# madou_vol2_2011
# Extracted from: 2011-Madou_Marc_vol2_Fundamentals_of_Microfabricat.pdf
# Total PDF pages: 658
# Page numbering: from PDF page labels
# ============================================================


[Page A]
[empty page]

[Page i]
[empty page]

[Page ii]
[empty page]

[Page iii]
Marc J. Madou
CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton   London   New York

[Page iv]
CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2011 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20110720
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4398-9530-6 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and 
information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and 
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission 
to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact 
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides 
licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment 
has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

[Page v]
I dedicate this third edition of Fundamentals of Microfabrication to my family in the US and 
in Belgium and to all MEMS and NEMS colleagues in labs in the US, Canada, India, Korea, 
Mexico, Malaysia, Switzerland, Sweden and Denmark that I have the pleasure to work with. 
The opportunity to carry out international research in MEMS and NEMS and writing a textbook 
about it has been rewarding in terms of research productivity but perhaps even more in cultural 
enrichment. Scientists have always been at the frontier of globalization because science is the 
biggest gift one country can give to another and perhaps the best road to a more peaceful world.

[Page vi]
[empty page]

[Page vii]
vii
Contents
Roadmap 
ix
Author 
xi
Acknowledgments 
xiii
PART I
Lithography
Introduction to Part I 
2
 1 Photolithography 
3
 2 Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research 
89
PART II
Pattern Transfer with Subtractive Techniques
Introduction to Part II 
148
 3 Dry Etching 
155
 4 Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools 
215
 5 Thermal Energy-Based Removing 
319
 6 MechanicalEnergy-Based Removing 
351
PART III
Pattern Transfer with Additive Techniques
Introduction to Part III 
386
 7 Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining 
391
 8 Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques 
509

[Page viii]
viii   Contents
 9 Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming 
567
 10 Micromolding Techniques—LIGA 
591

[Page ix]
ix
Roadmap
Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology consists of three parts and ten chapters. 
In Part I, we review different forms of lithography, detailing those that differ most from the miniaturiza-
tion processes used to fashion integrated circuits (ICs). Chapter 1 starts with a short historical note about 
the origins of lithography, followed by a description of photolithography, including developments that have 
allowed the printing of the ever-shrinking features of modern ICs. After reviewing the limits of photolithog-
raphy, we detail alternative next-generation lithographies (NGEs) in Chapter 2, including extreme ultraviolet 
(EUV), x-ray, and charged-particle (electron and ion) lithographies, followed by lithography techniques in 
the early research and development (R&D) stage. Lithography approaches in the R&D stage include very thin 
resist layers and block copolymers, zone plate array lithography (ZPAL), quantum lithography (two-photon 
lithography), and proximal probe-based techniques such as atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning tun-
neling microscopy (STM), dip-pen lithography (DPL), near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM), and 
apertureless near-field scanning optical microscopy (ANSOM). Also considered are holographic lithography, 
plasmonic lithography, and lithography with superlenses (“Pendry’s dream”). As an example of a lithography 
method that is capable of patterning resist on nonplanar substrates (e.g., patterning a resist on the surface of 
a cylinder) we detail soft lithography. 
In Part II we deal with material removal processes, and additive technologies are the focus of Part III. We 
review gas and vapor phase dry etching processes, including chemical, physical (purely mechanical), and 
chemical-physical (mostly chemical with some mechanical assist) in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 consists of two 
parts: one covers wet chemical etching and the other wet bulk micromachining, the latter being chemical etching 
as well but optimized for the manufacture of ICs, nano-, and micromachines. Chapter 5 discusses thermal 
removing techniques where thermal energy, provided by a heat source, melts and/or vaporizes material from 
the work piece. Examples of thermal techniques covered in this chapter are electric discharge machining 
(EDM) (including µ-EDM), laser- and electron-beam machining (LBM and EBM), and plasma arc cutting. In 
Chapter 6, we cover traditional and nontraditional mechanical removing techniques. Traditional mechanical 
material removing technologies covered are mechanical precision machining and abrasive wheel machining. 
In nontraditional mechanical machining, we deal with ultrasonic drilling, electrolytic in-process dressing 
(ELID) grinding, water jet, abrasive water jet, abrasive jet machining, and focused ion-beam milling (FIB). 
Also in this chapter, we highlight recent developments toward miniaturized mechanical manufacturing 
equipment, the so-called desktop factories.
In Part III we cover additive (forming) processes, where materials are added, usually in a selective man-
ner, to a work piece or a device under construction. Physical vapor deposition processes (PVD) and chemical 
vapor deposition (CVD) are topics of Chapter 7. In the same chapter we survey thin film properties and detail 
surface micromachining, an important application of thin film deposition techniques. In surface microma-
chining, features are built up, layer by layer, on the surface of a substrate (e.g., a single-crystal silicon wafer). 
Dry etching defines the surface features in the x,y-plane, and wet etching releases them from the plane by 
undercutting. In surface micromachining, shapes in the x,y-plane are unrestricted by the crystallography of 
the substrate. In Chapter 8 we discuss additive chemical, photochemical, and electrochemical processes. 
The chemical forming methods covered in Chapter 8 are geared toward BioMEMS applications. In pho-
tochemical forming, photoenergy solidifies a material into a 3D shape, as illustrated in rapid prototyping 
and microphotoforming (stereolithography). In the case of electrochemical forming, the energy at the work 
piece is electrochemical. Chapter 9 covers thermal forming techniques where thermal energy provided by a 

[Page x]
x   Roadmap
heat source “transforms” a material as in crystallization, sintering, alloying, annealing, decomposition, and 
pyrolizing. Replication methods based on plastic molding and LIGA—a sophisticated type of replication 
technique combining x-ray lithography with electroplating and plastic molding—are discussed in Chapter 
10. Plastic molding techniques include RIM, thermoplastic injection molding (IM), and compression mold-
ing or hot embossing.
Note to the Reader: Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology was originally composed 
as part of a larger book that has since been broken up into three separate volumes. Manufacturing Techniques 
for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology represents the second volume in this set. The other two volumes 
include Solid-State Physics, Fluidics, and Analytical Techniques in Micro- and Nanotechnology and From MEMS to 
Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications. Cross-references to these books appear throughout the 
text and will be referred to as Volume I and Volume III, respectively. The interested reader is encouraged to 
consult these volumes as necessary.

[Page xi]
xi
Author
Dr. Madou is the Chancellor’s Professor in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (MEA) at the University 
of California, Irvine. He is also associated with UC Irvine’s Department of Biomedical Engineering and the 
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science. He is a Distinguished Honorary Professor at 
the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India, and a World Class University Scholar (WCU) at UNIST in 
South Korea.
Dr. Madou was Vice President of Advanced Technology at Nanogen in San Diego, California. He special-
izes in the application of miniaturization technology to chemical and biological problems (bio-MEMS). He 
is the author of several books in this burgeoning field he helped pioneer both in academia and in industry. 
He founded several micromachining companies.  
Many of his students became well known in their own right in academia and through successful MEMS start-
ups. Dr. Madou was the founder of the SRI International’s Microsensor Department, founder and president of 
Teknekron Sensor Development Corporation (TSDC), Visiting Miller Professor at UC Berkeley, and Endowed 
Chair at the Ohio State University (Professor in Chemistry and Materials Science and Engineering).    
Some of Dr. Madou’s recent research work involves artificial muscle for responsive drug delivery, carbon-
MEMS (C-MEMS), a CD-based fluidic platform, solid-state pH electrodes, and integrating fluidics with DNA 
arrays, as well as label-free assays for the molecular diagnostics platform of the future. 
To find out more about those recent research projects, visit http://www.biomems.net.

[Page xii]
[empty page]

[Page xiii]
xiii
Acknowledgments
I thank all of the readers of the first and second editions of Fundamentals of Microfabrication as they made 
it worthwhile for me to finish this completely revised and very much expanded third edition. As in previous 
editions I had plenty of eager reviewers in my students and colleagues from all around the world. Students 
were especially helpful with the question and answer books that come with the three volumes that make up 
this third edition. I have acknowledged reviewers at the end of each chapter and students that worked on 
questions and answers are listed in the questions sections. The idea of treating MEMS and NEMS processes 
as some of a myriad of advanced manufacturing approaches came about while working on a WTEC report 
on International Assessment Of Research And Development In Micromanufacturing (http://www.wtec.org/
micromfg/report/Micro-report.pdf). For that report we travelled around the US and abroad to visit the lead-
ing manufacturers of advanced technology products and quickly learned that innovation and advanced 
manufacturing are very much interlinked because new product demands stimulate the invention of new 
materials and processes. The loss of manufacturing in a country goes well beyond the loss of only one class 
of products. If a technical community is dissociated from manufacturing experience , such as making larger 
flat-panel displays or the latest mobile phones, such communities cannot invent and eventually can no lon-
ger teach engineering effectively. An equally sobering realization is that a country might still invent new 
technologies paid for by government grants, say in nanofabrication, but not be able to manufacture the prod-
ucts that incorporate them. It is naïve to believe that one can still design new products when disconnected 
from advanced manufacturing: for a good design one needs to know the latest manufacturing processes and 
newest materials. It is my sincerest hope that this third edition motivates some of the brightest students to 
start designing and making things again rather than joining financial institutions that produce nothing for 
society at large but rather break things.

[Page xiv]
[empty page]

[Page 1]
PART I
Lithography
(a) Engraving of Cardinal d’Amboise. The earliest example of photolithography 
followed by wet etching. (Photograph from the Science Museum. Courtesy of the 
Royal Photographic Society.) (b) Ultrahigh-aspect-ratio SU-8 photoresist structures. 
Microfeatures with designed thickness of 40 µm and height of 2000 µm. (Courtesy 
of Dr. Wanjun Wan, Louisiana State University.)
There are those who still believe that America can move from the stron-
gest industrial core economy in the world to essentially a service economy 
without losing its greatness, its dynamism, and industrial health. I am 
absolutely certain we cannot.
David Halberstam
The Next Century (1991)
(a)
(b)

[Page 2]
2   Lithography
Introduction to Part I
Chapter 1 Photolithography
Chapter 2 Next-Generation Lithographies (NGLs) and Lithography Research
Introduction to Part I
For many miniaturization tasks, lithography, the technique used to transfer copies of a master pattern onto 
the surface of a solid material such as a silicon wafer, is of central importance. In Part I of this book, we 
review different forms of lithography, detailing those that differ most from the miniaturization processes 
used to fashion integrated circuits (ICs). Chapter 1 starts with a short historical note about the origins of 
lithography, followed by a description of photolithography, including developments that have allowed the 
printing of the ever-shrinking features of modern ICs. After reviewing the limits of photolithography, we 
detail alternative next-generation lithographies (NGLs) in Chapter 2, including extreme ultraviolet (EUV), 
x-ray, and charged-particle (electron and ion) lithographies, followed by techniques in the early research and 
development stage. 
Text by William Gilbert (from De Magnete), written using a 100-keV electron microscope in a common resist (PMMA). The 
height of each letter is 250 nm. The pattern was then imaged using the same electron microscope. (From http://www.lancs.
ac.uk/staff/koltsov/nanoimage.html.)

[Page 3]
3
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Historical Note: Lithography’s 
Origins
Photolithography Overview
Critical Dimension, Overall 
Resolution, Line Width 
Metrology
Lithographic Sensitivity and Intrinsic 
Resist Sensitivity (Photochemical 
Quantum Efﬁciency)
Resist Proﬁles
Contrast and Experimental 
Determination of Lithographic 
Sensitivity
Resolution in Photolithography
Photolithography Resolution 
Enhancement Technology
Appendix 1A: Spin Coating Process 
Troubleshooting
Questions
References
1
Photolithography
Introduction
We start this chapter with a short historical note about the origins of pho-
tolithography and follow with details on all the steps involved, including 
resolution enhancement techniques (RET), that have allowed the print-
ing of the ever-shrinking features of modern integrated circuits (ICs). In 
this photolithography treatise we expand especially on those aspects that 
are of most importance to microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and 
nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) and that differ the most from 
typical lithography processes for IC fabrication.
Historical Note: Lithography’s Origins
Within the space of 40 years two developments in photography laid the 
foundations for the photoresists we use today. In 1782, the Swiss pas-
tor Jean Senebier (1742–1808) of Geneva investigated the property of 
Wafer
preparation
Design
Tin ﬁlms
Front-end
processes
Photo-
lithography
Ion
implantation
Etch
Cleaning
Planarization
Test and
assembly
The image of an IC, micro-, or nanomachine pattern is transferred to a substrate 
in a process known as photolithography. Substrates are first coated with a thin 
emulsion of photoactive organic material called a photoresist. A pattern is then 
aligned and projected onto the substrate using a light source (e.g., deep UV). 
Subsequently, the resulting image is developed and inspected.

[Page 4]
4   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
certain resins that become insoluble in turpentine 
after exposure to sunlight. Inspired by Senebier, 
Nicéphore Niépce, after experimenting with vari-
ous resins in sunlight, managed to copy an etched 
print on oiled paper by placing it over a glass plate 
coated with bitumen (asphalt) dissolved in lavender 
oil (France, 1822). In so doing, he resurrected an 
ancient Egyptian embalming technique that involved 
the use of what is now known as Syrian asphalt. After 
two or three hours of sunlight, the unshaded areas in 
the bitumen became hard compared with the shaded 
areas, which remained more soluble and could be 
washed away with a mixture of turpentine and lav-
ender oil. Niépce’s concoction, we will learn below, 
corresponds to a negative-type photoresist. Five years 
later, in 1827 (talk about fast turnaround time!), 
using strong acid, the Parisian engraver Lemaître 
made an etched copy of an engraving of Cardinal 
d’Amboise from a plate developed by Niépce (see 
(a) on title page of Part I). The latter copy represents 
the earliest example of pattern transfer by photoli-
thography and chemical milling [i.e., photochemical 
milling (PCM); see Chapter 4]. The accuracy of the 
technique was 0.5–1 mm.1
The word lithography [Greek for the words stone 
(lithos) and to write (gráphein)] refers to the process 
invented in 1796 by Aloys Senefelder. Senefelder 
found that stone (he used Bavarian limestone), when 
properly inked and treated with chemicals, could 
transfer a carved image onto paper. As a result of the 
chemical treatment of the stone, image and nonim-
age areas became oil receptive (water repellent) and 
oil repellent (water receptive), respectively, attract-
ing ink onto the image area and attracting water on 
nonimage areas.
Photomasking, followed by chemical processing, 
led to the photolithography now used in fabricating 
integrated circuits (ICs) and in miniaturization sci-
ence. Not until World War II, more than 100 years 
after Niépce and Lemaître, did the first applications 
of the printed circuit board (PCB) [also printed wir-
ing board (PWB)], invented in 1943 by the Austrian 
Paul Eisler, come about. Interconnections were made 
by soldering separate electronic components to a 
pattern of “wires” produced by photoetching a layer 
of copper foil that was laminated to a plastic board. 
Jack Kilby of Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce 
of Fairchild Semiconductor developed the first IC 
in the late 1950s. By 1961, Fairchild Semiconductor 
had introduced the first commercial IC in which 
photoetching processes produced large numbers of 
transistors on a thin slice of Si. Now, ICs are ubiq-
uitous, and we find them in microprocessors, audio 
and video equipment, dishwashers, garage openers, 
security systems, automobiles, and so on. With the 
first ICs, patterns had a resolution not better than 
5 µm. Today photolithography, x-ray lithography, 
and charged particle lithography all achieve sub-
micrometer-printing accuracy. Intel introduced the 
Prescott Pentium IV chip, an IC chip incorporating 
90-nm-sized features using UV photolithography, in 
the fourth quarter of 2003. Chips based on a 65-nm 
technology became available in 2006, and the 32-nm 
node was achieved in 2009.
For details on the projected feature size of future 
ICs, see the International Technology Roadmap for 
Semiconductors (ITRS) in Appendix 1A of Chapter 1 
in Volume I or on the web at http://public.itrs.net. In 
the ITRS, technology modes have been defined, i.e., 
the feature sizes that have to be in volume manufac-
turing at a fixed date (year of production).
Photolithography Overview
Introduction
The most widely used form of lithography is pho-
tolithography. In the IC industry, pattern transfer 
from masks onto thin films is accomplished almost 
exclusively via photolithography. The combination 
of accurate registration and exposing a series of suc-
cessive patterns leads to complex multilayered ICs. 
This essentially two-dimensional (2D) process has a 
limited tolerance for nonplanar topography, creating 
a major constraint for building non-IC miniaturized 
systems, which often exhibit extreme topographies. 
Photolithography has matured rapidly, and its ability 
to resolve ever-smaller features is constantly improv-
ing. For the IC industry, this continued improve-
ment in photolithography resolution has impeded 
the adaptation of alternative, higher-resolution 
lithography techniques, such as x-ray lithography. 
Research during the past 10 years in high-aspect-
ratio resist features to satisfy needs of both IC and 

[Page 5]
Photolithography   5
non-IC miniaturization is also finally improving dra-
matically photolithography’s capacity to cover wide 
ranges of topography. Performance of a photolitho-
graphic process is determined by its resolution, the 
minimum feature size that can be transferred with 
high fidelity; the registration, how accurately patterns 
on successive masks can be aligned; and throughput, 
the number of wafers that can be transferred per 
hour (a measure of the efficiency of the lithographic 
process).
Photolithography and pattern transfer involve a 
set of process steps summarized in Figure 1.1. As an 
example, we use an oxidized Si wafer and a negative 
photoresist system. For simplicity, not all the steps 
are detailed in this figure, as they will be covered in 
the subsequent text. A short preview follows.
An oxidized wafer (Figure 1.1a) is coated with a 
1-µm-thick negative photoresist layer (Figure 1.1b). 
After exposure (Figure 1.1c), the wafer is rinsed 
in a developing solution or sprayed with a spray 
developer, which removes the unexposed areas of 
photoresist and leaves a pattern of bare and photore-
sist-coated oxide on the wafer surface (Figure 1.1d). 
The photoresist pattern is the negative image of the 
pattern on the photomask. In a typical next step 
after development, the wafer is placed in a solution 
of HF or HF + NH4F, meant to attack the oxide but 
not the photoresist or the underlying silicon (Figure 
1.1e). The photoresist protects the oxide areas it cov-
ers. Once the exposed oxide has been etched away, 
the remaining photoresist can be stripped off with a 
strong acid such as H2SO4 or an acid-oxidant com-
bination such as H2SO4-Cr2O3, attacking the photo-
resist but not the oxide or the silicon (Figure 1.1f). 
Other liquid strippers include organic solvent 
strippers and alkaline strippers (with or without 
oxidants). The oxidized Si wafer with the etched 
windows in the oxide (Figure 1.1f) is ready now for 
further processing, which might entail a wet aniso-
tropic etch of the Si in the etched windows with SiO2 
as the etch mask.
Wafer Cleaning and Contaminants: 
The Clean Room
An important step, even before lithography proper, 
is wafer cleaning. Contaminants include solvent 
stains (e.g., methyl alcohol, acetone, trichloroethyl-
ene, isopropyl alcohol, and xylene), dust from oper-
ators and equipment, and smoke particles. Stains or 
films may lead to adverse effects during oxidation 
and evaporation processes. Particulates, chunks 
of granular matter, may cause undesirable mask-
ing effects and scratches on the photomask dur-
ing contact printing (see Figure 1.6). Solvent stains 
and other contaminants on a Si wafer can be easily 
observed in dark field microscopy (see Volume III, 
Chapter 6 on metrology and MEMS, NEMS model-
ing). All lithography processes take place inside a 
semiconductor clean room, which is a specially con-
structed enclosed area environmentally controlled 
with respect to airborne particulates, temperature 
(±0.1°F), air pressure, humidity (from 0.5–5% rela-
tive humidity), vibration, and lighting. In Table 1.1, 
some common sources of clean room contaminants 
are listed, and in Figure 1.2, the clean room clas-
sification system is elucidated. In a Class 1 clean 
room, the particle count does not exceed 1 particle 
(b) Lithography preparation
(a) Oxidation
SiO2 (– 1µm)
SiO2
SI
UV light
Glass  plate
Opaque  pattern
Hardened  resist
(c) Exposure
(d) Unexposed photoresist removed
 
by developer
(e) SiO2 etched with NH4F + HF
(f) Exposed photoresist removed
      with H2SO4
n-type silicon
Negative photoresist coat (   1 µm)
+–
FIGURE 1.1 Basic photolithography and pattern trans-
fer. Example uses an oxidized silicon wafer and a nega-
tive photoresist system. Process steps include exposure, 
development, oxide etching, and resist stripping. Steps (a) 
through (f) are explained in the text.

[Page 6]
6   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
per cubic foot with particles 0.5 µm and larger, and 
in a Class 100 clean room, the particle count does 
not exceed 100 particles per cubic foot with parti-
cles 0.5 µm and larger. The allowable contamination 
particle size in IC manufacture has been decreasing 
hand in hand with the ever-decreasing minimum 
feature size. With a 64-kB dynamic memory chip 
[dynamic random access memory (DRAM)], for 
example, one can tolerate 0.25-µm particles, but for 
a 4-MB DRAM, one can only tolerate 0.05-µm parti-
cles. The smallest feature sizes in these two cases are 
2.5 and 0.5 µm, respectively. As a reference point, a 
human hair has a diameter of 75–100 µm (depend-
ing on age and race); tobacco smoke contains par-
ticles ranging from 0.01–1 µm; and a red blood cell 
ranges from 4–9 µm.
Example 1.1
Problem: If a 125-mm diameter wafer is exposed 
for 1 minute to an air stream under a laminar-
flow condition at 30 m/min, how many dust par-
ticles will land on the wafer in a Class 10 clean 
room?
Solution: In a Class 10 clean room, there are 350 
particles (0.5 µm or larger) per cubic meter. The 
air volume that passes over the wafer in 1 min is 
(30 m/min) × π(0.125 m ⁄ 2)2 × 1 min = 0.368 m3. 
The number of dust particles (0.5 µm or larger) 
contained in that air volume is 350 × 0.368 = 128 
particles. Therefore, if there are 200 IC chips on 
the wafer, the particle count amounts to one 
particle on each of 64% of the chips. Fortunately, 
only a fraction of the particles that land on the 
surface of the wafer adhere to the wafer surface, 
and of those only a fraction are at a circuit loca-
tion critical enough to cause a failure. However, 
the calculation demonstrates the importance of 
the clean room.
Many different dry and wet methods for wafer 
cleaning currently in use are listed below. RCA1 and 
RCA2, developed by W. Kern in 1965 while working 
for the Radio Corporation of America (RCA), which 
are well known, use mixtures of hydrogen peroxide 
and various acids or base followed by deionized (DI) 
water rinses. Others include vapor cleaning; ther-
mal treatment, for example, baking at 1000°C in a 
TABLE 1.1 Some Common Clean Room Contaminant 
Sources
• Location: a clean room near a refinery, smoke stack, 
sewage plant, cement plant spells big trouble
• Construction: the floor is an important source of 
contamination. Also, items such as light fixtures must 
be sealed, and room construction tolerances must be 
held very tight
• Wafer handling: transfer box
• Process equipment: never use fiberglass duct liner; 
always use 100% polyester filters, eliminate all 
nonessential equipment
• Chemicals: residual photoresist or organic coatings, 
metal corrosion
• Attire: only proper attire and dressing in the 
anteroom
• Electrostatic charge: clean room must have a 
conductive floor
• Furniture: only clean room furniture
• Stationary: use ballpoint pen instead of lead pencil, 
only approved clean room paper
• Operator: no eating, drinking, smoking, chewing 
gum, or makeup of any kind
Particle diameter (µm)
100,000
(3500)
10,000
(350)
1,000
(35)
100
(3.5)
10+
(.35)
1
0.1
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.5 1.0
5
10
100
Total number of particles/ft3(  ) equal to or larger than stated particle size
Particle size/density curves
Class 10 (0.35)
Class 1000 (35)
Class 100 (3.5)
Class 10,000 (350)
Class 100,000 (3500)
FIGURE 1.2 U.S. Federal Standard 209b for clean room 
classification. The bottom solid line shows the definition 
of Class 1. (From Cunningham, J.A. 1992. The remarkable 
trend in defect densities and chip yield. Semicond Int 
15:86–90. With permission.2)

[Page 7]
Photolithography   7
vacuum or in oxygen; and plasma or glow discharge 
techniques, for example, in Freons with or without 
oxygen. Mechanical methods include ultrasonic 
agitation, polishing with abrasive compounds, and 
supercritical cleaning. Ultrasonic cleaning, which is 
excellent for removing particulate matter from the 
substrate, is unfortunately prone to contamination 
and mechanical failure of deposited films. Attributes 
of wet versus dry cleaning techniques are compared 
in Table 1.2. Except for environmental concerns, wet 
etching still outranks other cleaning procedures.
The prevalent RCA1 and RCA2 wet cleaning pro-
cedures are as follows:
 
◾RCA1: Add 1 part of NH3 (25% aqueous solu-
tion) to 5 parts of DI water; heat to boiling, 
and add 1 part of H2O2. Immerse the wafer for 
10  minutes. This procedure removes organic 
dirt (resist).
 
◾RCA2: Add 1 part of HCl to 6 parts of DI 
water; heat to boiling, and add 1 part of H2O2. 
Immerse the wafer for 10 minutes. This proce-
dure removes metal ions.
The second RCA cleaning process is required to 
keep oxidation and diffusion furnaces free of metal 
contamination. Both cleaning processes leave a 
thin oxide on the wafers. Before a further etch of 
the underlying silicon is attempted, oxide must be 
stripped off by dipping the wafer in a 1% aqueous 
HF solution for a very short time. Water spreads on 
an oxide surface (hydrophilic) and beads up on a 
bare Si surface (hydrophobic). This behavior can be 
used to establish whether any oxide remains.
In most IC labs, processing a wafer previously 
exposed to KOH is not allowed as it is feared that 
the potassium will spoil the IC fabrication process. 
In more lenient environments, carefully cleaned 
wafers using RCA1 and RCA2 are allowed.
Supercritical cleaning (Figure 1.3) with CO2 is 
especially suited for microstructure cleaning.4 These 
fluids possess liquid-like solvative properties and 
gas-like diffusion and viscosity that enable rapid 
penetration into crevices with complete removal 
of organic and inorganic contaminants contained 
therein. During wet cleaning of surface microma-
chined structures, thin, mechanical microstruc-
tures tend to stick to one another or to the substrate 
through surface tension (stiction) (Chapter 7). 
Consequently, dry vapor phase and supercritical 
cleaning with low or no surface tension are  preferred. 
TABLE 1.2 Wet versus Dry Cleaning Attributes
Attribute
Wet
Dry
Particle removal
+
−
Metal removal
+
−
Heavy organics, i.e., photoresist
+
−
Light organics, i.e., outgassed 
hydrocarbon residues
+
+
Throughput
+
−
Process repeatability
+
+
Water usage
−
+
Process chemical cleanliness
−
+
Environmental impact, purchase, and 
disposal cost
−
+
Single wafer use applicability
−
+
Dry cleaning usually requires wet followup. UV ozone can effec-
tively remove light organic contamination.3
Source: Iscoff, R. 1991. Wafer cleaning: can dry systems compete? 
Semicond Int 14:48–54. With permission.3
Residue
ﬂuid
(a)
Particle
Boundary
layer
Crevice
Wafer,
moving
upward
Residue ﬂuid
(b)
Particle
Crevice
Wafer, moving
downward
FIGURE 1.3 (a) Wet cleaning. (b) Supercritical cleaning.

[Page 8]
8   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Vapor phase cleaning also uses significantly fewer 
chemicals than wet immersion cleaning.5
We will learn more about the emerging impor-
tance of supercritical fluids as developers for com-
pletely dry resist processes further below.
Wafer cleaning has become a scientific discipline in 
its own right with journals such as Microcontamination 
and The Magazine for Ultraclean Manufacturing Tech-
nology, books such as Handbook of Contamination 
Control in Microelectronics: Principles, Applications and 
Technology6 and the Handbook of Semiconductor Wafer 
Cleaning Technology,7 and dedicated conferences 
(e.g., the Microcontamination Conference). Visit 
the Semiconductor Subway (http://www-mtl.mit.
edu/semisubway.html) for frequent updates in this 
important area.
Silicon-Based Device Manufacturing Costs
The manufacturing of a Si-based device involves 
many processing steps, and each step adds to the 
cost of the finished wafer/device. In the most general 
terms, the finished wafer costs depend on the num-
ber of masks used, the complexity of the devices, 
and the clean room requirements. The costs increase 
with the number of layers in a device in a nonlinear 
fashion as defects are introduced in each new layer, 
but with each new layer more defects accumulate in 
the underlying layers as well. Cost per device/chip 
further increases the smaller the feature size because 
of more stringent requirements for the lithography 
steps and overall process control. In first world 
countries, an added concern is that semiconduc-
tor fabrication processes are highly toxic; therefore, 
environmental and worker protection laws need to 
be considered. In the case of an IC fab, the current 
cost is in the $2–3 billion range. A typical fab line 
occupies one city block and employs a few hundred 
workers. The most profitable period is typically in 
the first 18 months to 2 years. It is important to note 
that for large-volume ICs, packaging and testing 
constitute the largest costs, and that for low-volume 
ICs, design costs may swamp out the manufactur-
ing costs. In the case of non-IC micro- and nano-
machines, testing and packaging become yet more 
significant contributors to costs. Moreover, stan-
dardization is much more difficult, and multiphysics 
design software packages required for these devices 
are not yet sophisticated enough.
In Table 1.3 we list the relative costs of IC pro-
duction processes (does not include design, test, and 
packaging); lithography is the most expensive step 
(at 35%), and cleaning adds another 20%.
Variability in the IC manufacturing processes 
listed in Table 1.3 can lead to deformations or non-
conformities in finished products. The product yield 
is defined as the percentage of devices or circuits 
that meet a nominal performance specification. 
One distinguishes between a functional (hard) yield 
(e.g., opens, shorts, particles) and a parametric (soft) 
yield (e.g., speed, noise, immunity, power consump-
tion). Functional yield is affected by the presence 
of defects. Defects result from a number of random 
sources such as contamination from equipment or 
processes, handling, mask imperfections, and air-
borne particles. Functional yield Y is a function of 
Ac, a critical area in which, if a defect occurs, it has 
a high probability of inducing a fault, and D0, the 
density of defects per unit area, or:
 
Y
f(A D
c
0
=
,
) 
(1.1)
This relation depends on circuit geometry, density, 
feature sizes, number of processing steps, and so on, 
and is sometimes represented as:
 
Y
1
e
D A
D A
0
c
0
c
=
−
−
 
(1.2)
Manufacturing issues that influence hard yield Y 
include photoresist shrinking/tearing, variations in 
material deposition, variations in temperature, vari-
ations in oxide thickness, impurities, variations bet-
ween lots, variations across the wafer, and so on.
TABLE 1.3 Relative Costs of IC Production Processes
Manufacturing Process Step
Percentage of Wafer 
Processing Cost per Square 
Centimeter*
Lithography
35%
Multilevel materials and 
etching
25%
Furnaces and implants
15%
Cleaning/stripping
20%
Metrology
5%
*Excludes packaging, test, and design costs.

[Page 9]
Photolithography   9
The parametric yield measures the “quality” of 
 functioning systems. Even in a defect-free manufac-
turing environment, random process variations can 
lead to varying levels of system performance. Para-
metric yield may include variations in threshold 
voltage (because of oxide thickness, ion implantation, 
poly variations), variations in R, C (because of changes 
in doping or poly-Si, metal variations in height and 
width), and shorts and opens (because vias are not 
cut all the way through, or undersized vias that have 
too much resistance or oversized vias that short).
Masks
Standard Photolithography Masks
The stencil used to repeatedly generate a desired pat-
tern on resist-coated wafers is called a mask. In typi-
cal use, a photomask—a nearly optically flat glass 
[transparent to near ultraviolet (UV)] or quartz plate 
(transparent to deep UV) with an absorber pattern 
metal (e.g., an 800-Å-thick chromium layer)—is 
placed above the photoresist-coated surface, and 
the mask/wafer system is exposed to UV radiation 
(Figure 1.4). The absorber pattern on the photomask 
is opaque to UV light, whereas the glass or quartz 
is transparent. The absorber pattern on the mask is 
generated by e-beam lithography, a technique that 
yields higher resolution than photolithography. In 
e-beam lithography, a pattern drawn on a computer-
 aided design (CAD) system is exposed onto the 
mask. Like resists, masks can be positive or negative. 
A positive or dark field mask is a mask on which the 
pattern is clear with the background dark. A negative 
or clear field mask is a mask on which the pattern is 
dark with the background clear. A light field or dark 
field image, known as mask polarity (Figure 1.5), is 
then transferred to the semiconductor surface. This 
procedure results in a 1:1 image of the entire mask 
onto the silicon wafer.
Masks making direct physical contact (also referred 
to as hard contact) with the substrate are called con-
tact masks. Unfortunately, these masks degrade 
faster because of wear than noncontact, proximity 
masks (also referred to as soft contact masks), which 
are slightly raised, e.g., 10–20 µm, above the wafer. 
The defects resulting from hard contact masks on 
both the wafer and the mask make this method of 
optical pattern transfer unsuitable for very large scale 
integration (VLSI) manufacturing. In VLSI, ICs have 
between 100,000 and 1 million components, and 
in ultralarge scale integration (ULSI), there are more 
than 1 million circuit elements on a single chip. In 
2005, Intel began manufacturing computer chips 
with an average feature size of 65 nm (the so-called 
65-nm technology node, see Volume I, Appendix 1A). 
This new generation of chips has more than half a 
billion transistors and constitutes a ULSI chip.
We review hard contact masks because they are 
still used in research and development, in mask 
making itself, and for prototyping. Contact mask 
Chrome island
on glass mask
(a)
(b)
Shadow on
photoresist
Ultraviolet light
Exposed area
of photoresist
Photoresist
Photoresist
Oxide
Island
Window
Silicon substrate
Silicon substrate
FIGURE 1.4 (a) Photomask in an exposure setup. (b) Resulting pattern in case a negative photoresist is used.
Mask-reticle polarities for a ﬁeld eﬀect transistor
showing the gate and contacts.
Light
ﬁeld
Dark
ﬁeld
FIGURE 1.5 Light field and dark field.

[Page 10]
10   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
and proximity mask printing are collectively known 
as shadow printing. A more reliable method of mask-
ing is projection printing, where, rather than placing 
a mask in direct contact with (or in proximity of) a 
wafer, the photomask is imaged by a high-resolution 
lens system onto the resist-coated wafer. In the latter 
case, the only limit to the mask lifetime results from 
operator handling. The imaging lens can reduce the 
mask pattern by 1:5 or 1:10, making mask fabrication 
less challenging. In Figure 1.6, we compare contact, 
proximity, and projection lithography, and example 
commercial systems are listed also.
The design of electron beam-generated masks 
for ICs and miniaturized machines is generally 
fairly straightforward and requires some suitable 
CAD software and a platform on which to run it 
(Figure 1.7). Electron-beam lithography is maskless 
and is discussed later in this chapter; mask design 
and suitable CAD software will be addressed in 
Volume III, Chapter 6.
Gray-Tone Lithography Masks
As described above, photolithography constitutes a 
binary image transfer process: the developed pattern 
consists of regions with resist (1) and regions without 
resist (0). In contrast, in grayscale lithography, the 
partial exposure of a photoresist renders it soluble 
to a developer in proportion to the local exposure 
dose, and as a consequence, after development, the 
resist exhibits a surface relief.
Gray-tone masks (GTMs), letting varying amounts 
of light pass through, are of great potential use in 
Contact aligner
(a)
(b)
(c)
Proximity aligner
Projection aligner
UV lamp
Lens
Mask
PR
2 operating modes:
contact for expose;
separate for align.
Examples:
Kaspar 17A
Oriel
Karl Suss MJB3 
Less wear on mask, but
poorer image than from
a contact aligner.
Examples:
Kaspar-Cobilt
Examples:
Perkin-Elmer Micralign
Projection systems use imaging optics
in between the mask and the wafer
Substrate wafer
FIGURE 1.6 (a) Contact printing, (b) proximity printing, and (c) projection printing.
Electron
gun
Light
source
Condenser
lens
Reduction
lens
Wafer
Wafer exposure
Mask
Focus
Deﬂection
Mask
Mask making
CAD System
• Layout
• Simulation
• Design rule checking
FIGURE 1.7 E-beam writing of a photomask and subsequent projection printing.

[Page 11]
Photolithography   11
miniaturization science as they allow for the mass 
production of micromachines with varying topog-
raphy. The possibility of creating profiled micro-3D 
structures offers tremendous additional flexibility 
in the design of microelectronic, optoelectronic, and 
micromechanical components. In optical integrated 
circuits (OICs), for example, GTMs can be used for 
the fabrication of tapered waveguides, gratings with 
saw tooth profiles (blazed gratings), microlenses, 
and so on.8 As an example of GTM use, in Figure 1.8, 
we show experiments with a Rohm and Haas dual-
tone resist.9,10 The right-hand path in Figure  1.8a 
FIGURE 1.8 Rohm and Haas dual-tone resist. (a) Process options for Rohm and Haas dual-tone resist. The right-hand 
path produces positive-tone images in which the remaining resist is cross-linked and does not flow when exposed to 
temperatures above the Tg of the novolak-base resin. The left-hand path provides thermally stable negative-tone images. 
(b) Exposure of the Rohm and Haas resist with a mask exhibiting nominally 0% transmission, 50% transmission, and 100% 
transmission allows generations of patterns with controlled variations in thickness and/or overhangs and cantilevered 
structures. (c) Example of the types of features that can be printed using the Rohm and Haas resist. Note the structures 
with full thickness and 50% thickness. (Courtesy of Drs. Feely, Rohm, and Haas. Feely, W. E. 1988. Technical digest: solid 
state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: IEEE.9)

[Page 12]
12   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
produces positive-tone images in which the remain-
ing resist is cross-linked and does not flow when 
exposed to temperatures above the Tg of the novolak-
 base resin. The left-hand path provides thermally 
stable negative-tone images. The mask used here has 
only 0% or 100% transmission fields. Exposure of 
the same Rohm and Haas resist with a GTM, exhibit-
ing nominally 0% transmission, 50% transmission, 
and 100% transmission, allows generations of pat-
terns with controlled variations in thickness and/or 
overhangs and cantilevered structures. An example 
of the types of features that can be printed using 
the Rohm and Haas resist with a GTM is shown in 
Figure 1.8c. Note the structures with full thickness 
and 50% thickness.
The fabrication of 3D components by gray-tone 
technology is performed in three principal steps. 
The first and most critical step deals with the real-
ization of the GTM itself. The challenge in this step 
is the definition of zones of variable optical trans-
mission that represent the various gray levels. In a 
second step, the wafers are exposed, and the light 
intensity modulation by the gray-tone areas on the 
mask generates depth variations in the photoresist 
(Figure 1.9). The profile in the photoresist can also 
be transferred proportionally into the substrate dur-
ing a third step, i.e., a dry etching step.11
For each substrate/resist combination, the dry 
etching process has to be established to obtain resist/
substrate selectivity close to 1:1.
One approach to make multilevel photoresist 
patterns directly, without a physical mask, is by 
variable-dose e-beam writing, in which the elec-
tron dosage (current × dwell time) is varied across 
the resist surface.13 Variable-dose e-beam writing 
is slow and costly, and GTMs are a desirable alter-
native, especially if high throughput production is 
required. A laser writer can produce the same result 
but at a lower resolution.
Possible methods for making variable transmis-
sion masks include magnetron sputtering of amor-
phous carbon onto a quartz substrate. Essentially 
any transmittance (T) desired in the 0% < T < 100% 
can be achieved by controlling the film thickness 
(t) in the 200 nm > t > 0 nm range with subnano-
meter precision.14 Perhaps more elegantly, gray lev-
els may be created by the density of dots that will 
appear as transparent holes in a chromium mask. 
These dots are small enough not to be transferred 
onto the wafer because they are below the resolution 
limit of the exposure tool. In a CAD program, the 
dot matrices associated with the gray levels are then 
combined with the 2D geometries to define the final 
3D structures. Both electron-beam and laser-beam 
pattern generators have been used for manufacturing 
GTMs. The electron-beam pattern generator is better 
adapted to this application because of its flexibility 
and higher resolution.11 Optimization of the expo-
sure and the development parameters improves the 
resist depth and profile. The resist profile may then be 
FIGURE 1.9 Process flow chart for transferring the image on a gray-tone mask into a substrate. Gray-tone lithography 
is an inexpensive one-step lithographic method to fabricate 3D microstructures using a raster-screened (gray-tone) 
photomask. (Reimer, K., R. Engelke, U. Hofmann, P. Merz, K.T.K.v. Platen, and B. Wagner. 1999. MF-Conf., micromachine 
technology for diffractive and holographic optics. Santa Clara, CA: SPIE.12)

[Page 13]
Photolithography   13
used directly; it may function as a mold; or it is con-
formally transferred into the substrate using plasma 
etching with controlled selectivity. Figure 1.10 shows 
a blazed grating proportionally transferred from a 
patterned resist to the underlying fused silica. Blazed 
gratings with a period of 16 µm and 8 µm covering a 
surface of 3 × 3 mm2 were fabricated with an eight-
level GTM. A reflection grating in which the grooves 
are asymmetric with respect to the surface normal is 
said to be blazed. A blazed grating is used to direct 
the light only into the diffracted order of interest with 
high efficiency. From the atomic force measurements 
of the grating profile shown here, the distribution of 
light in the various diffraction orders was computed 
and found to be in agreement with the experimen-
tal optical measurements. Compared with multiple 
mask techniques, the GTM approach allows the real-
ization of different depths from the same GTM.
Another attractive way to implement grayscale 
lithography is with high-energy beam-sensitive 
(HEBS) glass. HEBS glass turns dark on exposure to 
an electron beam; the higher the electron dosage, the 
darker the glass turns. In HEBS glass, a top layer, a 
couple of micrometers thick, contains silver ions in 
the form of silver-alkali-halide (AgX)m (MX)n com-
plex nanocrystallites that are about 10 nm or smaller 
in size and are dispersed within cavities of the glass 
SiO4 tetrahedron network. Chemical reduction of the 
silver ions produces opaque specks of silver atoms on 
exposure to a high-energy electron beam (>10 kV). 
A key part in the development of a grayscale pro-
cess is the characterization of the resist thickness as 
a function of the optical density in the mask for a 
given lithographic process. It is desirable to use pho-
toresists that exhibit a low contrast to achieve a wide 
process window (see “Contrast and Experimental 
Determination of Lithographic Sensitivity,” this 
chapter). Ideally, the resist response can be linear-
ized to the optical density within the mask. Using 
an HEBS glass mask, Sure et al.8 fabricated 3D silicon 
tapers to couple light from an optical fiber into an 
optical waveguide for an OIC. Fabrication involves 
writing a single grayscale mask in HEBS glass with 
a high-energy electron beam, UV grayscale lithog-
raphy, and inductively coupled plasma etching (see 
Figure 1.11a).8 In Figure 1.11b we show an example 
HEBS mask for the fabrication of an array of lenses 
(http://www.canyonmaterials.com).
Inexpensive Masks and Maskless 
Optical Projection Lithography for 
Research and Development
In miniaturization science, one often is looking for 
low-cost and fast-turnaround methods to fabricate 
masks. This may involve manually drawn patterns 
on cut-and-peel masking films and photoreduc-
tion, affording fast turnaround without relying on 
outside photomask services. Alternatively, it may 
involve direct writing on a photoresist-coated plate 
with a laser plotter (~2-µm resolution).15 Simpler 
yet, using a drawing program such as Canvas® 
(Deneba Systems, Inc.), Freehand® (Macromedia, 
Inc.), Illustrator® (Adobe Systems, Inc.), or L-Edit® 
(Tanner Research, Inc.), a mask design can be cre-
ated on a computer and saved as a Postscript® file 
to be printed with a high-resolution printer on a 
transparency.16 A common laser printer has a reso-
lution of 72 lines per inch (lpi) and between 300 
and 1200 dots per inch (dpi) (see Figure 1.12). The 
average dot size for a 1200-dpi printer is 21 µm, and 
if we print a vertical line approximately 100 µm 
wide with this printer, approximately 5 dots make 
up the 100-µm width, but the space between suc-
cessive lines of 5 dots is 332 µm. Thus, this vertical 
70 60 50
20
10
0
10
10
0.5
–0.5
–1.0
0.0
Distance (µm)
Depth (µm)
20
30
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0
40
30
FIGURE 1.10 Atomic force microscope profile of a 16-µm 
pitch blazed grating in fused silica: the grating was 
proportionally transferred from resist to fused silica. A 
sawtooth (blazed) profile notably increases the efficiency 
of an optical grating.

[Page 14]
14   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
line will look like a dotted line. Using a typesetting 
type of printing can avoid these resolution problems 
(16,000 dpi).
The transparency with the printed image may 
then be clamped between a presensitized chrome-
covered mask plate (i.e., a vendor such as Nanofilm 
has preapplied the resist) and a blank plate to make 
a traditional mask from it. After exposure and devel-
opment, the exposed plate is put in a chrome etch for 
a few minutes to generate the desired metal pattern, 
and the remaining resist is stripped off. Simpler yet, 
the printed transparency may be attached to a quartz 
plate to be used as a mask directly.
Lithography is still mostly carried out using masks, 
but because of problems caused by masks, such as 
expense and time in fabricating them, contamina-
tion introduced by them, their disposal, and the dif-
ficulties in their alignment, research into maskless 
optical projection lithography (MOPL) is growing 
rapidly and broadly. One MOPL approach already 
on the market (http://www.intelligentmp.com) is 
based on the digital micromirror device (DMD) 
chip from Texas Instruments Inc. (TI) and relies 
on the same spatial light modulation technology 
used in digital light processing projectors and high-
definition television (see Chapter 7, Example 7.10). 
Enormous simplification of lithography hardware 
is feasible by using the movable mirror arrays in a 
DMD chip to project images on the photoresist. This 
technique is capable of fabricating micromachined 
elements with any surface topography and can, just 
like e-beam lithography or laser writing, be used for 
FIGURE 1.11 (a) Fabrication steps for a silicon taper. (Sure, 
A., T. Dillon, J. Murakowski, C. Lin, D. Pustai, and D.W. 
Prather. 2003. Fabrication and characterization of three-
dimensional Si tapers. Optics Express 11:555–61. Drawing 
by Mary Amasia.8) (b) HBS mask for the fabrication of a dif-
fractive microlens array (http://www.canyonmaterials.com).
FIGURE 1.12 Laser printer resolution. Image of a laser-printed letter. Note the scatter of small dots. Technology is not so 
precise as to place dots in a straight line, and the effective dpi might be partially the result of overspray. (From Dr. James 
Lee, Ohio State University.)

[Page 15]
Photolithography   15
implementing maskless binary and grayscale lithog-
raphy. The resolution of DMD-based maskless pho-
tolithography (about 5 µm) is significantly less than 
with e-beam lithography (0.25 µm) or laser writers 
(<1.0 µm), but it is a parallel technique, and for many 
applications, i.e., in microfluidics, the lower resolu-
tion might not be an obstacle. Using DMD tech-
nology, on-chip electronics, in conjunction with a 
control computer, can generate a pattern by turning 
individual mirrors ‘‘on’’ or ‘‘off.’’ DMD chip’s micro-
mirrors are mounted on tiny hinges that enable them 
to tilt either toward the light source in the projection 
lens (ON) or away from it (OFF) (see Example 7.10), 
creating a light or dark pixel on the projection sur-
face. The bit-streamed image code entering the semi-
conductor directs each mirror to switch on and off 
at a rate of up to 10,000 times/s. This pattern is then 
demagnified and focused on the wafer to expose 
the photoresist while light from the remaining off 
mirrors is deflected away from the optics. The use of 
refractive optics prevents the extension of MOPL to 
wavelengths much shorter than 157 nm. The unique 
capability of representing a grayscale is probably the 
most essential merit of this type of maskless litho-
graphy. When a mirror is switched on more frequently 
than off, it reflects a light gray pixel; a mirror that is 
switched off more frequently reflects a darker gray 
pixel. In this way, the mirrors in a DMD system can 
reflect pixels in up to 1024 shades of gray to convert 
the video or graphic signal entering the DMD chip 
into a highly detailed grayscale image. The method 
to fabricate the micromirrors used in DMDs is based 
on MEMS and is detailed in Chapter 7 on surface 
micromachining. In Figure 1.13 we show a photo of 
Intelligent Micro Patterning’s lithography system, 
the SF-100, based on TI’s DMD with a line-width 
resolution of 5 µm (http://www.intelligentmp.com/
SF100Photos.htm).
Maskless zone-plate-array lithography (ZPAL)17 is 
another optical maskless technology. This technol-
ogy operates on the principle of diffraction rather 
than refraction. Instead of a single large numeri-
cal aperture (NA) lens, an array of thousands of 
nanofabricated Fresnel zone plate lenses is used, 
each focusing a beam of light onto the substrate. 
A computer-controlled array of micromechani-
cal spatial-light modulators turns the light to each 
lens on or off as the substrate is scanned under the 
array, thereby printing the desired pattern in a “dot-
 matrix” fashion.
ZPAL is reviewed in Chapter 2 as a nanolithogra-
phy technique that can be adapted to work with an 
extreme UV light source.
Photoresist Deposition
Introduction
Lithography is the most expensive step in micro-
electronics technology, representing up to 35% of 
the wafer manufacturing cost (see Table 1.3). Within 
lithography, photoresist coating is one of the more 
expensive steps. Photoresists may cost $100/L (and 
it is about $40/gallon for a typical developer), and 
several of the resist deposition processes used waste 
significant amounts of material. For silicon ICs, 
the resist thickness after a prebake (see below for 
what a prebake does) typically ranges between 0.5 
and 2 µm. For miniaturized 3D structures, much 
greater resist thicknesses are often required, and 
complex topography might also call for a conformal 
resist coat over very high-aspect-ratio features. For 
thick resist coats, techniques such as casting and 
the use of thick sheets of dry photoresists replace 
the ineffective resist spinners. For conformal coat-
ing, resist spraying or, better yet, electrodeposition 
(ED) of photoresist might be preferable. In this sec-
tion we emphasize methods used to deposit liquid 
photosensitive materials in ICs, MEMS, and NEMS, 
including spin coating, spray coating, dip coating, 
FIGURE 1.13 Intelligent MicroPatterning’s SF-100 litho-
graphy system based on DMDs (http://www.intelligentmp.
com/SF100Photos.htm).

[Page 16]
16   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
meniscus coating, electrodeposited (electropho-
retic) photoresist, and casting methods such as 
roller, curtain, and extrusion coating. Photoresist 
coating is an additive technology, and in Chapter 8 
we present a broader review of available processes 
for the deposition of organic films in  general, 
including photoresists and nonphotosensitive or -
ganics for applications such as biosensors, mem-
branes, packaging, protein arrays, DNA arrays, and 
so on. Very thin photoresist coatings (<<1 µm) are 
reviewed further below under the section on Thin 
Photoresists, and in Chapter 10 we explore very 
thick photoresist coatings (>>20 µm) for molding 
applications. Lamination of dry photoresist films 
to a substrate and a comparison of wet versus dry 
photoresists are covered below in the section on 
Permanent and Dry Resists.
Spin Coating
A common step before spinning on a resist with Si as 
the substrate is the growth of a thin layer of oxide on 
the wafer surface by heating it to between 900 and 
1150°C in steam or in a humidified oxygen stream 
(see Figure 1.1a). Dry oxygen also works, but wet oxy-
gen and steam produce faster results. The oxide can 
serve as a mask for a subsequent wet etch or boron 
implantation. As the first step in the lithography 
process itself, a thin layer of an organic polymer, a 
photoresist sensitive to UV radiation, is deposited on 
the oxide surface (see Figure 1.1b). The photoresist is 
dispensed onto the wafer lying on a wafer platen in 
a resist spinner (see Figure 1.14).18 A vacuum chuck 
holds the wafer in place. A speed of about 500 rpm is 
commonly used during the dispensing step, enabling 
the spread of the fluid over the substrate. After the 
dispense step it is common to accelerate to a relatively 
high speed to thin the fluid to near its final desired 
thickness. Typical spin speeds for this step range from 
1500–6000 rpm, depending on the properties of the 
fluid (mostly its viscosity), as well as the substrate. 
This step can take from 10 seconds to several minutes. 
The combination of spin speed and time selected for 
this step will generally define the final film thickness. 
At these speeds, centrifugal force causes the solution 
to flow to the edges, where it builds up until expelled 
when surface tension is exceeded. The resulting poly-
mer thickness, T, is a function of spin speed, solution 
concentration, and molecular weight (measured by 
intrinsic viscosity). The empirical expression for T is 
given by:
 
T
KC
=
η
ω
β
γ
α
 
(1.3)
where K = the overall calibration constant
  
C =  the polymer concentration in g/100-mL 
solution
  
η = the intrinsic viscosity
  
ω = the number of rotations per minute
Once the various exponential factors (α, β, and γ) 
have been determined, Equation 1.3 can be used to 
predict the thickness of the film that can be spun for 
various molecular weights and solution concentra-
tions of a given polymer and solvent system.19
The resist spinning process is of primary impor-
tance to the effectiveness of pattern transfer. The 
quality of the resist coating determines the density of 
defects transferred to the device under construction. 
The photoresist film, after application to the sub-
strate, must have a uniform thickness and must be 
chemically isotropic so that its response to exposure 
and development is uniform. The coating thickness 
of the thin, glassy resist film depends on the chemi-
cal resistance required for image transfer and the 
fineness of the lines and spaces to be resolved. The 
coating process should take place in Class 100 lami-
nar flow air conditions, and a minimum spin time of 
30 seconds is necessary for coating uniformity. The 
FIGURE 1.14 Resist spinner.

[Page 17]
Photolithography   17
photoresist should also be filtered just before appli-
cation. The application of too much resist results 
in edge covering or run-out, hillocks, and ridges, 
reducing manufacturing yield. Application of too 
little resist may leave uncovered areas. Optimization 
of the “regular” photoresist coating process in terms 
of resist dispense rate, dispense volume, spin speed, 
ambient temperature, venting of the resist spin sta-
tion, and humidity presents a growing challenge.
To ensure reproducible line widths and devel-
opment times in subsequent steps, a resist thick-
ness of 1 µm, with a repeatability of ±10 Å (±0.1%) 
is becoming the norm. In such cases, even small 
changes in air draft over the resist-coated substrate 
could influence the results. In Table 1.4 we present a 
handy spin coating-troubleshooting chart based on 
data presented at http://www.brewerscience.com/
products/cee/technical/spintheory. In Appendix 1A 
a more detailed spin coating process troubleshoot-
ing list is presented.
Since 2005, computer chips with an average fea-
ture size of 65 nm have been on the market, and 
for these, as well as smaller feature sizes, yet bet-
ter control over thinner and thinner resist layers 
is sought. An on-line film thickness monitor, pos-
sibly a technique based on reflection spectroscopy, 
will become essential for statistical process control 
of such demanding photoresist coatings.18 The need 
for an alternative photoresist deposition technique 
might arise as the amount of waste material gener-
ated by spin coating is high, with most of the resist 
solution (>95%) thrown off the substrate during the 
spin casting process (the wasted resist must be dis-
posed of as a toxic material). Also inherent to this 
process is the formation of edge beads, which require 
an additional removal process (see Figure 1.15a) 
before subsequent process steps. The edge of a wafer 
might exhibit resist ridges that are about 10 times 
the mean thickness on the rest of the substrate. A typ-
ical bead removal solution is AZ edge bead remover 
solvent 
(http://www.glue.umd.edu/~nima/doc/
AZEBRSolventMSDS.pdf). With  the current  trend 
toward larger substrate formats, these limitations 
will be exacerbated. The main obstacle to using spin 
coating in MEMS is caused by varying topography: 
deeply etched features cause a physical obstruction to 
the solution flow, preventing complete coverage and 
often causing striation or resist thickness variation. 
For example, resist thickness variations can occur on 
the near and far sides of a cavity or in cavities at dif-
ferent locations on the substrate. Sizes and shapes of 
the cavities also have influence on the resist unifor-
mity and coating defects. For substrates with moder-
ate topography, alternative coating techniques, like 
spray coating (see the next section below), offer bet-
ter prospects. Wafers with extreme topography, e.g., 
as encountered in radio frequency-MEMS, require a 
process with yet higher shape conformality. For the 
latter application we will see below that ED photore-
sists are a possible solution.
A good review on spin coating can be found at 
http://www.brewerscience.com/cee/technical/spin 
theory.html.
Alternative Photoresist Deposition Methods
In this section, we compare alternatives to spin coat-
ing (Figure 1.15a). We follow closely James Webster’s 
treatise of the subject.20
Spray Coating In spray coating, the substrates to 
be coated pass under a spray of photoresist solution. 
A diagram depicting this process is shown in Figure 
1.15b. The spray system includes an ultrasonic 
spray nozzle that generates a distribution of drop-
lets in the micrometer range. The resist is pushed 
out of a pressurized tank via a supply pipe to the 
spray head. The spray head has a defined aperture 
where the spray mist is formed. The shape of the 
spray pattern can be adjusted by a secondary air 
cushion. Compared with electrostatic spraying (see 
TABLE 1.4 Spin Coating Troubleshooting Chart
Film too thin
Spin speed too high
→
Select lower speed
Spin time too long
→
Decrease time during 
high-speed step
Film too thick
Spin speed too low
→
Select higher speed
Spin time too short
→
Increase time during high 
speed step
Exhaust volume too 
high
→
Adjust exhaust lid or house 
exhaust damper
Source: Based on http://www.brewerscience.com/cee/technical/
spintheory.html.

[Page 18]
18   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
the coating method described immediately below), 
the droplets formed in the spray mist are not as 
small. This can lead to problems in the coating. To 
avoid the undesired overspray the spray gun must 
be kept close to the substrate (e.g., 5 cm compared 
with 30 cm in electrostatic spray). Compared with 
spin coating, spray coating does not suffer from the 
resist thickness variation caused by the centrifugal 
force because the resist droplets are supposed to 
stay where they are deposited. Spray coating is often 
used where thicker photoresist films are required, 
and the uniformity of spray coatings can be held 
within 5% tolerance when mechanized spray arms 
are used. Another major advantage is its ability to 
coat uniformly over nonuniform surfaces, making 
the technique appropriate for MEMS. During spray 
coating, the wafer may be rotated slowly while the 
swivel arm of the spray-coating unit is moved across 
the wafer. A low spin speed (30–60 rpm) is used to 
minimize the centrifugal force effects. The rotation 
allows for resist coverage in all the angles of MEMS 
cavities. Importantly, sprayed coatings do not have 
the internal stress forces that are common to spin-
coated films. However, control of the deposited film 
thickness is not as precise as with spin- and extru-
sion-coated substrates (see last coating method 
reviewed in this section), and some waste of pho-
toresist solution must be accepted as part of this 
FIGURE 1.15 Photoresist deposition methods: spin coating (a), spray coating (b), meniscus coating (c), roller coating 
(d), curtain coating (e), and extrusion coating (f) V represents a movement in the direction of the arrow. (Webster, R.J. 
1998. Thin film polymer dielectrics for high-voltage applications under severe environments. Master’s thesis. Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University.20)

[Page 19]
Photolithography   19
processing technique. It is difficult to deposit layers 
of resist thicker than 20 µm with spray coating. The 
process can be automated and may coat substrates 
double-sided.
Electrostatic Spraying Electrostatic spraying or 
electrodeposition is a variant of spray coating. 
During the atomization of the resist by air or nitro-
gen pressure, the droplets formed are given a static 
charge by applying a large voltage (e.g., 20 kV). The 
charge causes the droplets to repel each other, main-
taining the integrity of the mist of resist formed. 
Because the droplets follow the electric flux lines, 
the amount of overspray can be minimized by a 
set of charged wires keeping the cone of spray to 
within the desired coating area, thus minimizing 
overspray. The substrate to be coated can be passed 
horizontally or vertically through the spray. The lat-
ter allows for simultaneous coating on both sides of 
substrates.
Meniscus Coating Meniscus coating is another 
viable coating method, especially attractive for 
large area substrates such as flat panel displays. The 
method is illustrated in Figure 1.15c. Photoresist 
solution is pumped through a porous tube (10-µm 
pores), and a gravity-assisted laminar flow of the liq-
uid is established around the perimeter of the tube. 
The inverted substrate is made to touch and pass the 
solution flowing around the tube, and the meniscus 
of the resist solution adheres to the surface of the 
moving substrate. Excess fluid that does not adhere 
to the substrate is collected and recirculated to the 
coating head. Important process parameters include 
the separation of the coating head to the substrate, 
coating velocity, solids content in the resist solution, 
and evaporation rate of the carrier solvent. These 
variables control the coating uniformity and thick-
ness. Two important advantages of meniscus coat-
ing are the reduction in coating materials loss (only 
5–10% loss) and the avoidance of edge buildup 
(unlike spin coating). Coating techniques involv-
ing intimate contact between the substrate and the 
photoresist supply source, such as meniscus coat-
ing or silkscreen printing, lead to good coverage if 
the adhesion of the resist to the substrate surface is 
adequate.
Silkscreen Printing Silkscreening can also be used 
to apply thin, even films of resist for small produc-
tion runs. Silkscreening of organics is covered in 
Chapter 8 on chemical, photochemical, and electro-
chemical-based forming (see Figure 8.10).
Plasma-Deposited 
Resist Another 
interesting 
method is the deposition of resist from the gas phase, 
i.e., plasma-deposited photoresist. In this method, a 
monomeric coating precursor is required, which may 
be evaporated at ambient temperatures and forms a 
polymer after deposition on the substrate. The lat-
ter technique is covered in Chapters Seven and Eight 
(see for example Figure 8.9).
Electrodeposition 
(Electrophoresis)21 Electropho
retic photoresist deposition (ED) is an appropriate 
technique for the coating of substrates with extreme 
topography. The ED process requires electrically 
conductive substrates and electrical biasing during 
the resist-coating process. The coating solution con-
tains charged micelles comprising resist, solvent, 
and dye and photoinitiator molecules. The sizes 
of the micelles are in the 50–200 nm ranges, and 
coulombic repulsion keeps the particles sufficiently 
separated to avoid flocculation and settlement. The 
electrophoretic process was explained in detail in 
Volume I, Chapter 6; it suffices to mention here that 
the solution must be rather resistive for a strong 
enough electrophoretic field to be established. The 
ED of the photoresist occurs onto a cathodic (neg-
ative) or anodic (positive) polarized conductive 
substrate.22 In the case of a cataphoretic resist emul-
sion, the ionized polymer forms positively charged 
micelles. When the electric field is applied, the posi-
tively charged micelles migrate by electrophoresis 
toward the cathode. When the micelles reach the 
cathode, their positive surface charges are neutral-
ized by hydroxide ions produced by the electrolysis 
of water at that electrode. The micelles then become 
destabilized and coalesce on the surface of the cath-
ode to form a self-limiting, insulating photoresist 
film. The growth of the film is self-limiting because 
the resist layer is nonconductive, and once sufficient 
resist has been deposited to insulate the substrate 
surface, no further “plating” can occur. Both posi-
tive and negative photoresist chemistries for ED are 

[Page 20]
20   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
available (e.g., 2400 ED and Eagle 2100 ED from 
Shipley Ltd.). Typical coating thicknesses, highly 
dependent on the voltage and the temperature, are 
in the range of 5–10 µm, but specific resist systems 
can be deposited up to about 35 µm on both sides 
of the substrate simultaneously. The main advantage 
is that it yields a pore-free deposit of the resist, even 
at very low thicknesses. Although the most extreme 
surface topographies can be coated with this tech-
nique, this process needs metal plating of substrates 
and has some associated process complexities, such 
as the requirement for wafer electrical biasing dur-
ing the resist-coating process.
Dip Coating In dip coating, one dips the substrate 
into a solution of liquid resist to apply a coating. The 
method is simple in that the substrate after cleaning 
and drying is dipped into a tank containing the pho-
toresist and withdrawn slowly. A thin coating of the 
resist adheres to the substrate and is fixed by mild 
baking. The rate of withdrawal and the viscosity and 
solid contents of the resist are adjusted to obtain the 
desired thickness. However, it is not possible to get 
thicknesses greater than about 8–10 µm through 
this method. The technique does not enable much 
thickness or uniformity control either, although this 
method is commonly used in small-volume shops 
or for odd-sized substrates. The benefits of dip coat-
ing are obvious. As a double-sided coating method, 
all types of formats can be coated. It allows coating 
thick plates, as well as thin sheets and even wires. 
Simultaneous coating of multiple sheets increases 
the productivity significantly. A high and consis-
tent coating quality can be ensured because the few 
and basic coating parameters can easily be main-
tained. Dip coating, a process often used to make 
needle-type biosensors, is covered in more detail in 
Chapter 8. In the dip-coating process, multiple dip 
coatings and drying cycles follow each other.
Roller Coating Roller, curtain, and extrusion coat-
ing are all variations of directly casting the coating 
solution on the substrate. Roller coating allows for 
single- or double-sided coating, and the equipment 
is less expensive than that used in curtain coating 
(see next section). Double-sided roller coating is 
illustrated in Figure 1.15d. Grooved rubber rolls are 
used to transfer the liquid resist, which is constantly 
fed into a nip between a doctor bar or roller and 
the coating roll, to the substrate surface. The pres-
sure between the doctor and coating roller affects 
the final resist film thickness, as does the pitch of the 
grooves on the roller, the nonvolatile content of the 
resist, and the coating roller-to-substrate pressure 
(see Figure 1.15d). Roller coating can produce very 
even coatings of low thickness. Excess resist flows 
back to a sump for recycling via an automatic viscos-
ity controller and filter unit, thus limiting wastage. 
Roller coaters are often used in-line with a photo-
resist dryer. The roller-coating technique can also 
be useful for the application of thick photoresist 
films to thin substrates. In general, however, it is 
incapable of producing uniform coatings less than 
5 µm in thickness. Other advantages of roller coat-
ing include low photoresist waste and adaptability 
to automation.
Curtain Coating Curtain coating is illustrated in 
Figure 1.15e; the substrate is moved on a conveyor 
through a sprayed “curtain” of the resist. The liq-
uid resist is pumped into a head from which the 
only exit is a thin nip on the head’s underside. The 
resist forced through this nip forms a curtain of 
resist through which the substrates to be coated are 
passed. This method can only coat single-sided. The 
distance from the resist delivery point (the slit) to 
the substrate is large compared with other coating 
methods. This method gives high transfer efficiency; 
however, the thin layer of resist falling through the 
air results in a significant loss of solvent. Typically, 
thickness in the 25–60 µm range can be obtained 
with curtain coating. Undeposited material is recir-
culated back to the coating head. By careful control 
of material viscosity, belt speed, and pump speed, 
reproducible thicknesses can be achieved and main-
tained over the substrate surface with less than 10% 
variation in the overall thickness.
Extrusion Coating A method closely related to 
curtain coating is extrusion coating, as illustrated 
in Figure 1.15f. In extrusion coating, the extrusion 
head is positioned at a short, predetermined height 
above the substrate. Film thicknesses from less than 
1 µm to greater than 150 µm in a single coating 

[Page 21]
Photolithography   21
pass have been demonstrated with uniformities 
better than ±3% on substrates up to 350 mm × 
400 mm.20 An important commercial advantage of 
extrusion coating is that it can be easily integrated 
into high throughput microelectronic fabrication 
lines. However, there are some disadvantages asso-
ciated with extrusion coating, such as the varia-
tion in the substrate surface uniformity, which is 
transferred to the extrusion head during the depo-
sition process. Furthermore, edge beads form along 
the leading edge of extrusion-coated substrates, 
although not to the extent encountered in spin-
coated films. A thin curtain of the resist is made to 
fall on the substrate, which is moving horizontally 
at a controlled rate. As it falls on the substrate, the 
liquid curtain gently covers it just like a cloth and 
gets fixed as a film during conveyor movement and 
drying. This method obviously requires a lot of 
controls to achieve good results and, if performed 
well, can yield very satisfactory coatings. It should 
be noted, however, that coating the two sides of the 
laminate requires two operations. Control schemes 
exist in which the fluid flow into the extrusion head 
and the internal head pressure are measured and 
passed to a computer that determines the proper 
motion profile for the extrusion head, thereby 
improving the uniformity of the coating along the 
leading edge. The resist extrusion process has been 
proposed as a lower cost alternative to spin coating 
for producing highly uniform thin films on large 
area substrates.
There is no forced drying during roller, curtain, 
and extrusion coating other than evaporation. 
Therefore, the coating material has time to flow and 
planarize over surface features. The degree of cover-
age into deep features is highly dependent on the 
surface wettability and the solution viscosity.
A number of the photoresist deposition processes 
reviewed above are depicted in Figure 1.15.
In Table 1.5, three coating methods of photo-
resist—spin, spray, and electrodisposition—on 
large topography MEMS surfaces are compared.23 
Characteristics of each method, as well as advan-
tages and disadvantages, are outlined.
Soft Baking or Prebaking
After resist coating, the resist still contains up to 15% 
solvent and may contain built-in stresses. Therefore, 
TABLE 1.5 Comparison of Spin Coating, Spray Coating, and Electrodeposition (ED) of Photoresists
Spin Coating
Spray Coating
ED
Process
Simple
Difficult to automate process
Simple 
Possible for batch production
More complicated 
(equipment, solution)
Batch production
Surface materials
Insulating or conductive
Insulating or conductive
Only on conductive layer
Electrical connection to 
wafer
Parameters
Viscosity
Spin speed
Solid content of solution
Resist dispensed volume
Scanning speed
Spray pressure
Voltage
Temperature
Photoresist
Several commercially available 
types
Resist solution with viscosity 
<20cSt
Use much less resist
Special ED resist
Resist bath needs frequent 
refreshing
Resist uniformity
Difficult to control
Poor reproducibility
Dependent on position of 
cavities in wafer
Controllable
Reproducible
Independent on position of 
cavities
Reproducible and good 
uniformity (best among 
three methods)
Suitable application
Transfer patterns to the bottom 
of etched cavities
One level etched and large 
cavities preferable
Transfer patterns to bottom of 
etched cavities
Cavities with comparable size 
preferable
Transfer patterns that run in 
and across cavities
Metal patterning preferable
Source: Boellaard, E., P.N. Pham, L.D.M.v.d. Brekel, and G.J. Bertens. 2003. Electrodepositable photoresist processing for RF-devices in 
MEMS technology. MEPTEC Rep Quarter Two: 29–31; and Pham, N.P., E. Boellaard, P.M. Sarro, and J.N. Burghartz. 2002. SAFE 2002. 
Veldhoven, the Netherlands: STW.22,23

[Page 22]
22   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
the wafers are soft baked (also pre-exposure baked 
or prebaked) at 90–100°C for about 20 minutes in 
a convection oven or at 75–85°C for 1–3 minutes 
with a vacuum hot plate to remove solvents and 
stress and to promote adhesion of the resist layer to 
the substrate. This is a critical step in that failure to 
sufficiently remove the solvent will affect the resist 
profile. Excessive baking destroys the photoactive 
compound and reduces sensitivity. Thick resists may 
benefit from a longer bake time. The resist thick-
ness, for both negative and positive resists, is typi-
cally reduced by 10–25% during soft baking. Hot 
plating the resist is faster, more controllable, and 
does not trap solvent like convection oven baking. 
In convection ovens, the solvent at the surface of 
the resist is evaporated first, and this can cause an 
impermeable resist skin, trapping the remaining sol-
vent inside. Therefore, heating in a convection oven 
must proceed slowly to avoid solvent bursts. On a 
hot plate, a smooth substrate surface is needed for 
good thermal contact and heating uniformity, and 
the hot plate should be perfectly horizontal. In this 
case, the temperature increase starts at the bottom 
of the wafer and works upward, more thoroughly 
evaporating the coating solvent and leading to a 
generally much faster and more suitable approach 
for automation. Commercially, microwave heating 
or IR lamps are also used in production lines. The 
optimization of the prebaking step may substan-
tially increase device yield.
Exposure and Postexposure Treatment
After soft baking, the resist-coated wafers are trans-
ferred to an illumination or exposure system where 
they are aligned with the features on the mask (see 
Figure 1.16). For any lithographic technique to be of 
value, it must provide an alignment technique capa-
ble of a superposition precision of mask and wafer 
that is a small fraction of the minimum feature size 
of the devices under construction. In the simplest 
case, an exposure system consists of a UV lamp illu-
minating the resist-coated wafer through a mask 
without any lenses between the two. The purpose of 
the illumination is to deliver light with the proper 
intensity, directionality, spectral characteristics, and 
uniformity across the wafer, allowing a nearly per-
fect transfer or printing of the mask image onto the 
resist in the form of a latent image.
In photolithography, wavelengths of the light 
source used for exposure of the resist-coated wafer 
range from the very short wavelengths of extreme 
UV (10–14 nm) to deep UV (150–300 nm) to near 
UV (350–500 nm). In near UV, one typically uses 
the g-line (435 nm) or i-line (365 nm) of a mercury 
lamp. The brightness of shorter-wavelength sources 
is severely reduced compared with that of longer-
wavelength sources, and the addition of lenses fur-
ther reduces the efficiency of the exposure system. 
For example, the total collected deep UV power for a 
1-kW mercury-xenon lamp in the 200–250 nm range 
is only 30–40 mW; the additional optics absorb more 
FIGURE 1.16 (a) Exposure of resist-coated wafer to UV light source. (b) An exposure station.

[Page 23]
Photolithography   23
energy of the short wavelengths passing through 
them. As a consequence, with shorter wavelengths, 
higher resist sensitivity is required, and newer deep 
UV sources that produce a higher flux of deep UV 
radiation must be used. For example, a KrF excimer 
laser with a short wavelength of 248 nm and a power 
of 10–20 W at that wavelength is used. In general, 
the smallest feature that can be printed using projec-
tion lithography is roughly equal to the wavelength 
of the  exposure source; in this example, 248 nm 
would be expected. The same laser, in combination 
with sop histicated resolution-enhancing techniques 
(RETs), may be used to produce more advanced cir-
cuits with transistor gate features of 160  nm and 
less. RET methods (see below) enable one to go a bit 
beyond the conven tional Rayleigh diffraction limit. 
Other exposure systems now available include two 
deep UV excimer lasers, the ArF at 193 nm and the F2 
at 157 nm, and extreme UV lithography at 13.4 nm. 
The current generation of lithography uses 193-nm 
light24 from ArF lasers. In the case of extreme UV, 
a plasma or synchrotron source and all-reflective 
reduction optics (4×) (at this wavelength all materials 
absorb!) are used. Refractive optical elements are too 
absorbing at those wavelengths.25 Extreme UV as a 
commercial tool is in the exploratory phase only and 
is discussed in detail in Chapter 2 on next generation 
lithographies (NGLs). Step and scan printing extreme 
UV systems are expected to come on-line by the end 
of this decade. In Figure 1.17 we show the various 
technologies under investigation for the development 
of pilot and production lines of large scale integrated 
(LSI) circuitry.
The incident light intensity (in W/cm2) multiplied 
by the exposure time (in seconds) gives the incident 
energy (J/cm2) or dose, D, across the surface of the 
resist film. Radiation induces a chemical reaction 
in the exposed areas of the photoresist, altering the 
solubility of the resist in a solvent either directly or 
indirectly via a sensitizer. During the latent image-
forming reaction, the sensitizer in the resist usually 
bleaches; in other words, exposed resist is rendered 
transparent to the incoming wavelength. This bleach-
ing allows the use of thick films with high absor-
bency because light will reach the substrate through 
the bleached resist. The absorbency of the unexposed 
resist should not reach 40% to avoid degradation of 
the image profile through the resist depth because 
KrF(248 nm)
KrF(248 nm) PSM
ArF(193 nm)
ArF(193 nm)  PSM
F2(157 nm)
EPL PXL IPL
F2(157 nm)  PSM
EPL extreme UV
IPL PXL EBDW
Extreme UV EPL
IPL EBDW
Production
Production
Production
Production
Pilot
Pilot
Pilot
Pilot
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
First year of LSI production
Technology options at technology nodes (nm)
180
130
100
70
50
Narrow
options
Narrow
options
Narrow
options
FIGURE 1.17 Various technologies under investigation for the development of pilot and production lines of LSI  circuitry. 
These include KrF (248 nm), KrF excimer laser lithography with wavelength 248 nm; ArF (193 nm), ArF excimer laser 
lithography with wavelength 193 nm; F2 (157 nm), F2 excimer laser lithography with a wavelength of 157 nm; PSM, 
phase-shifting mask applied to KrF, ArF, and F2; EPL, electron-projection lithography; PXL, proximity X-ray lithography; 
IPL, ion-projection lithography; EBDW, electron-beam direct writing. (Ito, T., and S. Okazaki. 2000. Pushing the limits of 
lithography. Nature 406:1027–31.26)

[Page 24]
24   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
too large a percentage of the light is absorbed in the 
top layer. On the other hand, with the absorbency 
far less than 40%, exposure times required to form 
the image become too long. The smaller the dose 
needed to “write” or “print” the mask features onto 
the resist layer with good resolution, the better the 
lithographic sensitivity of the resist.
A postexposure treatment of the exposed photo-
resist is often desired because the reactions initiated 
during exposure might not have run to completion. 
To halt the reactions or to induce new ones, several 
postexposure treatments are in use: postexposure 
baking (PEB), flood exposure with other types of radi-
ation, treatment with a reactive gas, and vacuum treat-
ment. PEB (sometimes in a vacuum) and treatment 
with reactive gas are used in image reversal and dry 
resist development. In the case of a chemically ampli-
fied resist, the PEB is most critical. Although reactions 
induced by the catalyst that forms during exposure 
take place at room temperature, their rate is greatly 
increased by baking at 100°C. The precise control of 
this type of PEB critically determines the subsequent 
development itself. A PEB improves line-width con-
trol by improving adhesion, reduction of scumming 
(resist left behind after development), increasing con-
trast and resist profile (higher edge-wall angle), and 
reducing the effects of standing waves (see Figures 
1.69c and 1.70) in regular positive resist. A typical PEB 
used for the positive resist OCG 895i involves a tem-
perature of 115°C on a hot plate held for 1 minute. 
Image reversal, dry resist development, and chemi-
cally amplified resists will be discussed below.
Development
Development is the dissolution of unpolymerized 
resist that transforms the latent resist image, formed 
during exposure, into a relief image that will serve 
as a mask for further subtractive and additive steps. 
During the development of an exposed resist, selec-
tive dissolving takes place (see Figure 1.1d). Two 
main technologies are available for development: 
wet development, illustrated in Figure 1.18, is widely 
used in circuit and miniaturization manufacture in 
general, and dry development, which is starting to 
replace wet development for some of the ultimate 
line-width resolution applications.
Wet development by solvents can be based on 
at least three different types of exposure-induced 
changes: variation in molecular weight of the poly-
mers (by cross-linking or by chain scission), reactiv-
ity change, and polarity change.27 Two main types of 
wet development setups are used: immersion (Figure 
1.18) and spray developers (Figure 1.19). During 
batch immersion developing, cassette-loaded wafers 
are batch-immersed for a timed period in a devel-
oper bath and agitated at a specific temperature.
FIGURE 1.18 Wet development.
FIGURE 1.19 Spray developer: fresh developing solution 
is directed across wafer surfaces by a fan-type spray-
ing nozzle. The renewal of developer allows uniform 
developer strength to be maintained.

[Page 25]
Photolithography   25
During batch spray development, fan-type spray-
ers direct fresh developing solution across wafer 
surfaces. Positive resists are typically developed 
in aqueous alkaline solutions, and negative resists 
are developed in organic ones. For alkaline devel-
opers, simple solutions of NaOH (Shipley 351) or 
KOH (AZ/Clariant 400K) may be used, but because 
of the possibility of mobile ion contamination in 
metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) devices, devel-
opers free of metal ions are preferred. The latter are 
usually tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide (TMAH) 
based (Shipley CD-26, MF-321, or AZ/Clariant 300-
MIF). Each developer has a different dilution, and 
some require longer development times than oth-
ers. Developers are generally matched to a type of 
photoresist. Although they may be interchangeable 
to some extent, changing the type of developer used 
in a process will usually change the exposure time 
necessary to resolve the pattern. It should be noted 
that all of the above-mentioned alkaline developers 
etch aluminum. If the micromachine or microchip 
under construction contains aluminum features, 
Shipley Microposit Developer Concentrate, a mix-
ture of proprietary alkaline salts (mostly phos-
phates) with the slowest aluminum etch rate, is a 
better developer choice.
Aqueous development is highly favored for 
health reasons. The aqueous development rate 
depends on the pH of the developer and the tem-
perature, which needs to be controlled to within 
±0.5°C.19 Surfactants and other wetting agents 
added to the developer ensure uniform wetting, 
and buffers provide a more stable operating win-
dow and a longer lifetime. The more newly devel-
oped negative resists also may be developed in 
aqueous solutions.
The use of organic solvents leads to some swell-
ing of the resist (especially for negative resists) and 
loss of adhesion of the resist to the substrate. Dry 
development overcomes these problems, as it is 
based either on a vapor phase process or a plasma.28 
In the latter, oxygen-reactive ion etching is used to 
develop the latent image. The image formed during 
exposure exhibits a differential etch rate to oxygen-
reactive ion etching rather than differential solubil-
ity to a solvent.19 Dry developed resists should not 
be confused with dry film resists, which are resists 
that come in film form and are laminated onto a 
substrate rather than spin coated.
With continued pressure by the U.S. Environmen-
tal Protection Agency for a cleaner environment, dry 
development and dry etching (see Chapter 3) are 
becoming the predominant technologies to use. Dry 
developed resists, such as the DESIRE process, where 
the surface of the exposed resist is treated with a sili-
con-containing reagent, will be discussed below.
Descumming and Postbaking
A mild oxygen plasma treatment, so-called descum-
ming, removes unwanted resist left behind after 
development. Negative and, to a lesser degree, posi-
tive resists leave a thin polymer film at the resist/
substrate interface. The problem is most severe in 
small (<1 µm) high-aspect-ratio structures where the 
mass transfer of a wet developer is poor. Patterned 
resist areas are also thinned in the descumming pro-
cess, but this is usually of little consequence.
Before etching the substrate or adding a material, 
the wafer must be postbaked. Postbaking or hard 
baking removes residual coating solvent and devel-
oper and anneals the film to promote interfacial 
adhesion of the resist that has been weakened either 
by developer penetration along the resist/substrate 
interface or by swelling of the resist (mainly for neg-
ative resists). Hard baking also improves the hard-
ness of the film and avoids solvent bursts during 
vacuum processing. Improved hardness increases 
the resistance of the resist to subsequent etching 
steps. Postbaking frequently occurs at higher tem-
peratures (120°C) and for longer times (e.g., 20 min) 
than soft or prebaking. The major limitation for heat 
application is excessive flow or melt, which degrades 
wall profile angles and makes it more difficult to 
remove the resist. Postbake induces some stress and 
resist shrinkage. Special care needs to be taken when 
the baking temperature is above the glass transition 
temperature, Tg, when impurities are easily incorpo-
rated into the resist because of the plastic flow of the 
resist. Positive resists withstand higher heating tem-
peratures than negative resists, but their stripping 
proves more difficult. Descumming and postbaking 
both follow step d in Figure 1.1.
Resist does not withstand long exposure to 
etchants well. As a consequence, with 1:7 buffered 

[Page 26]
26   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
HF (a mixture of 1 part 49% aqueous HF solution 
and 7 parts NH4F that is used to strip SiO2), the 
postbake sometimes is repeated after 5 minutes of 
etching to prolong the lifetime of the resist layer (see 
Figure 1.1e). Also, postbaking should be prolonged 
before electroplating but is not needed for processes 
in which a soft resist is desired, e.g., in metal liftoff 
patterning (see Figure 1.37). As mentioned before, 
photoresist will undergo plastic flow with sufficient 
time and/or temperature, and this resist reflow may 
be used for tailoring resist sidewalls (Figure 1.20).
Resists
The principal components of photoresists are a 
polymer (base resin), a sensitizer, and a casting sol-
vent. The polymer changes structure when exposed 
to radiation; the solvent allows spin application 
and formation of thin layers on the wafer surface; 
sensitizers control the chemical reactions in the 
polymeric phase. Resists without sensitizers are sin-
gle-component or one-component systems, whereas 
sensitizer-based resists are two-component systems. 
Solvent and other potential additives do not directly 
relate to the photoactivity of the resist.
Resist Tone
If the photoresist is of the type called positive (also 
positive tone), the photochemical reaction during 
exposure of a resist weakens the polymer by rupture 
or scission of the main and side polymer chains, and 
the exposed resist becomes more soluble in develop-
ing solutions (e.g., 10 times more soluble). In other 
words, the development rate, R, for the exposed resist 
is about 10 times faster than the development rate, 
R0, for the unexposed resist. If the photoresist is of the 
type called negative (also negative tone), the reaction 
strengthens the polymer by random cross-linkage of 
main chains or pendant side chains, becoming less 
soluble (slower dissolving). Exposure, development, 
and pattern-transfer sequences for negative and 
positive resists are shown in Figure 1.21. Figure 1.22 
illustrates chain scission (positive resists) and cross-
linking (negative resists).
Positive Resists Two well-known families of positive 
photoresists are the single component poly (meth-
ylmethacrylate) (PMMA) (Figure 1.23) resists and 
the two-component diazonaphtoquinone (DNQ) 
100°C
110°C
120°C
130°C
140°C
FIGURE 1.20 Tailoring resist sidewalls through resist reflow.
Uniform UV exposure illumination
Chrome on glass photomask
Photoresist (PR)
Substrate wafer
Latent image created in
(x,y,θ) alignment of
mask to substate
photoresist after exposure
Wet chemical development
Negative photoresist
Positive photoresist
P
(a)
hotoresist is photopolymerized where
exposed and rendered insoluble to the
developer solution.
E
(b)
xposure decomposes a development
inhibitor, and developer solution only
dissolves photoresist in the exposed areas.
FIGURE 1.21 Positive and negative resist: exposure, development, and pattern transfer. (a) Negative resists remain in the 
exposed region. (b) Positive resists develop in the exposed region. 

[Page 27]
Photolithography   27
(Figure 1.24) resists composed of a photoactive com-
ponent such as DNQ ester (20–50 wt%) and a phe-
nolic novolak resin.
PMMA becomes soluble through chain scission 
under deep UV illumination. The maximum sen-
sitivity of PMMA lies at 220 nm; at greater than 
240 nm the resist becomes insensitive. PMMA resin 
by itself constitutes a rather insensitive or slow 
deep UV photoresist requiring doses >250 mJ/cm2. 
Exposure times of tens of minutes were required 
with the earliest PMMAs available.28 By adding a 
photosensitizer such as t-butyl benzoic acid, the UV 
spectral absorbency of PMMA is increased, and a 
150-mJ/cm2 lithographic sensitivity can be obtained. 
PMMA is also used in electron beam, ion beam, and 
x-ray lithography. Although the resolution of PMMA 
is very good, its plasma etch tolerance is very low. 
Also, dissociation of PMMA changes the chemistry 
of a plasma etch and often leads to polymeric depos-
its on the surface of the substrate.
The DNQ resist system is a “workhorse,” near-
 UV, two-component positive resists, which photo-
chemically transform into a polar, base-soluble 
product.24 The hydrophilic novolak resin (N) is in 
itself alkali soluble because of the OH groups. 
Diazonaphthaquinone (DQ) is a hydrophobic and 
nonionizable compound, and when phenolic resins 
are impregnated with DQ, they become hydrophobic 
and are rendered insoluble. The addition of 20–50 
wt% DQ forms a complex with the phenol groups of 
the novolak resin and reduces the solubility rate of 
the unexposed resist to less than 1–2 nm·s−1. During 
exposure, DNQ undergoes photolysis that destroys 
the inhibitory effect of DQ on film dissolution 
(Figure 1.24). The photolysis causes the DNQ to 
undergo a reaction forming a base-soluble carbox-
ylic acid that can be rapidly developed in aqueous 
solution of hydroxide ions (e.g., 1% NaOH). In con-
trast with cross-linked resists, the film solubility 
is controlled by chemical and polarity difference 
rather than molecular size. The matrix novolak 
resin itself is a condensation product of a cresol 
(a)
Chain scission
(b)
Cross-link
FIGURE 1.22 (a) Polymer chain scission (positive resists) 
and (b) cross-linking (negative resists).
[
]
[
]
:
+
.
.
[
]
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
C
C
C
C
OCH3
OCH3
O
O
CH3
CH3
CH3O
CH3
CO2,
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
n
hν
O
OCH3
O
O
C
C
C
C
n
,
,
CO
CH3
O
C
C
C
O
+
FIGURE 1.23 Poly(methylmethacrylate) or PMMA. Photo-
induced chain scission of PMMA resist.
OH
R
+ H2C = O
CH3
+ N2 
H+
Novolak resin
O
C
OH
R
H2O
O
Base insoluble
sensitizer
O
C
R
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
OH
OH
(
) n
R
N2
O
FIGURE 1.24 Phenolic novolak resin and the influence 
of diazonaphthoquinone ester (DNQ) on it. The novolak 
matrix resin is prepared by acid copolymerization of cresol 
and formaldehyde. The base-insoluble sensitizer, a DNQ, 
undergoes photolysis to produce a carbine, which then 
undergoes a rearrangement to form a ketene. The ketene 
reacts with water, present in the film, to form a base-
 soluble, indenecarboxylic acid photoproduct.

[Page 28]
28   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
isomer (para-cresol) and formaldehyde consisting 
of hydrocarbon rings with two methyl groups and 
1 OH group attached. Phenolic resins are readily 
 cross-linked by thermal activation into rigid forms 
(bakelite was the first thermosetting plastic). 
A novolak resin absorbs light less than 300 nm, 
and the DNQ addition adds an absorption region 
around 400 nm. The 365-, 405-, and 435-nm mer-
cury lines can all be used for exposure of DNQ. 
The intense absorption of aromatic molecules pre-
vents the use of this resist at exposing wavelengths 
less than about 300 nm; at those shorter wave-
lengths, linear acrylate and methacrylate copo-
lymers have the advantage. Positive attributes of 
novolak-based resist are that the unexposed areas 
are essentially unchanged by the presence of the 
developer. Thus, line width and shape of a pattern 
are precisely retained. Moreover, novolak is a long-
chain aromatic ring polymer that is fairly resistant 
to chemical attack. Therefore, the photoresist is 
a good mask for the subsequent plasma etching. 
Moreover, unlike radical-based systems, it shows 
no oxygen inhibition.
Most positive resists are soluble in strongly alka-
line solutions (a fact which is taken advantage of for 
stripping of the resist; see Figure 1.1f and text below) 
and develop in mildly alkaline ones (as shown in 
Figure 1.1d). Some typical industrially used devel-
opers for positive resists are KOH (e.g., a 0.05–0.5 N 
aqueous solution and a surfactant), TMAH, ketones, 
and acetates. As mentioned above, besides changing 
the molecular weight of the resist, radiation-induced 
reactions may also change the resist’s solubility by 
altering its hydrophilicity (polarity) or its reactiv-
ity. Typical casting solvents for positive resists are 
Cellosolve* acetate, methyl Cellosolve, and aromatic 
hydrocarbons.
Negative Resists The first negative photoresists 
were based on free radical-initiated photo cross-
linking processes of main or pendant polymer side 
chains, rendering the exposed parts insoluble. They 
were the very first types of resists used to pattern 
semiconductor devices and still comprise the largest 
* Cellosolve is a trade name for solvents based on esters of ethylene 
glycol; these solvents have been identified as possible carcinogens.
segment of the overall photoresist industry, being 
widely used to define circuitry in printed wiring 
boards (PWBs).29 A negative photoresist becomes 
insoluble in organic (more traditional negative 
resists) or water-based developers (newer negative 
resist systems) on exposure to UV radiation. The 
insoluble layer forms a “negative” pattern that is 
used as a stencil (usually temporarily) to delineate 
many levels of circuitry in semiconductors, MEMS, 
and PWBs. The insolubilization of radiated negative 
resists can be achieved in one of two ways: the nega-
tive resist material increases in molecular weight 
through UV exposure (traditional negative resists), 
or it is photochemically transformed to form new 
insoluble products (newer negative resist prod-
ucts). The increase in molecular weight is generally 
accomplished through photoinitiators that generate 
free radicals or strong acids, facilitating polymeric 
cross-linking or the photopolymerization of mono-
meric or oligomeric species. Photochemical trans-
formation of negative photoresists may also lead to 
hydrophobic or hydrophilic groups, which provide 
another means of inducing preferential solubility 
between the exposed and unexposed resist film.
Commonly used negative-acting, two-compo-
nent resists are bis(aryl)azide rubber resists (Figure 
1.25), whose matrix resin is cyclized poly(cis-
isoprene), a synthetic rubber. Cyclized rubber is 
obtained  by acid treatment of poly(cis-isoprene), 
a process that leads to some ring formation in the 
polymer and stiffens it, thereby raising its glass 
transition temperature (Tg). For use in a photo-
resist, a resin should have a molecular weight of 
around 100,000–200,000 to ensure proper viscos-
ity, melting point, softening point, and stiffness. To 
get a molecular weight of 100,000 using isoprene 
(M  =  68.12 g/mol), one needs chains of an aver-
age length of n = 100,000/68.12 or 1,468 monomer 
units. This represents a molecule that is too long 
for proper photolithographic resolution, so the 
chains need to coil up to make them shorter and 
to increase the mechanical stiffness of the resist. 
Therefore, cis-isoprene is used to curl up the chains 
into rings; trans-isoprene would not work because of 
steric hindrance of the CH3 groups.
The earliest negative photoresists, introduced in 
the 1960s, were based on the photo cross-linking of 

[Page 29]
Photolithography   29
“cyclized rubber” using an additive that contained 
two azide groups such as bis(aryl)azide. When this 
bis-azide is photolyzed, it loses nitrogen and pro-
duces two highly reactive nitrene moieties.
The nitrene intermediates undergo a series of 
reactions that results in the cross-linking of the 
resin. The nitrenes can form bonds with the cycl-
ized rubber in a variety of ways, the most common 
of which is aziridine ring formation. Oxidation 
of the nitrene intermediate, with oxygen from the 
ambient or dissolved in the polymer to form azoxy 
and nitrose products, often competes with the addi-
tion and insertion reactions, reducing the extent of 
the polymer-polymer cross-linking. This phenom-
enon is called oxygen inhibition. In other words, 
polymerization can be inhibited by the quenching 
of the cross-linking reactions through scavenging of 
the nitrene photoproduct by oxygen. This compet-
ing reaction represents a disadvantage, as exposure 
must be carried out under a nitrogen blanket or in a 
vacuum. This type of resist was successfully used in 
the semiconductor industry when printed in “hard 
contact,” minimizing the effect of the oxygen inhi-
bition. With the introduction of soft contact (prox-
imity mode) and off-contact (projection mode), 
the resist showed severe film thinning (scalping) as 
a direct consequence of the reduced cross-linking 
density near the air/polymer interface. Today, cyclic 
poly(cis-isoprene)-based resists play only a small roll 
in the semiconductor industry.
Another disadvantage of negative resists is that 
the resolution is limited by film thickness. The cross-
linking process starts topside, where the light hits the 
resist first. Consequently, overexposure is needed to 
render the resist insoluble at the substrate interface. 
The greater the desired resist thickness, the greater 
the overdose needed for complete polymerization 
and the larger the scattered radiation. Scattered radi-
ation at the resist/substrate interface in turn reduces 
the obtainable resolution. Moreover, the organic 
solvent developer swells the cross-linked negative 
image, which further degrades the resolution. In a 
practical situation, this leads to a 2–3-µm maximum 
resolution in a 1-µm-thick resist layer. To improve 
the resolution of a negative resist, thinner resist 
layers can be used; however, when using thin lay-
ers of negative resist, pinholes become problematic. 
Xylene is the most commonly used aromatic solvent 
for negative resists, although almost any organic sol-
vent will do. Aromatic solvent developers may pose 
environmental, health, and safety concerns. Newer 
negative resists are water developable.
An example of a commercial, two-component 
negative photoresist is the Kodak KTFR [an azide-
sensitized poly(isoprene) rubber] with a lithographic 
sensitivity (also photospeed) of 75–125 mJ/cm2. 
Negative photoresists, in general, adhere very well 
to the substrate, and a vast amount of compositions 
are available (stemming from research and develop-
ment work in paints, UV curing inks, and adhesives 
N
N3
N3
X
N
X
hν
R_N3
hν
R_N: + N2
R_N: + R_N:
R_N: + H_C
R_N: + H_C
R_N: + 
R_N = N_R
R_NH_C
R_N 
N3
N3
N3
O
O
C
C
C
CH3
CH3
O
+2
H
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2=C CH2 CH
_
=
Z.N.
n
CH3
CH2
CH2
H
C=C
n
R_NH + H_C
Te primary photoevent in 
bisarylazide-rubber resists is the 
production of nitrene, which 
then undergoes a variety of 
reactions that result in covalent, 
polymer-polymer linkages. A 
typical 
structure 
of 
one 
commonly employed sensitizer 
is shown. Te reaction involved 
in the synthesis of the cyclized 
rubber matrix and the bisazide 
sensitizer is also shown.
Azide
Nitrene + Nitrogen
Bisazide sensitizer
Cyclized rubber matrix
Bis(aryl)azide-sensitized rubber resists with
cyclized poly(cis-isoprene) as matrix resin
FIGURE 1.25 Bis(aryl)azide-sensitized rubber resists with 
cyclized poly(cis-isoprene) as matrix resin. The primary 
photoevent in bis(aryl)azide rubber resists is the produc-
tion of nitrene, which then undergoes a variety of reac-
tions that result in covalent, polymer-polymer linkages. 
A typical structure of one commonly used sensitizer is 
shown.

[Page 30]
30   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
all based on polymerization hardening). Negative 
resists are highly resistant to acid and alkaline aque-
ous solutions, as well as to oxidizing agents. As a 
consequence, a given thickness of negative resist 
is more chemically resistant than a corresponding 
thickness of positive resist. This chemical resis-
tance ensures better retention of resist features even 
during a long, aggressive wet or dry etch. Negative 
resists also are more sensitive than positive resists 
but exhibit a lower contrast (γ smaller; see “Contrast 
and Experimental Determination of Lithographic 
Sensitivity,” this chapter).
A comparison of negative and positive photore-
sist features is presented in Table 1.6. This table is 
not exhaustive and is meant only as a practical guide 
for selection of a resist tone. The choice of whether 
to use a negative or a positive resist system depends 
on the needs of the specific application, such as 
resolution, ease of processing, speed, and cost. The 
choice of resist tone will even depend on the specific 
intended pattern geometry, which is known as the 
optical proximity effect. For example, an isolated single 
line most easily resolves in a negative resist (higher 
resolution line), whereas an isolated hole or trench 
is most easily defined in a positive resist. Because 
traditional negative resists used to have a line-width 
limit of only about 2–3 µm and because the industry 
moved away from organic solvent-based systems in 
favor of less toxic, water-based developers, positive 
resists gained in popularity. However, traditional 
negative resists continue to be used in the produc-
tion of PWBs and low-cost, high-volume chips 
TABLE 1.6 Comparison of Traditional* Negative and Positive Photoresists
Characteristic
Resist Type
Positive Resist
Negative Resist
Adhesion to silicon
Fair (priming required)
Excellent (priming not required)
Available compositions
Many
Vast
Baking
In air (+)
In nitrogen (−)
Contrast γ
Higher, e.g., 2.2
Lower, e.g., 1.5
Cost
More expensive
Less expensive
Developer
Temperature sensitive (−) and aqueous 
based (Ecologically sound)
Temperature insensitive (+) and 
organic solvent (−)
Developer process window
Small
Very wide, insensitive to 
overdeveloping
Influence of oxygen
No (+)
Yes (−)
Liftoff
Yes [usually with multiple layer resist 
(MLR)]
Yes [even in single layer resist (SLR)]
Mask type
Dark-field: lower defects
Clear-field: higher defects
Opaque dirt on clear portion of mask
Not very sensitive to it
Causes printing of pinholes
Photospeed
Slower
Faster
Pinhole count
Higher
Lower
Pinholes in mask
Prints mask pinholes
Not so sensitive to mask pinholes
Plasma etch resistance
Not very good
Very good
Proximity effect
Prints isolated holes or trenches better
Prints isolated lines better
Residue after development
Mostly at <1 µm and high aspect ratio
Often a problem
Resolution
High
Low (>1 µm)
Sensitizer quantum yield Φ
0.2−0.3
0.5−1
Step coverage
Better
Lower
Strippers of resist over
 Oxide steps
 Metal steps
Acid
Simple solvents
Acid
Chlorinated solvent compounds
Swelling in developer
No
Yes
Thermal stability
Good
Fair
Wet chemical resistance
Fair
Excellent
*Newer resist systems are discussed under “Photolithography Resolution Enhancement Technology,” this chapter.

[Page 31]
Photolithography   31
because they require only small amounts of sensi-
tizers and therefore are substantially less expensive 
than positive resists. Moreover, great progress has 
been made in improving the resolution of new types 
of water-soluble negative resists. These are used in 
new generations of ICs and in high-aspect-ratio 
miniaturized systems.29,30 In working with different 
resists, it is also important to be aware of such prop-
erties as shelf life, flash point, and threshold limit 
value (TLV) rating. The flash point is the tempera-
ture at which the resist vapors ignite in the presence 
of an open flame. The TLV is the toxicity rating that 
specifies the maximum ambient concentration (in 
parts per million) to which a worker can be safely 
exposed during a normal workday.
Table 1.7 lists some common positive and negative 
resists used in various lithography strategies along 
with their lithographic sensitivities. For charged 
particles (e-beam lithography and ion-beam lithog-
raphy), sensitivity is expressed in coulombs per 
centimeter square (C/cm2); for photons (optical 
and x-ray), joules per centimeter square (J/cm2) is 
used. Ideally, in charged-particle lithography, one 
should select a resist with sensitivity in the range of 
10–5–10–7 C/cm2, and in photon lithography, 10–100 
mJ/cm2, to minimize the exposure duration.
Resist research and development are produc-
ing better resolution in both positive and negative 
resists. Results have been especially impressive in 
the latter. Negative resists used to be relegated to 
low-resolution chips and PWBs, but newer systems 
offer wider processing latitude and higher resolu-
tion. Progress has been so swift that new negative 
resists are now used in advanced complementary 
metal oxide silicon (CMOS) logic device manufac-
ture. Several of these new negative resists also enable 
very high-aspect-ratio microfabrication.
Finally, in Table 1.8, we list the development of 
photoresists as they keep up with the scale of inte-
gration in ICs. In the inset of Table 1.8, we show the 
photoresist evolution with the type of lithography. 
In this inset, SCALPEL, ion-projection lithography, 
and x-ray lithographies are next generation litho-
graphies (NGLs) that will be reviewed in Chapter 2; 
PSM stands for phase- shifting masks and OAI for 
off-axis illumination, two resolution-enhancing 
tech niques (RETs) that are reviewed further below.
Permanent Resists and Dry Resists
Permanent Resists Resists typically are removed 
(stripped) once they have served their function as 
temporary stencils. Some negative resists, hard-
ened through UV exposure, are used as permanent 
components of miniature devices. Two prominent 
examples in this category are polyimide and SU-8-
based resists.
Polyimides are a class of polymers synthesized 
from two monomers: a dianhydride and a di amine. 
TABLE 1.7 Typical Negative and Positive Photoresists and Their Lithographic Sensitivity
Class of Resist
Resist Name
Tone (Polarity)
Lithographic Sensitivity
Optical
CAMP-6 (OCG)
Positive
100 mJ/cm2
APEX-E (IBM and Shipley)
Positive
75 mJ/cm2
Kodak 747
Negative
9 mJ/cm2
AZ-1350J
Positive
90 mJ/cm2
PR102
Positive
140 mJ/cm2
XP-2198 (Shipley)
Positive
30 mJ/cm2
KRF (from UCB-JSR)
Negative
20–30 mJ/cm2
e-Beam
COP [Copolymer-(α-cyano ethyl 
acrylate-α-amido ethyl acrylate)]
Negative
0.5 μC/cm2
GeSe (germanium selenide)
Negative
80 μC/cm2
PBS [poly-(butene-1-sulfone)]
Positive
1 μC/cm2
PMMA
Positive
100 μC/cm2
X-ray
COP
Negative
100 mJ/cm2
DCOPA 
Negative
14 mJ/cm2
PBS
Positive
170 mJ/cm2
PMMA
Positive
6500 mJ/cm2

[Page 32]
32   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Commercial products are supplied as soluble 
polyamic acid (PAA) intermediates, which undergo 
a thermal imidization with the evolution of water 
to form an insoluble polyimide (Figure 1.26). Polyi-
mide is used as an interlayer dielectric because of 
its desirable characteristics such as a high thermal 
stability with a glass transition temperature, Tg  > 
300°C, a low dielectric constant ε, good chemi-
cal stability, and ease of processing. However, its 
tendency to absorb moisture causes the polyim-
ide layers to swell and their dielectric constants to 
increase significantly. Various polyimide analogs 
have been developed to avoid the latter undesir-
able property.31 A common approach to reduce the 
dielectric constant of polyimides is the inclusion of 
organofluorine components, in the form of pendant 
perfluoroalkyl groups. The polyamic acid precursor 
for fluorinated polyimides is commonly based on 
hexafluorodianhydrideoxydianiline (HFDA-ODA). 
The inclusion of fluorinated monomers in the poly-
imide backbone reduces moisture absorption and 
the dielectric constant. Unfortunately, these modi-
fied polyimides generally show an increased sus-
ceptibility to chemical attack, making their use 
in multilayer fabrication questionable. However, 
newer formulations have improved the chemical 
resistance of polyimides and have demonstrated 
a unique wet etch capability for making vias with 
aspect ratios approaching 1.2:1. Polyimide can 
be “wet etched” using a strong alkaline solution 
TABLE 1.8 Development of Photoresists during the Past 38 Years
Year
Scale of Integration
Minimum Line Width
Photoresist
1970
1 Kb
10 µm
Rubber-based negative
1973
4 Kb
8 µm
Rubber-based negative
1976
16 Kb
5 µm
Rubber-based negative
1979
64 Kb
2 µm
Rubber-based negative
1982
256 Kb
2 µm
Novolak-type positive
1985
1 Mb
1.2 µm
High-resolution positive photoresist of 
DQ-novolak type
1988
4 Mb
0.8 µm
High-resolution positive photoresist and 
multilayer process
1992
16 Mb
0.5 µm
Deep UV resist, multilayer process
1995
256 Mb
0.25 µm
l-line (356 nm) resist
1999
1 Gb
0.18 µm
KrF (248 nm) resist
2002
4 Gb
0.13 µm
ArF (248/193 nm) resist
2005
16 Gb
0.1 µm
F2 (193/157 nm) resist
2008
64 Gb
0.07 µm
Extreme UV (13 nm) resist
Negative photoresist
Positive photoresist
(DNQ-novolak)
Chemical ampliﬁcation
Advanced photoresist
top surface imaging
Contact printer
g-line stepper
i-line stepper
Scanning aligner
Deep UV step and scan
Deep UV stepper
Extreme UV step and scan
SCALPEL
IPL, x-ray
PSM, OAI
1970s                           10  µm
0.35 µm
0.40 µm
0.18 µm
2010
Inset
2000s   
0.13 µm
0.1 µm
1.2 µm 
 1  µm 
1980s 
1990s

[Page 33]
Photolithography   33
such as TMAH. For dry etching of polyimide, one 
can use plasma- enhanced chemical vapor deposi-
tion (PECVD) silicon nitride as a mask with an O2 
plasma etch (possibly adding some CF4). Tougher 
polyimide formulations are commercially available 
in polyamic acid form from Amoco under the trade 
name Ultradel. They have a slightly modified chem-
ical structure based on hexafluorodianhydride-
aminophenoxy-biphenyl (HFDA-APBP). The newest 
polyimides are extremely versatile materials and are 
used, for example, as stress-release layers in multi-
chip modules, low dielectric insulation layers,32 and 
even as optical waveguides based on fluorinated 
polyimides33 (Figure 1.27; see also Chapter 3 on dry 
etching, Example 3.4). Ultradel 9000D is a soluble, 
preimidized, fluorinated polymer with proper-
ties optimized for integrated optical applications. 
Typical absorption losses in the near-IR range from 
0.2–0.4 dB/cm. In MEMS, polyimides have been 
used, for example, as flexible hinges in mechanical 
miniaturized structures (see Figure 7.86).34
Both nonphotosensitive polyimides and pho-
tosensitive polyimides (negative and positive) are 
available. Photosensitive polyimides have been 
processed in mass production lines using g-line 
(436  nm) and i-line (365 nm) exposure tools. 
Using photosensitive polyimides in manufacturing 
reduces  the number of process steps dramatically 
compared with the use of nonphotosensitive poly-
imides. This is illustrated in Figure 1.28 for making 
polyimide vias in packaging. Positive tone polyim-
ides, as used in Figure 1.28, are relatively new and 
were developed by HD Microsystems, a joint ven-
ture between Hitachi Chemical and Dupont (http://
www.hdmicrosystems.com). The positive tone poly-
imides are more environmentally friendly than neg-
ative tone polyimides because of reduced organic 
solvents and associated volatile organic compounds. 
These positive tone resists also enable the process to 
use industry-standard TMAH developers. Polyimide 
films very strongly absorb UV light less than 350 nm. 
This absorbency is a result of the polymer’s high aro-
maticity that is also responsible for the exceptional 
thermal properties of polyimides, which allows 
for processing at greater than 400°C. Polyimides 
in packaging and MEMS are further reviewed in 
Volume III, Chapter 4 on packaging.
Whereas in IC fabrication, sacrificial resist lay-
ers of 1 µm or less are common, in miniaturization 
 
NH2
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
NH2
NH2
H2N
H2N
H2N
Diamine
Dianhydride
Polyamic acid
NH
NH
OH
HO
n
n
Polyimide
(H2O) 
+
N
N
FIGURE 1.26 Typical imidization process used to form polyimides from polyamic acid.
FIGURE 1.27 Flexible polyimide waveguide from Mitsui 
Chemicals. (Shioda, T. 2007. Next generation packag-
ing technology which supports the ubiquitous devices. 
Application of the flexible optical waveguide to the con-
sumer products. Electr Parts Mater 46:38–42.35)

[Page 34]
34   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
science, 3D structures frequently require thick per-
manent resist layers, capable of high resolution 
and high aspect ratios. Relatively new, chemically 
amplified deep UV resist systems, such as SU-8, 
can be applied in very thick layers (>100 µm) and 
have excellent sensitivity, high resolution, low opti-
cal absorption, high aspect ratio, and good thermal 
and chemical stability. These properties make SU-8 
a good candidate for molds and other permanent 
MEMS structures. SU-8 is an acid-catalyzed negative 
photoresist, made by dissolving EPON®-SU-8 resin 
(registered trademark of Shell Chemical Company, 
http://www.shell.com) in an organic solvent such 
as cyclopentanone solvent or GBL (γ-butyrolactone) 
and adding a photoinitiator. The viscosity, and hence 
the range of thicknesses accessible, is determined 
by the ratio of solvent to resin. The EPON resist is 
a multifunctional, highly branched epoxy deriva-
tive that consists of bisphenol-A novolak glycidyl 
ether (Figure 1.29). On average, a single molecule 
contains eight epoxy groups, which explains the “8” 
in the name SU-8. The material has become a major 
FIGURE 1.28 Comparison of conventional polyimide process and positive acting photosensitive polyimide process in 
packaging. The photosensitive polyimide process eliminates multiple steps and decreases cycle time. (Flack, W., S. Kulas, 
and C. Franklin. 2000. Process characterization of an aqueous developable photosensitive polyimide as a broadband step-
per. SPIE. 3999–45.36)

[Page 35]
Photolithography   35
workhorse in miniaturization science. In a chemi-
cally amplified resist like SU-8, one photon produces 
a photoproduct that in turn causes hundreds of reac-
tions to change the solubility of the film. Because 
each photolytic reaction results in an “amplifica-
tion” via catalysis, this concept is dubbed “chemical 
amplification”.37 We touch briefly on resist amplifi-
cation here, in the context of SU-8 photoresist only, 
but will discuss the underlying principles in more 
detail in “Strategies for Improved Resolution through 
Improved Resist Performance” (this chapter).
Scientists at IBM discovered that certain photoini-
tiators, such as onium salts, polymerize low-cost 
epoxy resins such as EPON®-SU-8. An onium salt, 
on UV exposure, generates a strong Lewis acid and 
catalyzes the cationic polymerization of the resin. 
These salts are called photochemical acid genera tors 
(PAGs), and their action constitutes excellent dis-
solution inhibition of a phenolic resin. In contrast 
with conventional free-radical initiators, an onium 
salt cationic photoinitiator, for example, triphenyl-
sulfonium hexafluoroantimonate, is oxygen insen-
sitive and stable over a wide temperature range. On 
UV exposure of the resist, Lewis acids are released 
within the resist matrix, forming a latent image—a 
3D distribution of the catalytic photoproduct—
and image formation is realized after an activating 
postexposure baking (PEB), as shown in Figure 1.30. 
Not only UV light in the 365–436-nm range but also 
electrons and x-rays initiate a high level of cross-
linking density, converting the SU-8 photoepoxy 
into a strong polymer with a Tg of more than 200°C 
(the Tg of the unexposed resist is 55°C).38 During the 
PEB, the generated photoacid initiates the ring open-
ing of the epoxy groups, and extensive cross-linking 
makes the SU-8 insoluble. An SU-8 soft bake is typi-
cally carried out at 95°C, and a hard bake at 200°C. 
Hot plating, on a level hot plate, is preferred over an 
oven heat treatment. For developing a 130-µm-thick 
SU-8 film, a 5- minute dip in undiluted propylene 
glycol methyl ether acetate, a rinse with isopropyl 
alcohol, and repeat of this procedure until all the 
unpolymerized material is dissolved works best.
SU-8 resist, patented by IBM in 1992, was orig-
inally developed for e-beam lithography39 and 
became commercially available in 1996. Because 
of its aromatic functionality and highly cross-
linked matrix, the SU-8 resist is thermally stable 
and chemically very inert. After a hard bake, it 
withstands nitric acid, acetone, and even NaOH at 
90°C, and it is more resistant to prolonged plasma 
etching and better suited as a mold for electroplat-
ing than PMMA.* The low molecular weight [∼7000 
± (1000)] and multifunctional nature of the epoxy 
gives it the high cross-linking propensity, which 
* PMMA or poly(methyl 2-methylpropenoate) is the synthetic polymer 
of methyl methacrylate. This thermoplastic and transparent plas-
tic is sold by the trade names Plexiglas, Limacryl, R-Cast, Perspex, 
Plazcryl, Acrylex, Acrylite, Acrylplast, Altuglas, Polycast, and Lucite 
and is commonly called acrylic glass or simply acrylic
O
O
O
C
O
C2HC
H3C
CH3
CH2
C2HC
CH2
O
O
O
C
O
C2HC
H3C
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
C2HC
CH2
O
O
O
C
O
C2HC
H3C
CH3
CH2
CH2
C2HC
CH2
O
O
O
C
O
C2HC
H3C
CH3
CH2
C2HC
CH2
FIGURE 1.29 Glycidyl ether of bisphenol A: SU-8: cross-linking reaction of carboxy functional polymer with diepoxide.

[Page 36]
36   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
also reduces the solvent-induced swelling typically 
associated with negative resists. As a result, very 
fine feature resolution, unprecedented for negative 
resists, has been obtained, and epoxy-based formu-
lations are now used in high-resolution semicon-
ductor devices, such as 0.35 µm CMOS logic (e.g., 
with CGR* chemically amplified negative resist). 
Low molecular weight characteristics also trans-
late into high contrast and high solubility. Because 
of their high solubility (up to 85% solids by weight 
in solvents such as  methyl-iso-butyl ketone), very 
concentrated resist casting formulations can be pre-
pared. The increased concentration benefits thick 
film deposition (up to 500 µm in one coat) and pla-
narization of extreme topographies. The high epoxy 
content promotes strong SU-8 adhesion to many 
types of substrates and makes the material highly 
sensitive to UV exposure. On the negative side, 
strong adhesion makes stripping of the exposed 
SU-8 material currently one of the most problem-
atic aspects. Stripping of SU-8 may be carried out 
with hot 1-methyl-2- pyrrolidon, plasma, or laser 
ablation. There are other issues to be resolved with 
this resist; for example, thermal mismatch of SU-8 
on a Si substrate (the thermal expansion coefficient 
* CGR, chemically amplified resist based on poly(p-hydroxystyrene) 
or its copolymers with styrene or vinylcyclohexane with powderlink 
crosslinker and a photochemical acid generator.
α. for silicon is 2.361 ppm/K vs. 21–52 ppm/K for 
SU-8) produces stress and may cause film cracking. 
Moreover, the absorption spectrum of SU-8 shows 
much higher absorption coefficients at shorter wave-
lengths. As a result, lithography using a broadband 
light source tends to result in overexposure at the 
surface of the resist layer and underexposure at the 
bottom. The resulting developed photoresist tends 
to have a negative slope, which is not good for mold 
applications: the mold sidewall should have a posi-
tive or at least a vertical slope for easy release of the 
molded part from the mold. The exaggerated nega-
tive slope at the top of the resist structure surface 
is often called T-topping (see Figure 1.30). UV light 
shorter than 350 nm is strongly absorbed near the 
surface, creating locally more acid that diffuses side-
ways along the top surface. Selective filtration of the 
light source is often used to eliminate these undesir-
able shorter wavelengths (<350 nm) and thus obtain 
better lithography results. For example, Reznikova 
et al. used a 100-µm-thick SU-8 resist layer to fil-
ter exposure radiation at 334 nm,40 and Lee et al.41 
reported using a Hoya UV-34 filter to eliminate the 
T-top (overexposed top part). Nearly vertical side-
walls can be achieved using a Hoya UV-34 filter. 
However, there might still be a beaked feature cre-
ated at the very top of the resist features. This results 
from the diffraction at the interface between the 
Neutralized
photoresist
Region of
unexposed
photoresist
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
PAG
PAG
PAG
PAG
Acid-catalyzed
reaction of exposed
resist (post PEB)
PAG
Resist T-topping
Development
PAG
PAG
PAG
FIGURE 1.30 SU-8 is a negative-type amplified photoresist. Where light strikes the photochemical acid generators 
(PAGs), a Lewis acid is released within the resist matrix, forming a latent image—a 3D distribution of the catalytic 
photoproduct—and image formation is realized after an activating postexposure bake (PEB). After development a 
T-topped structure often results (see text).

[Page 37]
Photolithography   37
mask and the photoresist, and it can be eliminated 
by filling this gap with index matching oil (see results 
by Wanjun Wan in Figure 1.31). Besides its sensitiv-
ity and relatively low cost (<$100/L), aspect ratios 
up to ∼25 for lines and trenches have been demon-
strated in SU-8-based contact lithography.42 When 
patterned at 365 nm, the wavelength at which the 
photoresist is the most sensitive, total absorption of 
the incident light in SU-8 is reached at a depth of 
2 mm. In principle, resist layers up to 2 mm thick can 
be structured.43 Wan et al.44 recently confirmed this 
astounding potential experimentally. Wan’s group 
at Louisiana State University, using both wavelength 
optimization by patterning using a filtered i-line 
(365 nm) and air gap compensation (with glycerin 
or a Cargille refractive index matching fluid), dem-
onstrated aspect ratios greater than 190 (for a fea-
ture with a 6-µm thickness and a height of 1150 µm) 
and structures as high as 2 mm. In the inset in the 
header of this chapter we reproduce one result of 
Wan et al., and more are displayed in Figure 1.31.
New resists like SU-8 have enabled miniaturiza-
tion scientists to make LIGA (German acronym for 
Lithographie, Galvano-formung, Abformung)-like struc-
tures less expensively. LIGA is the ultimate lithogra-
phy technique for making high-aspect-ratio features. 
In LIGA, a synchrotron x-ray source is used for 
exposure, and resist walls with the ultimate in wall 
straightness and wall smoothness are obtained (see 
Chapter 10). For many applications, photolithogra-
phy with a much less expensive UV exposure system 
and a thick photoepoxy, such as SU-8, suffices. This 
alternative method to LIGA is sometimes referred to 
as poor man’s LIGA. The example SU-8 applica tion 
from Mimotec (http://www.mimotec.ch) shown 
in Figure 1.32 is a typical LIGA-like application, in 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 1.31 Ultrahigh-aspect-ratio structures obtained using a filtered light source (using a thick PMMA plate as filter) 
and with gap compensation (using an index matching solution). (a) Micro features with designed thickness of 7 µm and 
height of 2000 µm. (b) Micro comb structures with designed thickness of 40 µm and height of 2000 µm. (c) Micro cylin-
ders 1150 µm tall and designed wall thickness of 6 µm and an internal diameter of 20 µm. As the thickness is reduced, 
the strength of the cylinders becomes too low to maintain their upright position. (d) Micro cylinders 1150 µm tall and 
designed wall thickness of 9 µm and internal diameter 27 µm.

[Page 38]
38   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
which a sacrificial cavity in SU-8 resist has been 
electroplated to make a metal positive replicate of 
the cavity. The advantages of the poor man’s LIGA 
method are that it is inexpensive and can be quickly 
brought into play, all of which makes the process 
very competitive compared with LIGA.
To find the latest updates on SU-8 applications and 
processing tips, visit http://aveclafaux. freeservers.
com/SU-8.html. This site also lists all the relevant 
physical properties of SU-8 accompanied with lit-
erature references. Another resource with plenty of 
SU-8 information is the MEMScyclopedia at http://
memscyclopedia.org/su8.html.
The first two companies that bought an SU-8 sales 
license from IBM were MicroChem Corporation45 
and Sotec Microsystems.46 The latter company, now 
defunct, developed conductive and magnetic SU-8 
and used dry SU-8 films to laminate over large cavi-
ties and channels42. MicroChem (previously named 
Microlithography Chemical Corp.) is the oldest 
manufacturer of the SU-8 photoresist, licensed 
by IBM. SU-8 Gerstel Engineering Solutions, Ltd. 
(http://www.gersteltec.ch) not only sells SU-8 under 
the name SU-8 GM-10## with different viscosities 
(e.g., GM-1040, GM-1060, and GM-1070) but also 
offers prototyping and mass production of SU-8 
microsystems.
Dry Resist Most resists in IC and MEMS fabrica-
tion are deposited as liquids, whereas resists used in 
printed wiring board (PWB) manufacture are usu-
ally dry film resists that come in rolls (ranging from 
2–60 in. wide and 125–1000 ft. long) and are lami-
nated onto the substrate instead of being spin coated 
onto it (Figure 1.33). Dry film resist formulations are 
sandwiched be tween a polyolefin release sheet and 
a polyester base, rolled up on a support core (Figure 
1.33A and  B). These protective covers shield the 
film from environmental oxygen and facilitate han-
dling. The dry film resist layer comes in thicknesses 
starting from 25 µm and goes up to 100 µm. Resist 
thicknesses of 1–1.5 mils are common for imaging 
purposes, and thicker resists (1.5–2.0 mils) are used 
as plating, rather than etch, resists. Dry film resists 
offer advantages such as excellent adhesion on most 
substrates, no liquid handling because there is no 
solvent, high process speed, excellent thickness 
uniformity over a whole substrate (even substrates 
with holes), simple handling, no formation of edge 
beads, low exposure energy, low cost, short pro-
cessing time, and near vertical sidewalls. The pho-
toresist film is applied by removing the polyolefin 
sheet before lamination of the resist onto the sub-
strate. The polyester top cover sheet remains on top 
of the photo polymer until later in the process. This 
coversheet protects the resist from scratches, keeps 
contaminants from the surface, and prevents the 
exposure tool from touching and perhaps sticking 
to the resist. Conformation of the resist to the sub-
strate is achieved by heating under pressure in a hot-
roll or cut-sheet laminator (Figure 1.33C). The heat 
and pressure of the laminating rollers cause the dry 
film to soften and adapt to surface topologies. The 
resist is then exposed to a UV light source. Modern 
dry film resists are developed in a simple sodium 
carbonate solution (1–2%) after removal of the top 
cover layer. The biggest disadvantage of dry resist is 
its relatively low resolution compared with liquid 
resists as illustrated in Figure 1.34. Two major rea-
sons for this poorer resolution are the many-times 
thicker resist coating and the fact that the mask is 
positioned on top of a thick protective Mylar cover 
FIGURE 1.32 Typical SU-8 application. The metal structure 
shown here has been made by plating in an SU-8 mold. 
(http://www.mimotec.ch). 1) Rake: cogwheel actuation; 
2) cam reader; 3) microinscriptions; and 4) rest position.

[Page 39]
Photolithography   39
FIGURE 1.33 (A) Dry film resist roll. (B) Dry film photoresist composition; three-layer structure, (a) polyethylene separa-
tion sheet, (b) photoresist, and (c) polyester support. (C) Dry lamination equipment.
1970
0.1
1
10
100
1000
1980
1990
2000
2010
Year
µm
PWB
IC
FIGURE 1.34 Comparison of resolution obtained with liquid resist compared with dry resists as a function of time. 
(Drawn by Mary Amasia from UC Irvine.)

[Page 40]
40   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
film. Under highly controlled conditions, one can 
achieve an opening (space) of 25 µm with a 25-µm-
thick dry film, but under production conditions, 
it is rather difficult to achieve such resolutions. By 
removing the top cover sheet from the photoresist 
before exposure, higher resolutions are possible. The 
removal of 25 µm of separation between the photo-
resist and the exposure tool decreases the chances 
of light diffusion. Also, foreign particles that col-
lect on the coversheet are removed along with the 
coversheet.
There are a variety of dry film photoresists widely 
used and commercially available; examples include 
Riston®, Ordyl BF 410, Etertec® 5600, DF 4615, and 
DFR-15. All are used in the manufacture of circuit 
boards and can be made thick; additionally, all are 
candidates for broad use in MEMS as well.
Today it is difficult to obtain high-aspect-ratio 
devices with these resists because of their resolution 
limitation, high optical absorbency, and the diffi-
culty in obtaining layers thicker than 50 µm in a 
single coat.29 However, for many applications, the 
poorer resolution of dry resists (25–75 µm) is no 
obstacle for their usage in mesoscale devices (100s 
of micrometer to millimeter scale).
The potential benefits of using dry resist films as 
permanent components in the mass production of 
biosensors and microfluidics were recognized and 
described, for example, by Madou et al.47 These 
authors suggest that continuous, web-based manu-
facturing may finally make ubiquitous, disposable 
miniaturized devices such as biosensors and micro-
fluidics possible (see also Volume III, Chapter  1, 
Example 1.1). Dry resist film materials are less 
expensive than silicon and form a convenient sub-
strate; they come in rolls so that large sheets can be 
processed. In the future, this author envisions a con-
tinuous lithographic process, including exposure 
and development, taking place between a dry resist 
supply roll and a pick-up reel. This would be espe-
cially attractive if higher resolution dry resist could 
be formulated. Dry film SU-8, as Louis Guerin sug-
gested many years ago, holds the promise of contin-
uous high-aspect-ratio, high-resolution lithography 
(http://www.geocities.com/guerinlj).
At MicroChem (http://www.microchem.com/about/
index.htm), progress is being made making SU-8 
dry resist films, and Dupont already offers the MX 
series dry film for MEMS applications. The new MX 
products feature an aspect ratio of 3:1. At a thickness 
of 50 µm, resolution is 16–17 µm, which is better than 
any other dry film product. Additionally, these films 
can be multilaminated to build up the thickness 
(http://tyvek.com.mx/APL/en_US/products/mx/
index.html).
Nonspin liquid resist-coating methods such as 
roller coating or spraying (see above) also will play 
an important role in MEMS manufacturing of the 
future. Large substrate sheets can be accommodated; 
the throughput is higher than with dry resists; and 
the resolution is considerably better.
Glass Transition Temperature of a Resist (Tg)
Resists must meet several rigorous requirements: 
good adhesion, high sensitivity, high contrast, good 
etching resistance (wet or dry etching), good reso-
lution, easy processing, high purity, long shelf life, 
minimal solvent use, low cost, and a high glass tran-
sition temperature, Tg. Most resists are amorphous 
polymers that exhibit viscous flow with considerable 
molecular motion of the polymer chain segments at 
temperatures above the glass transition. At tempera-
tures below Tg, the motion of the segments is halted, 
and the polymer behaves as a glass rather than a 
rubber. If the Tg of a polymer is at or below room 
temperature, the polymer is considered a rubber; if 
it is above room temperature, it is considered to be 
a glass. Because above Tg the polymer flows easily, 
heating the resist film above its Tg for a reasonable 
amount of time enables the film to anneal into its 
most stable energetic state. In the rubber state, it is 
easy to remove the solvent from the polymer matrix; 
that is, soft bake the resist. Extreme attention needs 
to be given to the cleanliness of the working envi-
ronment with the resist in this state. When softening 
the resist at or above Tg, it may be easier to remove 
solvent, but the resist tends to pick up impurities. 
The importance of resist reflow, as we will learn 
later, also lies in planarizing of undesirable topog-
raphy. The glass transition temperature of a resist is 
influenced by baking and exposure; the Tg for SU-8, 
for example, is 55°C for the unexposed material but 
200°C after exposure and hard baking. In the fabri-
cation of carbon-MEMS structures from photoresist 

[Page 41]
Photolithography   41
by pyrolysis (Volume III, Chapter 5), we make sure 
that the temperature always stays below the Tg to 
avoid collapse of the resist features.
In general, polymers that crystallize are not use-
ful as resists because the formation of crystalline 
segments prevents the formation of uniform high-
resolution isotropic films.19
Wafer Priming
Resists, especially positive resists, do not adhere well 
to a Si wafer. The native silicon dioxide on a Si surface, 
typically 20–50 Å thick, forms long-range hydrogen 
bonds with water adsorbed from the air. When 
resist is spun onto such a surface, it adheres to the 
water molecules rather than to the surface, resulting 
in poor adhesion. This effect is more pronounced 
when the humidity is high or if the wafer has been 
previously immersed in water. Good humidity con-
trol (at ~40% relative humidity) and annealing are 
required to remove surface water and prepare a 
silicon wafer for resist coating. In the early 1960s, 
photoresist was spun directly onto the wafer surface. 
This worked for the large geometry circuits at the 
time, but when geometries reached the 20-µm range, 
further feature decrease became intimately linked 
to the quality of the resist adhesion. To faithfully 
reproduce the smallest features of a circuit design, a 
better photoresist/Si wafer contact had to be devised. 
To this end, surface priming with reactive silicone 
primers was introduced. A typical resist adhesion 
promoting primer is 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisila -
zane (abbreviated HMDS) [formula: (CH3)3SiNHSi 
(CH3)3], developed and patented by IBM. Other 
primers include trichlorophenylsilane (TCPS) [for-
mula: C6H5SiCl3] and bistrimethylsilylacetamide 
(BSA) [formula: (CH3)3SiNCH3COSi(CH3)3]. Re -
active Si−NH−Si functional groups in HMDS 
react with the oxide surface in a process known 
as silylation, and a strong siloxane bond to the 
surface (Si-O-Si) is created (Figure 1.35). At room 
temperature, unhydrolyzed silane does not react 
with surface silanols [Si(s)−OH + (CH3)3SiOCH3 → 
no reaction], but with some surface-adsorbed water 
present, a small amount of reaction occurs as a result 
of methoxysilane hydrolysis, followed by reaction 
with surface silanols [Si(s)−OH + Surface H2O + 
(CH3)3SiOCH3 → (CH3)3SiOH + Si(s)−OH and 
(CH3)3SiOH + Si(s)−OH → Si(s)−O−Si(CH3)3 + H2O]. 
When silylation is carried out with HMDS, a strong 
catalytic effect is observed. The amine adsorbs onto 
the relatively acidic surface silanols, rendering the 
oxygen attached to the surface silicon atom highly 
FIGURE 1.35 HMDS reaction mechanism monitored by the contact angle θ of a drop of water on the treated surface.

[Page 42]
42   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
nucleophilic. This oxygen then attacks the relatively 
electrophilic silane silicon, resulting in surface 
silylation. The more hydrophobic the wafer surface, 
the better the resist adhesion, and the methyls, it is 
assumed, bond/adhere to the photoresist, enhancing 
the photoresist adhesion. The process works not only 
on silicon dioxide but also on other oxides (e.g., 
Al2O3). It should be noted that HMDS is extremely 
flammable and a suspected carcinogen; it should be 
handled with care. A dehydration bake of the SiO2 
surface at 200–250°C for 30 minutes (with optional 
vacuum) removes adsorbed water from the silanol 
groups at the silicon surface, which then can react 
with the amino groups of the HMDS vapor. The 
primer may then be applied by dipping the wafer in 
a 1–10% HMDS solution in xylene or by spin coating 
it onto the wafer. Baking the wafers to dehydrate and 
then removing them from the oven and transporting 
them to a dip solution or a spinner poses a serious 
problem, however, because on removal from the 
bake oven, the surface may rehydrolyze. Further 
shortcomings of this approach include a tendency to 
generate and deposit particles and HMDS wastage. 
Today priming of wafers is performed in a process 
that combines a bake and prime in the same vacuum. 
The wafer is exposed to HMDS vapor in a stream 
of dry nitrogen in a vacuum chamber while heating 
the wafer for approximately 40–60 seconds. This 
method provides the best adhesion and constitutes 
the best overall process as it remedies several 
problems: 1) no rehydrolyzation can occur because 
the unprimed wafers are not exposed again to the 
atmosphere before priming; 2) the same vacuum 
that is used during the bake cycle is used to draw 
monolayer amounts of HMDS; and 3) the interior of 
the chamber may be evacuated several times (with 
intermediary nitrogen backfills) before exposure to 
HMDS. Thus, at the time of HMDS exposure, the 
amount of oxygen present in the chamber (and hence 
the chance of a flammable mix forming) is very low. 
After treating a Si wafer with HMDS, a contact angle 
test with a drop of water reveals the surface to be 
much more hydrophobic (see Figure 1.35).
The chemical modification of oxide surfaces using 
organofunctional silanes is important not only in 
affecting better resist adhesion but also for the fab-
rication of water-repellent and antifouling coatings, 
DNA arrays, protein arrays, enzyme-based sensors, 
and so on.
Sputtering of the surface (Chapter 3), for some 
applications, presents an attractive alternative to 
vapor priming; the microroughness at the surface 
induced by sputtering provides for mechanical 
adhesion of the resist to the substrate. Primers for 
GaAs include monazoline C, trichlorobenzene, and 
xylene.
Resist Stripping
We now turn to the last step of the photolitho-
graphic process: photoresist stripping, as illustrated 
in Figure 1.1f.
Wet Stripping
Photoresist stripping, in slightly oversimplified 
terms, is organic polymer etching. The primary con-
sideration is complete removal of the photoresist 
without damaging the device under construction. 
Turning back to Figure 1.1, once the exposed oxide 
has been etched away in (e), the remaining photo-
resist can be stripped off with a strong acid such 
as H2SO4 or an acid-oxidant combination such as 
H2SO4–Cr2O3 attacking the photoresist but not the 
oxide or the silicon (Figure 1.1f). Other liquid strip-
pers include organic solvent strippers and alkaline 
strippers (with or without oxidants). Acetone can 
be  used if the postbake is not too long or occurs 
at a low enough temperature. With a postbake of 
20 minutes at 120°C, acetone is still fine. But with a 
postbake at 140°C, the resist develops a tough “skin” 
and has to be burned away in oxygen plasma. There 
are many commercial strippers available; some are 
specific for positive resists (e.g., ACT-690C from 
Ashland), others for negative resists, and still others 
are universal strippers (e.g., ACT-140 from Ashland). 
Other popular commercial strippers are Piranha 
and RCA clean. The RCA1 clean for organics was 
described above. To make up a Piranha solution, 
measure 5 parts of H2SO4 in a Pyrex beaker, and 
very slowly add 1 part of H2O2. Note that this mix-
ture is exothermic. When cool, it may be refreshed 
by very slowly adding more H2O2.
The ozone-water method is a Piranha alterna-
tive. In this process, water of 25–95°C, depending 
on the application, is sprayed onto the substrate 

[Page 43]
Photolithography   43
as it is rotated. At the same time, dry ozone gas is 
injected into the reaction chamber. The ozone dif-
fuses through the thin boundary layer of water to 
react with the organics on the substrate. Strip rates 
exceed 1.2 µm/min.48
The oxidized Si wafer with the etched windows 
in the oxide (Figure 1.1f) now awaits further pro-
cessing. This might entail a wet anisotropic etch of 
the Si in the oxide windows with SiO2 as the etch 
mask.
Dry Stripping
Dry stripping or oxygen plasma stripping, also 
known as ashing, has become more popular as it 
poses fewer disposal problems with toxic, flamma-
ble, and dangerous chemicals. Wet stripping solu-
tions lose potency in use, causing stripping rates 
to change with time. Accumulated contamination 
in solutions can be a source of particles, and liquid 
phase surface tension and mass transport tend to 
make photoresist removal difficult and uneven. Dry 
stripping is more controllable than liquid stripping, 
less corrosive with respect to metal features on the 
wafer, and, more importantly, it leaves a cleaner sur-
face under the right conditions. Finally, it does not 
cause the undercutting and broadening of photore-
sist features that can be caused by wet strippers.
In solid-gas resist stripping, a volatile product 
forms either through reactive plasma stripping 
(e.g., with oxygen), gaseous chemical reactants 
(e.g., ozone), and radiation (UV), or a combina-
tion thereof (e.g., UV/ozone-assisted). Plasma strip-
ping uses a low-pressure electrical discharge to split 
molecular oxygen (O2) into its more reactive atomic 
form (O). This atomic oxygen converts an organic 
photoresist into a gaseous product that may be 
pumped away. This type of plasma stripping belongs 
in the category of chemical dry stripping and is iso-
tropic in nature (see Chapter 3). In ozone strippers, 
ozone, at atmospheric pressure, attacks the resist. 
In UV/ozone stripping, UV helps to break bonds in 
the resist, paving the way for a more efficient attack 
by the ozone. Ozone strippers have the advantage 
that no plasma damage can occur on the devices in 
the process. Reactive plasma stripping currently is 
the predominant commercial technology because 
of its high removal rate and throughput. Some 
different stripper configurations are barrel reactors, 
downstream strippers, and parallel plate systems. 
These prevalent stripping systems are reproduced 
in Figure 1.36.49 More details will be provided in 
Chapter 3.
Posing new challenges to modern stripping pro-
cesses are shrinking feature sizes, increasing aspect 
ratios, and stripping of resist over some of the new-
est dielectrics (σr < 3) and copper interconnects. 
Especially novel dielectric materials, such as fluori-
nated silicate glass, carbon-doped oxides, and fluo-
rinated amorphous carbon, are easily attacked or 
degraded by stripping.48 In practice, combinations 
of dry and wet etching often form the most success-
ful strategy.
Dry stripping of resist has been so successful 
that it has accelerated the use of plasmas in other 
lithography steps such as development and deposi-
tion of resist. For example, it was the study of the 
attack of oxygen on polymers that led to the develop-
ment of dry developed resists as used in the DESIRE 
process (see page 75). Such dry developed resists are 
vital for future submicrometer lithography where 
Microwave
cavity
Lamp
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 1.36 Various dry stripping reactors: barrel 
re actor (a), downstream etchers (b), parallel plate systems 
(c). (From Flamm, D.L. 1992. Dry plasma resist  stripping. 
Part I: overview of equipment. Solid State Technol 35: 
37–39. With permission.49) 

[Page 44]
44   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
underetching and broadening of features are most 
critical. Although not detailed in the current short 
treatise, inspection and metrology techniques (see 
Volume III, Chapter 6) play a crucial role at various 
points in the lithography process.
Critical Dimension, Overall Resolution, 
Line Width Metrology
The absolute size of a minimum feature in an IC 
or a miniature device, whether it involves a line 
width, spacing, or contact dimension, is called the 
critical dimension (CD). The overall resolution of a 
process describes the consistent ability to print a 
minimum size image, a CD, under conditions of 
reasonable manufacturing variation.50 Many aspects 
of the process, including hardware, materials, and 
processing considerations, can limit the resolution 
of lithography. Hardware limitations include diff-
raction of light or scattering of charged particles 
(in the case of charged-particle lithography or hard 
x-rays), lens aberrations, mechanical stability of the 
system, and so on. The resist material properties that 
impact resolution are contrast, swelling behavior, 
thermal flow, and chemical etch resistance. The 
most important process-related resist variables 
include swelling (during development) and stability 
(during etching and baking steps). Resolution 
frequently is measured by line-width measurements 
using either transmitted or reflected light or other 
metrology techniques. Optical techniques perform 
satisfactorily for features of 1 µm and larger, provi-
ding a precision of ±0.1 µm (at 2 σ, i.e., all data 
points within plus and minus two standard devia-
tions). By 1998, devices with features as small as 
0.25 µm were launched and necessitated equipment 
requirements for line-width measurement with a 
precision of at least ± 0.02 µm (at 3 σ). Scanning 
electron microscopes (SEMs) or atomic force micro-
scopes have come forward as the methods to reach 
these goals. A line width, L, is defined as the hori-
zontal distance between the two resist-air boun-
daries in a given cross-section of the line at a 
specified height above the resist/substrate interface. 
Because different measurements may measure the 
line width of the same line at different heights of 
the cross-section, the measuring technology  used 
always needs to be identified. The successful per-
formance of devices depends on the control of the 
size of critical structures across the entire wafer and 
from one wafer to another, referred to as line-width 
control. A rule of thumb is that the dimensions must 
be controlled to tolerances of at least ± 1/5 of the 
minimum feature size. Typically, a series of features 
with known sizes across a substrate is measured and 
then plotted as a function of position on the wafer. 
The standard deviation at the 1 or 2 σ level is adopted 
as the line-width control capability of the particular 
exposure/resist technology. Plotting these data as a 
function of time enables line managers to maintain 
optimum performance on a manufacturing line.50
 In Volume III, Chapter 6, the metrology tools 
used in IC, MEMS, and NEMs are discussed: laser 
interferometers for accurate alignment of mask to 
wafer (with a 5-nm “resolution”), film thickness 
measurement with profilometers, SEM, scanning 
transmission electron microscope (STEM), scan-
ning probe microscope (SPM) with vertical resolu-
tion of 1 Å, and lateral resolution depending on tip 
sharpness.
Lithographic Sensitivity and Intrinsic 
Resist Sensitivity (Photochemical 
Quantum Efficiency)
Lithographic Sensitivity
A distinction must be made between the intrinsic 
sensitivity of a resist (that is, the resist’s response 
to radiation) and the lithographic sensitivity when 
defining the measurement of the efficiency that 
translates resist exposure into a sharp image. In 
the literature, the values given for the lithographic 
sensitivity of a resist show a tremendous spread as 
a result of the complex relationship between the 
intrinsic resist sensitivity and the dose required to 
successfully process that resist. This relationship 
involves the intrinsic resist sensitivity and the band-
width of the optical exposure system, baking condi-
tions, resist thickness, developer composition, and 
development conditions. To reproduce a reported 
lithographic sensitivity, all these parameters need 
to be duplicated exactly. The best way to determine 
lithographic sensitivity is experimentally, as we will 
explain next.

[Page 45]
Photolithography   45
Intrinsic Sensitivity of a Resist 
(Photochemical Quantum Efficiency)
A first indication of the intrinsic sensitivity of a 
resist to a certain wavelength can be deduced from 
the spectral-response curve of the resist. If the resist 
absorbs strongly in ranges where the radiation source 
shows strong emission lines, relatively short expo-
sure times can be expected. Practical limits confine 
resist sensitivity: too sensitive a resist might mean 
an unacceptably short shelf life, and yet clearly the 
resist should be insensitive to the yellow and green 
light of the clean room.
High intrinsic resist sensitivity is a sought-after 
characteristic. To increase resolution of photoli-
thography, the shortest possible wavelengths must 
be used. At those wavelengths exposure sources 
become less bright and optics absorb more. Because 
the total energy incident on a resist is a function 
of light source intensity, time, and absorption effi-
ciency of the exposure optics, a decrease in intensity 
and an increase in light absorption require compen-
sation through longer exposure times. This results in 
a smaller throughput of wafers per hour; conversely, 
a more sensitive resist decreases the exposure time, 
resulting in a higher throughput.
The intrinsic sensitivity or photochemical quan-
tum efficiency, Φ, of a resist is defined as the num-
ber of photoinduced events divided by the number 
of photons required to accomplish that number of 
events:
 
Φ = Number of photon-induced events
Number of photons absorbed
 (1.4)
For polymer resins where the polymer undergoes 
scission or cross-linking without the need for light-
absorbing sensitizers (one-component resists), a 
G-value is introduced. The G-value corresponds to 
the number of scissions or cross-links produced per 
100 eV of absorbed energy. For scission reactions, the 
symbol G(s) is used; for cross-linking, the symbol 
G(x) is used. In contrast to lithographic sensitivity, 
the measurement of intrinsic radiation sensitivity as 
expressed through Φ, G(s), or G(x) is reliable, and 
values from different sources agree relatively well.
The experimental determination of the quantum 
efficiency of a one-component resist is a complex 
undertaking. Samples of the polymer must be 
exposed to a known dose of gamma radiation, and 
the molecular weight of the irradiated samples must 
be measured either by membrane osmometry or gel 
permeation chromatography. Quantitative analysis 
of the molecular weight versus dose in polymers 
that undergo scission or cross-linking leads to an 
important relationship for a better understanding 
of resist exposure. We will use such a relationship 
when exploring x-ray lithography for the creation 
of “high-rise” PMMA resist structures (»10 µm high; 
see Chapter 10 on LIGA). Let us consider a positive 
resist here. For a positive resist sample of weight w 
(in grams) containing N0 molecules before expo-
sure, the definition of average molecular weight Mn
0 
is given by28,51:
 
M
wN
N
n
0
A
0
=
 
(1.5)
where NA is Avogadro’s number. Expressing the dose, 
D, in eV/g, the total number of scissions produced 
in the sample, N*, is proportional to the absorbed 
dose, or:
 
N* = KDw 
(1.6)
where K is a constant dependent on the polymer 
structure, generally expressed in terms of a G-value. 
G(s) (for positive resists) and G(x) (for negative 
resists), like Φ, are figures of merit used to compare 
one resist material with another. With K expressed 
in terms of G(s), Equation 1.6 can be rewritten as:
 
N*
G(s)
100 Dw
= ⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
 
(1.7)
in which we divide by 100 to express the number 
of events per 100 eV. As scission occurs, the num-
ber of molecules increases, and the new average 
molecular weight after exposure to dose D is then 
given by:
 
M
wN
N
N*
n
A
0
ʹ =
+
 
(1.8)
where the total mass of the polymer is assumed to 
remain constant during exposure.

[Page 46]
46   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
By substituting Equations 1.5 and 1.7 into 
Equation 1.8, we obtain:
 
M
N
N
M
G(s)
100 D
n
A
A
n
0
ʹ =
+ ⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
 
(1.9)
which is independent of the sample mass w. 
Rearranging Equation 1.9 we obtain:
 
1
M
M
+
G(s)
100 D
n
n
0
ʹ
=
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1
 
(1.10)
From Equation 1.10, we conclude that a linear 
relationship exists between the inverse of the aver-
age molecular weight and the exposure dose D. The 
intercept on the y-axis yields 1/Mn
0, and the slope 
allows one to calculate G(s). There is a very high cor-
relation between G(s) values for gamma radiation 
[the radiation commonly used to determine G(s)] 
and sensitivity for electrons, ions, and x-rays.
The G(s) of polymers commonly used as one-
component, positive resist systems ranges from 1.3 
for some PMMAs to approximately 10 for certain 
poly(olefin sulfones). A PMMA with a G(s) value of 
1 has a corresponding photochemical quantum yield 
for scission, Φ (Equation 1.4), of 0.02.28 For some 
polymers, both scissioning and cross-linking events 
occur simultaneously on exposure. It is possible, even 
in the latter case, to uniquely determine both scission 
efficiency G(s) and cross-linking efficiency G(x).51
For one-component negative resists the figure 
of merit for intrinsic sensitivity, G(x), expressed as 
number of cross-links per 100 eV absorbed dose, 
ranges from 0.1 for poly(ethylene) to approximately 
10 for polymers containing oxirane groups (epoxy 
groups) in their side chains.
For a two-component positive system such as 
DNQ, Φ in Equation 1.4 corresponds to the quan-
tum efficiency, that is, the number of sensitizer 
molecules converted to photoproduct, divided by 
the number of absorbed photons required to accom-
plish that conversion. Quantum efficiency in this 
case can easily be measured by using a narrow-band-
width radiation source and a UV-Vis spectropho-
tometer. The quantum efficiency, Φ, of typical DNQ 
sensitizers ranges from 0.2–0.3 (compared with 
0.02 for PMMA). Because of the high opacity (i.e., 
high nonbleachable absorption) of novolak resins 
in the deep UV region (200–300 nm) region, other 
resists like PMMA are used for shorter wavelength 
exposures (e.g., for deep UV, e-beam, and x-ray litho-
graphies). The quantum efficiency of the bis(aryl)
azide sensitizers in negative resist systems ranges 
from 0.5–1, making negative resists more sensitive 
than positive resists.
Resist Profiles
Overview of Profile Types
Manipulation of resist profiles is one of the most impor-
tant concerns of a lithography engineer. Depending 
on the final objective, one of the three resist profiles 
shown in Figure 1.37 is attempted. A re-entrant, under-
cut, or a reverse resist profile (resist sidewall >90°) is 
required for metal liftoff (see below for more details). 
Some authors confusingly call slopes >90° overcut 28; 
most, including this author, refer to this type of resist 
profile as an undercut (Figure 1.37a). Shallow resist 
angles (<90°) enable continuous deposition of thin 
45–75°
75–95°
95–110°
(a)
(b)
(c)
Liftoﬀ
Deposit material
Dissolve photoresist
FIGURE 1.37 The three important resist profiles. (a) 
Re-entrant, undercut, or a reverse resist profile (resist 
sidewall >90°) is required for metal liftoff. (b) A verti-
cal (75–90° resist sidewall angle) slope is desirable for a 
perfect fidelity transfer of the image on the mask to the 
resist. (c) Shallow resist angles (45–75° < 90°) enable con-
tinuous deposition of thin films over the resist sidewalls.

[Page 47]
Photolithography   47
films over the resist sidewalls (Figure 1.37c). A verti-
cal (90° resist sidewall angle) slope is desirable for a 
perfect fidelity transfer of the image on the mask to 
the resist (Figure 1.37b). If resist sidewalls are perpen-
dicular, or if the resist layer is undercut, a deposited 
metal is likely to be noncontinuous: there is a separa-
tion between the desired and the undesired metal for 
a liftoff process. In the case of a shallow slope, the 
deposit is continuous.
In general, after development of negative and 
 positive resists, three different photoresist wall pro-
files may be obtained as summarized in Figure 1.37 
and tabulated in Table 1.9. In the table, R is the 
 development rate of the exposed region, R0 is the 
development rate of the unexposed region, and 
γ is the resist contrast. The resist contrast will be 
explained in greater detail later in this chapter. This 
table also lists typical applications for each resist pro-
file. First, we will concentrate on the dependence of 
the resist profile of a positive resist on exposure dose 
and development mode. In a developer- dominated 
process, “force” developed with R/R0 < 5, a shallow 
outward sloping resist profile results, and thinning 
of the entire resist layer occurs. For positive resists, 
the shallow angle is the most typical profile with a 
45–75° resist wall angle. With a quenched developer, 
R/R0 = 5–10, and a moderate dose, a straight resist 
wall profile results (∼90°, e.g., 75–95°). In the verti-
cal wall case, the removal of the laterally exposed 
region has been inhibited, and a perfect pattern trans-
fer of the mask features onto the resist is obtained. 
An undercut profile is difficult to achieve in positive 
resists because the optical exposure dose (and hence 
the development rate of the system) is greater at the 
surface than at the resist/substrate interface, result-
ing in a normal profile with shallow resist angles. An 
undercut profile is desirable for liftoff processes in 
which deposited layers are lifted from the substrate 
TABLE 1.9 Photoresist Profiles Overview
Profile
Uses
Dose
g
Developer
Influence
(a)
95–110°
(A) Positive resists
undercut
Ion implant;
liftoff; not good
for plasma 
etching; often
only obtained
through image
reversal
High (often
with backscatter
radiation)
>6
Low
>10
(B) Negative resists
undercut
Permanent
resists; larger
devices; MEMS
Dominant
<3
Little influence
<0.1
75–95°
(b)
Vertical
Liftoff; reactive
ion etch; wet etch;
ion beam etch;
perfect fidelity
Normal
dose
<4
Moderate
5–10
45–75°
(c)
Normal or
overcut
Typical for
positive resists;
wet etch;
metallization;
<20% resist loss
Low
<3
Dominant
<5
R R0
(A) Positive resist. (a) Desired resist profile for liftoff, that is, exposure-controlled profile also called undercut. (b) Perfect 
fidelity image transfer by applying a normal exposure dose and relying moderately on the developer. (c) Receding pho-
toresist structure with thinning of the resist layer, that is, developer control also called overcut, the normal profile for 
positive resists. (B) Negative resist. Profile is mainly determined by the exposure. Development swells the resist slightly but 
otherwise has no influence on the wall profile for the older types of resists. The undercut profile is the normal profile for 
the newer types (aqueous developable) of negative photoresists.
Source: Based on Moreau, M.W. 1988. Semiconductor lithography. New York: Plenum Press. With permission.28

[Page 48]
48   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
by dissolving the underlying resist structure (see 
next section). In the extreme case of overexposure 
and a fast developer, the result is a lip, retrograde 
or inward wall-angle undercut (>90, e.g., 95–110°). 
This profile might come about if there is a lot of light 
back scatter from shiny surfaces at the interface of the 
substrate and the bottom of the resist layer. A ratio 
of R/R0 > 10 qualifies as a fast developer. However, 
liftoff profiles with positive resists are more readily 
formed with multilayer resist (MLR) systems or with 
a postexposure soaking procedure (see below). With 
negative resists, forming more insoluble products at 
the resist surface than at the resist/substrate inter-
face, one more easily obtains an undercut profile; a 
single-layer resist (SLR) will do, and no complicated 
MLR systems are required in this case.
A more rigorous, mathematical treatment of resist 
profiles is presented under Mathematical Expression 
for Resist Profiles.
We now detail the more unusual profiles for posi-
tive and negative resists a bit further. Not all pho-
tons strike the resist/substrate interface at the same 
angle; especially with a high overdose, scattering at 
a reflective interface may cause broadening of the 
radiation profile at the substrate/resist interface. The 
scattered radiation profiles for overexposed positive 
and negative resists are shown in Figure 1.38.
Time-independent organic solvent development 
(with a strong developer) of overexposed negative 
resists from outside the scattered region reveals 
the scattered radiation zone because cross-linking 
and  further swelling inhibit its removal. On the 
other hand, development of overexposed positive 
resists using aqueous alkaline is time dependent 
and rapidly removes the exposed region, edge-
 scattered radiation zones, and part of the photo-
resist top unless the developer is quenched. The 
time- dependent aspect of this process enables 
the operator to tailor positive resist profiles. With 
negative resists, the exposed regions remain, as 
they are rendered insoluble; with positive resists, 
the exposed region develops, and the unexposed 
regions usually remain soluble. Swelling in tradi-
tional negative resists is one of the reasons these 
resists used to be limited to the manufacture of 
devices with minimum feature size of about 3 µm. 
Scattered radiation and swelling result in a broad-
ening of the remaining resist features. Positive 
resists do not exhibit this swelling because of a dif-
ferent dissolution mechanism. The oxygen effect, 
quenching the cross- linking of negative resists as 
discussed earlier, usually means a disadvantage for 
negative resists but can be turned into an advan-
tage to improve resolution. We already know that 
oxygen can scavenge the photogenerated reactive 
nitrene species and that this reaction eliminates 
the precursors for cross-linking and insolubiliza-
tion. Excluding oxygen from the top surface of the 
resist by flushing with an inert gas or blocking with 
a polymer topcoat causes the oxygen dissolved in 
the polymer film to move laterally from the unex-
posed dark areas into the light zone. The light zone 
FIGURE 1.38 Edge-scattered radiation profile for negative and positive resists. (a) Negative resist image; time-
 independent development of cross-linked negative resist fails to remove light scatter zone. (b) Positive resist image; 
development of positive resist rapidly removes exposed region and can be quenched to inhibit removal of lateral 
 scattered exposed resist region. (Based on Brodie, I., and J.J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrication. New York: 
Plenum Press. With permission.52)

[Page 49]
Photolithography   49
becomes an oxygen sink, and the lightly scattered 
zones (Figure 1.39) do not insolubilize, leading to 
better resolution.28
Liftoff Profile
The creation of a straight photoresist wall or, better 
yet, that of a lip or undercut can be taken advantage 
of in a so-called lift-off process. Lift-off is important, 
for example, for patterning catalytic metals such 
as Pt, frequently used in chemical sensors but not 
easily patterned directly. In the process sequence, 
shown in Figure 1.40, a solvent dissolves the posi-
tive photoresist underneath the deposited metal, 
starting at the edge of the unexposed photoresist, 
and lifts off the metal. It is important that there be 
a discontinuity or gap in the metal deposit so that 
solvent can get at the uncoated resist wall. This is 
accomplished by depositing the metal with a line-of-
sight–type technique such as thermal evaporation, 
which is described in Chapter 7. In a line-of-sight 
deposition technique, a vertical or inward sloping 
wall will receive little or no metal deposit, leaving a 
gap for the resist solvent to dissolve the unexposed 
resist and lift off the metal on top of it. One dis-
advantage of this technique is the rounded profile, 
a result of shadowing, associated with deposited 
features and temperature limitations (see Figure 
1.40). A more desirable profile for a conductor line 
has a rectangular cross-section minimizing electri-
cal resistance. The latter is one reason why liftoff in 
IC fabrication, where contact resistance is of prime 
concern, is used with discretion. Also with liftoff, 
Insolubilization of radiated negative tone resist is 
prevented by oxygen ingress from the unexposed resist 
areas. Te oxgen interdiﬀusion enhances the resolution.
Actinic light
Oxygen
diﬀusion
Oxygen
diﬀusion
Negative
Photopolymer
Polymerized
area
Support
FIGURE 1.39 Lightly scattered zones do not insolubilize. 
(From Moreau, W.M. 1988. Semiconductor lithography. 
New York: Plenum Press. With permission.28)
Spin positive photoresist and
expose
Photoresist
Metal
Light ﬁeld
reticle
Directional metal deposition
Liftoﬀ in solvent
FIGURE 1.40 Example of liftoff sequence with positive resist for the construction of a Pt-based electrochemical sensor 
electrode. Rounding of deposited features through shadowing is observed (see text).

[Page 50]
50   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
the metal deposition technique is limited to tem-
peratures less than 200–300°C, where resist begins 
to degrade.53
In a liftoff process, one can either use a negative 
resist, such as the alkaline-developing ZPN1100, 
or modify a positive resist to exhibit the desired 
undercut. We know already that an undercut does 
not readily form with a positive resist: therefore, 
some “tricks” are in order. The first trick is to “pre-
soak” the positive resist surface with an aromatic 
solvent (e.g., chlorobenzene) to convert a surface 
layer. This layer will develop at a much slower rate 
than the bulk of the resist film, thereby providing 
an undercut during development in alkaline solu-
tion. The second method, image reversal, follows 
further below.
A presoak process to develop an undercut on a 
positive resist (Shipley 1827) involves the following 
steps—with typical example materials, equipment, 
and process parameters:
 
1. Dehydration bake of Si wafer to remove all 
moisture. Typically this is done in a natural 
convection oven at 200°C for 30 minutes.
 
2. Wafer priming using HMDS.
 
3. Spin coat resist using a Solitec 5100 spinner. 
Spin to 1000 rpm for 5 seconds to spread the 
resist and then at 7000 rpm for 35 seconds to 
complete the spin cycle.
 
4. Soft bake at 90°C for 20 minutes in a natural 
convection oven.
 
5. Expose the wafer for 15 seconds in a Kasper 
Contact Mask Aligner.
 
6. A 5-minute chlorobenzene soak. Chloroben-
zene diffuses into the photoresist top layer, 
causing it to swell. A gel is formed to the depth 
of the diffusion, which develops much slower 
than the bulk of the resist. This causes the devel-
oper to undercut the photoresist structures and 
produces the desired profile. After the soak, 
blow-dry the wafers with a nitrogen gun.
 
7. Develop the wafers using Microposit MF319 
from Shipley. Development rates are increased 
with exposure time and decreased by soaking 
time. The exposed regions develop faster; the 
undercut of the structure is formed when the 
development front passes the gel layer, and fast 
lateral development of the unexposed regions 
begins. Use a development time of 5 minutes 
with mild agitation. Then place the wafers in 
DI water for approximately 2 minutes, and 
blow-dry with nitrogen.
 
8. Deposit desired material.
 
9. Liftoff. Dissolution of the photoresist is the 
final step in the liftoff process. Positive resist 
is very soluble in acetone, which has been used 
traditionally. Soak the wafers in acetone for 
5 minutes with mild agitation.
There are many different techniques to make 
undercut resist profiles with a positive tone resist, 
including:
 
1. Chlorobenzene induced lip in single-layer pho-
toresist (see above)
 
2. Multilayer resists (e.g., a bilayer) where top 
layer develops more slowly
 
3. Special undercoatings that develop faster than 
resist in developer
 
4. Trilayer methods
 
5. Image reversal resists (see next section)
Image Reversal
Because swelling does not take place during the 
development of positive photoresists, several pro-
cess variations aim at reversing the tone of the image 
so that the resists can act as high-resolution negative 
resists. Examples of positive photoresists that may 
be used for this purpose are OCG 895i and Shipley 
1800. One purpose of reversal processes is for the 
generation of an undercut profile for liftoff. As we 
have seen, positive resists more readily lead to over-
cut resist profiles as shown in Table 1.9Ac, whereas 
with a negative resist an undercut is more readily 
generated (Table 1.9B). A typical image-reversal pro-
cess is demonstrated in Figure 1.41a. After a diazo-
positive resist has been patterned, an amine vapor 
(such as imidazole or triethanolamine, or, more 
generally, a base) is diffused into the exposed areas. 
The amine neutralizes the byproduct of the photo-
decomposition (a carboxylic acid in this case) and 
makes these exposed areas highly resistant to fur-
ther change by exposure to light and highly insensi-
tive to further development. The base inducing the 

[Page 51]
Photolithography   51
image reversal may also be added to the resist for-
mulation before coating. A subsequent flood expo-
sure makes the areas adjacent to the neutralized 
image soluble in conventional positive photoresist 
developers. The net result is a negative image of the 
mask with an undercut profile and improved reso-
lution because the resist does not swell as negative 
resists do.
Image reversal with a negative resist, such as 
KTFR, is possible as well (see Figure 1.41b). We have 
already discussed that remaining oxygen in a resist 
can improve resolution by preventing insolubiliza-
tion in light-scattered zones outside the exposed 
area (Figure 1.39). Image reversal is an extension 
of this insolubilization. By working at low inten-
sity, oxygen flooding can scavenge all photogene-
rated azide polymerization precursors, making the 
exposed areas soluble in a developer as they are 
prevented from polymerizing. A subsequent flood 
exposure under a nitrogen blanket, at higher inten-
sity, initiates the polymerization in the previously 
nonexposed areas.28
A dual-tone resist chemistry, based on a phenolic 
resin with diazonaphthoquinone as the acid genera-
tor and hydroxymethylmelamine as the hardening 
agent, was developed in 1986 by Feely and cowork-
ers at Rohm and Haas (Figure 1.42).10 The increase in 
molecular weight for the exposed dual-tone Rohm 
and Haas photoresist is the result of a condensa-
tion reaction between phenol formaldehyde resins 
and amino-based cross-linkers. Initially, the Rohm 
and Haas process drew a lot of attention because 
it promised to have many miniaturization science 
applications. Earlier, in Figure 1.8a, we illustrated 
the process flow options for this resist.9
Exposure produces the latent image, which results 
in the “normal” positive resist relief image when 
developed at this stage (right-hand path in Figure 
1.8a). If, on the other hand, after exposure, the film 
is heated to induce the acid-catalyzed reaction of 
the melamine with the phenolic resin, the exposed 
areas become insoluble, and image reversal is ini-
tiated. The reversal is completed by a subsequent 
flood exposure, solubilizing the nonexposed areas 
and rendering a negative-tone image of the mask 
(left-hand path in Figure 1.8a). The cross-linked 
nature of the image imparts resistance to swelling 
and dissolution by aqueous and organic solvents, as 
well as dimensional and thermal stability to tem-
peratures >300°C. By using three-tone masks that 
have opaque, transparent, and partial transmis-
sion (50%), stepped (positive-tone process) and 
cantilevered (negative-tone process) structures are 
produced (Figure 1.8b). By appropriate processing 
of image reversal systems, positive, negative, and 
vertical walls become possible as well. Figure 1.8c 
showcases an example of the types of microstruc-
tures that can be printed with the Rohm and Haas 
system. In principle, this resist could be the basis of 
a complete microstructural universe.
Mask
Resist
Substrate
Expose
Bake
Flood expose
Develop
CO2 CO2
R
R
R
R
R
O
O
COOH
COOH
COOH
N2
N2
A
H
H2O
H2O
N
N
+ CO2 
Develop
Develop
Negative imaging
Positive imaging
U.S. Pat. 3,591,378
Flood(N2)
O2 Ambient exposure
O2
O2
O2
O2
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.41 Image reversal process sequence. (a) Positive photoresist. (b) Negative photoresist. [(a) Based on Alling, 
E., and C. Stauffer. 1988. Image reversal photoresist. Solid State Technol 31:37–43;54 (b) based on Moreau, W.M. 1988. 
Semiconductor lithography. New York: Plenum Press. With permission.28]

[Page 52]
52   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Contrast and Experimental Determination 
of Lithographic Sensitivity
The resolution capability of a resist, defined as the 
smallest line width to be consistently patterned, 
is directly related to resist contrast γ. For positive 
resists, the contrast is related to the rate of chain scis-
sion and the rate of change of solubility with molec-
ular weight. The latter is very solvent dependent. 
After development, the thickness of the exposed 
resist layer decreases until, at a critical dose DP, the 
film is completely removed. Lithographic sensitivity, 
DP, and contrast can be obtained from the response 
curve—a plot of normalized film thickness versus 
log D (dose) (Figure 1.43a). To construct a curve as 
shown in Figure 1.43a, a series of positive resist pads 
of known area are subjected to varying doses and 
developed in a solvent that does not attack the unex-
posed film. The thickness of the remaining film in 
the exposed area is then measured and normalized 
to the original thickness and plotted as a function of 
cumulative dosage. Contrast γp is determined from 
the slope of this sensitivity or exposure response 
curve as:
 
γ p
p
p
0
p
p
0
log D
D
log D
D
=
−
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
−
1
1
(
log
)
 
(1.11)
 And the lithographic sensitivity Dp is the x-axis 
intersection. For a given developer, Dp corresponds 
Photochemical
acid generator
Novolak resin
M
Three-dimensional
network
elaminecross-linker
Acid
H2O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
N
O
N2
SO2OR
SO2OR
CO2H
hν
CH2)
CH3
OH
HO
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
N
N
N
N
N
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
–CH3OH
N
N
N
/ T
H
(
FIGURE 1.42 Cross-linking of a novolak resin through acid-catalyzed condensation with a melamine for negative 
 aqueous-base development.
(a)
(b)
LOG D(OSE)
LOG D(OSE)
1.0
0.5
0
DP
O
Dg
i
Dg
o
Dg
x
Dp
1.0
X
0
Normalized ﬁlm thickness
after development
Normalized ﬁlm thickness
after development
FIGURE 1.43 Typical response curves or sensitivity curves. (a) For a positive resist. Contrast γp is determined from the 
slope. The contrast for a positive resist is markedly solvent dependent. A typical contrast value for a positive optical resist 
is 2.2. (b) For a negative resist. The value of Dγ x usually occurs at 0.5–0.7 normalized thickness as shown in Figure 1.44. 
The slope determines the contrast, γn. A typical value for the contrast of a negative optical resist is 1.5. (From Thompson, 
L.F., C.G. Willson, and M.J. Bowden, eds. 1994. Introduction to microlithography. Washington, DC: American Chemical 
Society. With permission.55)

[Page 53]
Photolithography   53
to the dose required to produce complete solubility 
in the exposed region while not affecting the unex-
posed resist. Dp
0 is the dose at which the developer 
first begins to attack the irradiated film. For a dose 
less than Dp but higher than Dp
0, another developer 
could “force develop” the resist. In force developing, 
the developer attacks or thins the original, unex-
posed resist (Table 1.9Ac). The above describes how 
the profile of a positive resist can be manipulated by 
the operator.
For a negative resist, contrast relates to the rate of 
cross-linked network formation at a constant input 
dose. This is simpler than in the case of a positive 
resist, where contrast is also very solvent dependent. 
Consequently, if one negative resist has a higher 
cross-linking rate compared with another, it also 
possesses the higher contrast of the two. With nega-
tive resists, the onset of cross-linking, as evidenced 
by gel formation, is not observed until a critical 
dose Dg
i (also called the interface gel dose) has been 
reached (see Figure 1.43b). In Figure 1.43b, we show 
the response or sensitivity curve: the normalized 
developed film thickness versus log dose. Below 
the interface gel dose, no image can form, as the 
film thickness is insufficient to serve as an etching 
mask. At higher doses, the image thickness increases 
until the thickness of the image equals that of the 
resist before exposure (in reality, it remains thin-
ner as the film shrinks as a result of cross-linking). 
The latter dose is shown in Figure 1.43b as Dg
0, the 
dose required to reach 100% polymerization of ini-
tial film thickness (before exposure). Contrast, γn, is 
obtained from the slope of this curve as:
 
γ n
g
g
i
g
0
g
i
D
D
log D
D
=
−
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
−
1
0
1
(log
log
)
 
(1.12)
Lithography sensitivity (Dg
x) defines the dose 
cross-linking the film to the required thickness for 
optimal resolution. The required dose is sometimes 
defined as the dose resulting in dimensional equal-
ity of clear and opaque features (corresponding to 
nominally equal structures on the mask) imaged 
in the resist. The so-defined lithographic sensitivity 
can be determined separately from a plot of feature 
size versus dose for an opaque and a clear feature of 
equal size (Figure 1.44). This dose, Dg
x, correspond-
ing to the lithographic sensitivity transposed on the 
x-axis of Figure 1.43b, fixes the required cross-linked 
film thickness after development on the y-axis (usu-
ally 0.5–0.7 times the normalized thickness). The 
lithographic sensitivity also may be taken as the dose 
D0
x
.7, at which 70% of the original film is retained 
after development.27
Resists with higher contrast result in better reso-
lution than those with lower contrast, and this can 
be explained as follows. In an exposure, energy is 
delivered in a diffused manner because of diffrac-
tion and scattering effects. Some areas outside the 
mask-defined pattern will receive an unintended 
dose higher than Dg
i but lower than Dg
x. The resulting 
resist profile will exhibit some slope after develop-
ment. The higher the contrast of the resist, the more 
vertical the resist profile. Because line width is mea-
sured at a specified height above the resist/substrate 
surface, as the resist profile becomes less vertical, the 
resist line width represents the original mask dimen-
sion less accurately.
Values of Dp and Dg
x are figures of merit used 
only to compare different resists. For lithographic 
sensitivity numbers to have any value they must 
be   accompanied by a detailed description of the 
conditions under which they were measured.
Clear
Clear
Opaque
Opaque
2.5
2.0
1.5
Feature size - µm
1.0
D
x
g
LOG10 DOSE
FIGURE 1.44 Size of a clear and opaque 2.0-µm feature 
(on the mask) as a function of the exposure dose for a 
negative resist. The dose (Dg
x) resulting in the correct 
feature size (same size as on the mask) is called the litho-
graphic sensitivity. (From Thompson, L.F., C.G. Willson, 
and M.J. Bowden, eds. 1994. Introduction to microlitho-
graphy. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society. 
With permission.55)

[Page 54]
54   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Resolution in Photolithography
Introduction
A line-width measurement made with a SEM or 
another metrology tool from the many options 
reviewed in Volume III, Chapter 6 is used to deter-
mine the resolution of a lithographic system. Correct 
feature size must be maintained within a wafer and 
from wafer to wafer, as device performance depends 
on the absolute size of the patterned structures. The 
term critical dimension (CD) refers to a specific mini-
mal feature size and is a measure of the resolution of a 
lithographic process. We first consider the theoretical 
resolution limits of different photolithography print-
ing techniques; in the subsequent section, we review 
how one can go beyond those conventional limits by 
using resolution-enhancing techniques (RETs). With 
reference to Figure 1.6 where we compare contact, 
proximity, and projection printing, we now delve 
into a mathematical formulation of the expected 
resolution for each of these printing techniques.
Resolution in Shadow Printing 
and Self-Aligned Masks
Introduction
In the shadow printing mode, including contact 
and proximity arrangements of mask and wafer, 
optical lithography has a resolution with limits set 
by a variety of factors. These include diffraction of 
light at the edge of an opaque feature in the mask 
as the light passes through an adjacent clear area, 
alignment of wafer to mask, nonuniformities in 
wafer flatness, and debris between mask and wafer. 
Figure 1.45 illustrates a typical intensity distribu-
tion of light incident on a photoresist surface after 
passing through a mask containing a periodic grat-
ing consisting of opaque and transparent spaces of 
equal width, b.51 Diffraction causes the image of a 
perfectly delineated edge to become blurred or dif-
fused. The theoretical resolution, R, that is, the min-
imum resolved dimension in a grating mask (bmin for 
a line or a space) as illustrated in Figure 1.45 and 
using a conventional resist is given by:
 
R
b
k
s+ z
2
min
=
=
λ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(1.13)
where
bmin =  half the grating period and the minimum 
feature size transferable
s =  the gap between the mask and the photoresist 
surface
λ = the wavelength of the exposing radiation 
z = the photoresist thickness 
k = a constant that theoretically is ~1.5
Depending on the relative magnitude of s and z, one 
distinguishes between contact and proximity print-
ing. The square root relation in contact and proximity 
printing is a consequence of the near-field or Fresnel 
diffraction theory valid in the near-field region just 
below the mask openings; this contrasts with the far-
field behavior (Fraunhofer diffraction) of projection 
lithography (see below). These three types of lithog-
raphy are compared in Figure 1.46 (see also Volume I, 
Chapter 5 on far-field and near-field imaging).
Self-aligned printing can be regarded as an 
extreme form of contact printing where there is no 
gap between the mask and the substrate.
Contact Printing
In contact printing, a photomask is pressed against 
the resist-covered wafer with pressures in the range 
Incident
UV light
on mask
Mask plate
Mask pattern
Resist
Wafer
Ideal transfer
Actual transfer 
Minimum period
transferable
S
b
b
b
b
b
b
0
1
2
3
 4
Position on wafer
(arbitrary units)
FIGURE 1.45 Light distribution profiles on a photoresist 
surface after light passes through a mask containing an 
equal line and space grating. (From Thompson, L.F., C.G. 
Willson, and M.J. Bowden, eds. 1994. Introduction to 
microlithography. Washington, DC: American Chemical 
Society. With permission.55)

[Page 55]
Photolithography   55
of 0.05–0.3 atm, and the s in Equation 1.13 is zero. 
In this case, Equation 1.13 reduces to:
 
R
b
k
z
2
min
=
=
λ
 
(1.14)
With λ = 400 nm and a 1-µm-thick resist, we con-
clude that a resolution higher than 1 µm is possible. 
For thinner resist layers, that is, z very small and 
with shorter wavelengths (e.g., 248 nm), the resolu-
tion capability of contact printing further improves. 
Equation 1.14 clarifies the need to use shorter wave-
length and thinner resist layers to achieve higher 
resolution. However, the theoretical maximum reso-
lution is seldom achieved because only diffraction 
effects were taken into account to derive Equation 
1.13. The other factors mentioned above (e.g., wafer 
flatness, mask alignment) and shadowing effect 
(penumbral blur) usually conspire to make the reso-
lution worse. Typical contact printers are the Kasper 
and the Cobilt 800. The required contact between 
mask and wafer also causes mask damage and con-
tamination, rendering the method unsuitable for 
most modern microcircuit fabrication.
Proximity Printing
In proximity printing, spacing of the mask removed 
from the substrate (by at least 10 µm) minimizes 
defects that result from contact. On the other hand, 
diffraction of the transmitted light reduces the res-
olution. The degree of reduction in resolution and 
image distortion depends on the wafer-to-substrate 
distance, which may vary across the wafer. For 
proximity printing, Equation 1.13, with s » z, can be 
rewritten as:
 
R
b
k
s
min
=
=
λ  
(1.15)
The technology parameter k theoretically is 1.5. 
Based on Equation 1.15, for a gap of 10 µm using 
400-nm exposing radiation and a k value of 1.5, the 
resolution limit is about 3 µm.56 More typical mask 
and wafer separations are in the range of 20–50 µm. 
The smallest features resolvable in a practical UV 
proximity exposure measure about 2–3 µm for most 
processes. A typical instrument used for proximity 
printing is the Canon PLA-600FA (the same setup 
can also be used for contact printing). Resolution is 
not as good as in contact printing (see above) or pro-
jection printing (see below), and for dimensions less 
than 2 µm optical projection methods are used.
The main disadvantage of proximity printing is 
a severe reduction in resolution as a result of dif-
fraction spreading. Resolution can be enhanced by 
either decreasing the gap at the risk of contact and 
defect generation or by reducing the wavelength. 
Using wavelengths in the deep UV or even extreme 
UV range will not suffice for optical proximity print-
ing to compete with projection printing. However, 
using x-rays with a wavelength of about 1 nm, fea-
ture sizes less than 0.2 µm can be produced with 
proximity methods. This makes 1× proximity x-ray 
a promising candidate for NGL.
Resolution with Self-Aligned Masks
The most desirable fabrication processes involve in 
situ deposited masks, also called self-aligned or con-
formable masks. These masks, forming molecular 
contact with the machine under construction, offer 
superior resolution as light has no chance to diffract 
between mask and substrate. They may be regarded 
as an extreme case of contact printing—that is, s is 
zero with the mask in atomic contact over the whole 
device under construction. Conformable masks com-
prise either permanent or sacrificial layers produced 
in intermediate process steps on the device itself 
rather than on separate quartz plates.
Figure 1.47 presents an important example of self-
alignment with the so-called SALICIDE process, i.e., 
the self-aligned silicide process, a process in which 
FIGURE 1.46 Proximity and contact printing are near-
field, whereas projection is far-field or Fraunhofer diffrac-
tion (see Volume I, Chapter 5).

[Page 56]
56   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
silicide contacts are formed only in those areas in 
which deposited metal is in direct contact with silicon. 
This self-aligning process is commonly implemented 
in MOS/CMOS processes in which ohmic contacts to 
the source, drain, and poly-Si gate are formed by the 
“salicide” process. The salicide process begins with 
deposition of a thin transition metal layer over fully 
formed and patterned semiconductor devices (e.g., 
transistors). The wafer is heated, allowing the transi-
tion metal to react with exposed silicon in the active 
regions of the semiconductor device (e.g., source, 
drain, gate) forming a low-resistance transition 
metal silicide. The transition metal does not react 
with the silicon oxide or nitride insulators present 
on the wafer. Following the reaction, any remaining 
unreacted transition metal is removed by chemical 
etching, leaving silicide contact metal automatically 
aligned to gate, source, and drain region.
We explained in Volume I, Chapter 4 that an 
important advantage of the SALICIDE process in 
new generation CMOS circuitry is that the entire 
junction area is used for contact formation, which 
translates into a lower overall contact resistance. The 
silicide contact materials on the transistors are then 
further contacted through chemical vapor deposi-
tion (CVD)-deposited plugs of pure W filling the 
contact vias (see Volume I, Chapter 4).
Projection Printing
Resolution
In projection printing, wafer contact is completely 
avoided; a high-resolution lens projects an image of 
the photomask onto the photoresist-covered wafer. 
Imaging in this case is far field or Fraunhofer dif-
fraction dominated, as shown in Figure 1.46. A sche-
matic of a projection lithography system is presented 
in Figure 1.48.
In Volume I, Chapter 5, we calculated (based on 
the Maxwell equations) the Rayleigh criterion for 
far-field resolution as:
R = 0.61λ/NA
with λ the wavelength of the light used for the pat-
tern transfer, and NA the numerical aperture of the 
imaging lens system.
Diffraction in a small opening transforms nor-
mally incident light into an angular spread as 
FIGURE 1.48 Optical projection printing. The basic 
 components of a generic optical projection system.
FIGURE 1.47 Example of a self-aligned silicide (SALICIDE) 
process in the formation of a MOS transistor. (a) An oxide is 
deposited over the polysilicon gate. (b) The deposited oxide 
is RIE patterned, leaving the sidewalls of the poly-Si covered 
with oxide (oxide spacer). (c) Metal is deposited over the 
structure and heated to form silicides where naked Si is 
exposed. (d) Unreacted metal is etched away, leaving silicide 
automatically aligned to gate, source, and drain region.

[Page 57]
Photolithography   57
illustrated in Figure 1.49. The numerical aperture of a 
lens determines how much of this diffracted light the 
lens can capture and image (see Volume I, Chapter 
5: NA = nsinθ). Because of this spreading effect, 
fewer diffracted orders are captured by the lens and 
form the image. This means that information about 
the smallest pattern is lost because the smaller the 
pattern the wider the spread. In Figure 1.50 we show 
the effect of including increasing numbers of dif-
fracted orders on the image of a slit of width w. The 
more diffracted orders we can pick up, the higher 
the fidelity of the resulting image. As explained in 
Volume I, Chapter 5, for absolute image fidelity, 
we need an NA = 1. Pendry’s near-field amplifying 
superlens (NFSL) offers that prospective. A near-
field superlens illustrated in Volume  I, Chapter 5 
enables subdiffraction limit imaging so that even 
nanometer objects can be imaged with light of say 
365-nm wavelength.
The NA of lenses in projection aligners ranges 
from ~0.16–0.80 (see Figure 1.80). With a good 
lens, possessing an NA of 0.5, the Rayleigh expres-
sion suggests that the best resolution one can obtain 
roughly equals the size of the wavelength of the 
exposure system. Although the Rayleigh criterion is 
too simplistic—it only takes into account character-
istics of the optical system—it correctly predicts that 
a larger NA or a shorter wavelength leads to better 
resolution.
The derivation of R = 0.61λ/NA (Volume I, 
Chapter 5) was based on the concept of a “point 
source” something that does not really exist. Here we 
want to introduce the practical resolution of a photoli-
thography system starting from the grating  equation. 
From the  grating formula d
N
n
NA
=
λ
θ
λ
2
2
sin
,
=
N
 we 
 calculated that the  resolution with incoherent illu-
mination is better than with coherent light [R = 0.5 
λ/NA for coherent light (Volume I, Chapter 5) vs. 
R  = 0.25 λ/NA for incoherent light (Volume  I, 
Chapter 5)]. We generalize these results using a 
dimensionless constant k1 to define the practical 
limiting resolution R in projection printing as:
 
R
k NA
1
=
λ  
(1.16)
where k1 is the experimentally determined dimen-
sionless parameter that depends on resist parameters, 
process conditions, mask aligner optics, and so on.
To achieve higher resolutions, we want to work at 
shorter wavelengths λ, higher NA, and smaller k1.
FIGURE 1.49 The numerical aperture (NA) of a lens tells us how much of this diffracted light the lens can capture and 
image (see Volume I, Equation 5.3: NA = nsinθ).
–w
2
w
2
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
Relative intensity
N' = 9
N' = 1
N' = 3
FIGURE 1.50 The higher the number of diffracted orders 
a lens can pick, i.e., the higher the NA of a lens, the better 
the resolution of the image.

[Page 58]
58   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The k1 parameter fluctuates between 0.3 for sur-
face imaging resists to 0.5 for multilayer resists 
(MLRs), 0.75 for single layer resists (SLRs), and 1.1 
for reflective surfaces like aluminum. Up until 1995, 
production engineers demanded that k1 be about 
0.7 for SLRs; today, its value is closer to 0.5 (see 
Figure 1.81). Technologies enabling lower k1 values, 
besides surface imaging and MLRs, include phase-
shift masking, antireflective coatings, and off-axis 
illumination. We will review these methods under 
resolution-enhancing technique (RET) and learn, 
for example, that with RET one can obtain a resolu-
tion about one-half of the exposure wavelength or 
even better. The better resolution afforded by a lower 
k1 makes for a narrower process window and thus a 
more difficult process; it is expected that one cannot 
go much lower than a k1 of 0.25 (see Figure 1.81).
Depth of Focus
To obtain good line-width control, the latent image 
must remain in focus throughout the depth of the 
resist layer. A certain amount of defocus tolerance 
is allowed. The defocus tolerance or depth of focus 
(DOF or δ) of an optical system is given by:
 
DOF
k
NA
2
2
=
δ =
λ
±
±
 
(1.17)
And by using Equation 1.16:
 
DOF
k
R
k
2
2
1
2
=
δ =
λ
±
±
 
(1.18)
In Equations 1.17 and 1.18, k2 is a process- dependent 
constant hovering around 0.5. For a detailed math-
ematical derivation of the DOF equations we refer 
to Bowden.56 From Equation 1.16, we know that 
to achieve better resolution we must reduce λ and 
increase NA. As deduced from the DOF equations, 
the penalty is a reduction in DOF, perhaps becom-
ing so small that a focused image through the total 
depth of a typical 1.0–1.5-µm-thick photoresist can-
not be achieved anymore. A good NA of a lens for a 
g-line (436 nm) lithography system is 0.54. With a 
k1 factor of 0.8, this leads to a resolution of 0.65 µm 
(based on Equation 1.16). With i-line (365 nm) 
lithography, a resolution of 0.65 µm can be achieved 
with a 0.45-NA lens while exhibiting a superior DOF 
of 0.9 µm compared with 0.7 µm for the g-line. Wide-
field i-line steppers with variable numeric apertures 
(Figure 1.51) are available with a 22 × 22-mm field, 
a 5× reduction ratio, and a resolution of better than 
0.35 µm (e.g., the Nikon NSR-2205i14E, http://www.
nikon.co.jp/main/eng/news/dec14e_97.htm). This 
type of equipment allows one to balance resolu-
tion, DOF, and wafer throughput for different appli-
cations. Because the patterns on wafers have their 
own topology and wafers may not be perfectly flat, 
a large DOF is needed to ensure that the image stays 
in focus over the entire field. If even a small part is 
out of focus, the final product will be ruined.
Photography enthusiasts easily relate to this dis-
cussion (see Figure 1.52): a high aperture setting on 
a camera leads to sharp images for objects that are 
close to the camera (see rose), whereas a small aper-
ture keeps objects in focus all the way to infinity (see 
stones).
Microlithographic (or practical) DOF is defined as 
the total defocus allowable for a desired tolerance on 
a minimum feature size. It may be different from the 
values estimated from Equations 1.17 and 1.18. The 
practical DOF must encompass device topography, 
resist thickness, wafer flatness, and focus tilt errors. 
For sub-0.5-µm lithography, only a small amount of 
residual nonplanarity in device topography can be 
tolerated without negatively affecting critical dimen-
sion control. Small DOF values require expensive 
 planarization processes to bring all IC features in 
focus within the DOF of the optical system. Some 
of these planarization processes will be reviewed 
Illumination light
Projection
     lens
Wafer
plane
NA 1
NA 2
DOF1
DOF2
Res 1
Res 2
FIGURE 1.51 Variable numeric aperture stepper.

[Page 59]
Photolithography   59
further below. Thin film imaging (TFI) methods, 
reviewed below, also allow one to work around 
DOF problems by imaging in thin film resist lay-
ers and then transferring that image to underlying 
thicker resist layers. Miniaturized structures often 
possess more extreme topologies than ICs, mak-
ing planarization an even bigger challenge. During 
the past 20 years, progress in expanding the DOF 
of semiconductor equipment has not kept pace with 
the decreasing CDs. For miniaturization science, the 
former is more important. We will learn how topo-
graphical masks and using x-ray and e-beam lithog-
raphy have enabled the higher DOFs needed for 
high-aspect-ratio miniaturized 3D machines.
Types of Projection Methods
Since 1973, when Perkin-Elmer (http://instruments.
perkinelmer.com) first introduced its scanning pro-
jection system for lithography, optical projection of 
mask patterns has become the standard lithography 
method. Some of the many projection systems in 
use include projection scanners (e.g., Perkin-Elmer’s 
Micralign 700 series), 1:1 and reduction (e.g., 5:1 
and 10:1 times, often denoted as 5× and 10×), step-
and-repeat projection systems (e.g., 10× Electro-
Mask), step and scan systems [e.g., ASML’s (http://
www.asml.com) PAS 5500/900], and double-sided 
mask aligners [e.g., the SUSS MicroTec MA/BA6 
Mask Aligner (http://www.suss.com/products/mask-
aligner/ma-ba6-gen2.html)].
A scanning projection system exposes the wafer in 
a single scan without the benefit of midscan realign-
ment to local alignment marks. The wafer and the 
mask move simultaneously and continually on an 
air-bearing carriage through a light arc covering the 
whole mask and wafer at once. With a deep UV light 
source, resolution of 1 µm can be obtained, DOF of 
±6 µm is possible, and an overlay accuracy of ±0.25 
µm (1 σ) has been reached. In practice, these scan-
ners are mainly used for alignment of patterns with 
CDs in the 3-µm range and for high throughput 
applications (e.g., 100 wafers/hour).
FIGURE 1.52 The concept of depth of focus (DOF) in lithography and photography.

[Page 60]
60   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
A stepper system, also step-and-repeat, exposes 
one small part of the wafer followed by a new expo-
sure at the next position (Figure 1.53). By stepping 
and repeating, the entire wafer is covered with the 
reticle pattern. Steppers have the ability to align to 
each field and make adjustments to x, y, rotation and 
focus, and tilt. They offer higher alignment accura-
cies but are slower than scanners. Most steppers use 
reduction lenses (e.g., with a 10:1 or a 5:1 reduction) 
rather than one-to-one projection printing. The 
reduction printer exposes part of the wafer to a pat-
tern from a mask 5–10 times larger than the projected 
image. The reduction process makes reticle inaccu-
racies less significant, consequently improving the 
resolution and resulting in easier mask making. The 
only drawback pertains to the size of the image field: 
the higher the reduction ratio, the smaller the image 
field. Because of lens imperfections and diffraction 
considerations, projection techniques have a lower 
resolution for pattern transfer than that provided by 
a contact or self-aligned mask; however, CDs of 65 
nm have already been achieved today with projec-
tion lithography.
With steppers, the full exposure field (pretty 
much the whole lens) is illuminated, and the reti-
cle image is projected in one flash at each location 
across the wafer. In newer step and scan systems 
(Figure  1.54), used in 193-nm lithography, only a 
narrow slit of the wafer is illuminated. In tools of 
this type, the wafer is stepped to a new field, which 
is then scanned; this sequence continues until all 
the fields have been scanned. This method projects 
a part of the image from the reticle onto the wafer 
and uses only a small fraction of the lens area. By 
synchronously moving the reticle stage (up to 1 m/s) 
and the wafer stage (up to 25 cm/s) in opposite 
directions, the whole reticle pattern is imaged onto 
the wafer. With step and scan systems, larger image 
fields can be exposed (see Figure 1.54), resulting in 
higher productivity; because a smaller area of the 
lens is used (only a slit over the center of the lens), 
each lens can be better optimized for higher resolu-
tion and lower distortion.
A mask aligner of particular interest to the 
non-IC miniaturization engineer is a double-sided 
mask aligner. With this equipment, features can be 
aligned on opposite sides of the wafer. An example 
is the SUSS MA-150 RH with a top-to-bottom preci-
sion alignment accuracy of 1 µm (1σ) in production. 
Another double-sided top and bottom aligner is the 
600 series EV640 by Electronic Visions Co. (http://
www.elvisions.com). Double-sided mask alignment 
is discussed in more detail under “Mask Alignment 
in Projection Printing,” this chapter.
FIGURE 1.53 Stepper exposure field.

[Page 61]
Photolithography   61
Modulation Transfer Function
In the projection printing of a grating, a series of 
light intensity maxima and minima are produced, 
as illustrated in Figure 1.55. Because of mutual inter-
ference, dark regions in the image never reach com-
plete darkness, and the maximum brightness never 
corresponds to 100% transmission. The quality of 
the image transfer can be expressed by the modula-
tion index (also simply modulation) M defined as:
 
M
I
I
I
I
max
min
max
min
=
−
+
 
(1.19)
In this equation, Imax and Imin are the peak and 
trough intensities, respectively. M reveals the degree 
to which diffraction effects cause incident radiation 
to fall on the resist between the images of two slits 
in a mask. Ideal optics would give a modulation M 
equal to 1. In practice, exposure systems behave less 
ideally with an M < 1.
The optical imaging quality (that is, the capabil-
ity of reproducing a mask feature on a wafer surface) 
for a given projection system can be characterized 
in terms of the modulation transfer function (MTF) 
curve. The MTF of an exposure system is defined as 
the ratio of the modulation in the image plane to 
that in the object or mask plane (that is, Mim/Mmask) 
as a function of spatial frequency (ν) or number 
of line pairs per millimeter on the mask. Because 
the intensity in the mask plane at the center of an 
opaque feature is essentially zero, we can equate 
Mmask = 1. Consequently, we can also equate MTF 
and Mim as shown in Figure 1.55 where the curve 
is normalized to 100%. An MTF curve is obtained 
by imaging a series of gratings with different spatial 
frequencies placed in the object plane, and the cor-
responding modulation Mim(ν) in the image plane is 
measured.52
The MTF of an exposure system depends on NA, 
λ, mask feature size, and the degree of spatial coher-
ency of the illuminating system. Because NA and λ 
are fixed by the system hardware design, a plot of 
MTF versus feature size, parametrically changing 
the spatial coherency, often is used to compare a sys-
tem’s imaging capability. Coherence (σ) varies from 
σ = 0 for coherent radiation to σ = ∞ for fully incoher-
ent illumination. Only point sources are completely 
coherent with all light waves impinging perpendicu-
lar on the mask. In reality, we deal with light sources 
of finite size as illustrated in Figure 1.56, resulting 
in partially coherent light. The degree of coherence 
of the light on the resist plane is dependent on that 
size, and the resulting light is usually only partially 
coherent. The definition of coherence is:
 
S = NAc/NAo or also S = s/d 
(1.20)
FIGURE 1.54 Step and scan systems. With wafer steppers, 
the full image is exposed in one flash, whereas with the 
step and scan systems, the wafer stage and reticle stage 
move simultaneously in opposite directions during the 
exposure to scan the image onto the wafer.
FIGURE 1.55 Modulation and modulation transfer func-
tion (MTF).

[Page 62]
62   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
where NAc and NAo are the NA of condenser and 
objective lens, respectively, s is the size of the 
light source, and d is the diameter of the lens (see 
Figure 1.56).
MTF curves (also the modulation Mim in the 
image plane) for coherent, partially coherent, and 
incoherent illumination are shown in Figure 1.57. 
Contrary to the coherent case in which MTF remains 
constant up to the cutoff frequency νmax = NA/λ, the 
MTF curve for the incoherent case decreases mono-
tonically as the frequency increases up to a maxi-
mum value νmax of 2NA/λ. Because νmax = 1/2bmin 
and R = bmin, the maximum resolution for coherent 
light is predicted to be 0.5λ/NA; for incoherent light 
it is 0.25λ/NA (see also the derivation of Equations 
5.6 and 5.9 in Volume I). Completely incoherent 
light produces an MTF curve that has a greater 
resolution limit, but the MTF value only slowly 
increases as the feature size increases. For these rea-
sons, partially coherent light often is preferred.56 
Based on various tradeoffs, a coherence value of 
~0.7 typically is selected for a practical exposure. 
The cutoff frequency shown in Figure 1.57 defines 
the resolution limit of the exposure system. It is 
proportional to the NA of the lens and inversely 
proportional to the wavelength. Good sources for 
a more detailed treatise on the MTF are Bowden,56 
Sheaths,57 and Wolf.50
Critical MTF Values
For the practical resolution of a resist to approach 
the Rayleigh limit of the optical system, the resist 
should have an infinite contrast. Because a resist 
always has a finite contrast value, a greater degree 
of modulation is needed before an adequate image 
can be formed. Thus, the minimum MTF of an opti-
cal system to adequately define an image in a resist 
depends on the resist contrast value γ and is defined 
as the critical MTF, or CMTFresist. The relationship 
between the resist contrast and CMTF is given by:
 
CMTFResist =
−
+
10
1
10
1
1
1
γ
γ
 
(1.21)
A resist material with γ = 2 results in a CMTF value 
of 0.52. For an exposure system to adequately print 
a given feature size, the MTF of the feature size must 
be larger than or equal to the CMTFresist of the resist 
used. If the MTF of an exposure system is known 
for various feature sizes, knowledge of the resist 
contrast and Equation 1.21 will allow prediction of 
s
d
Light
source
Condensor
lens
Mask
Light
source
Condensor
lens
Mask
FIGURE 1.56 Coherent and incoherent light.
NA = 0.3
= 0
 = 436 nm
vmax = NA
vmax = 2NA
= 0.7
= 
8
100
80
60
40
20
% min
v (line pairs per mm)
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
FIGURE 1.57 Percent modulation in the image plane, % 
Mim, modulation of an image as a function of spatial fre-
quency ν for different coherency factors. σ = 0 (coherent), 
σ = 0.7 (partially coherent), and σ = infinite (incoherent). 
(From Brodie, I., and J.J. Muray. 1982. The physics of micro-
fabrication. New York: Plenum Press. With permission.52)

[Page 63]
Photolithography   63
the smallest features printable when applying that 
system.
Mask Alignment in Projection Printing
Fiducial Marks Thus far we have not dwelled much 
on the alignment or registration of the wafer to the 
mask in so-called aligners or printers. In projection 
lithography, the mask, or reticle, is held in place above 
the projection lens by a reticle stage. The projection 
lens focuses the high-resolution images of the reticle 
patterns precisely onto a wafer that is positioned 
and held in place by the wafer stage. During this 
critical alignment process, the wafer stepper aligns 
the mask image to alignment or fiducial marks on 
the wafer. This ensures that the pattern pictured by 
each mask layer is precisely aligned and “overlays” 
the previous layer. In the process of manufacturing 
a miniaturized device, several thin films are stacked 
on top of one another; each is patterned differently; 
and each wafer goes through the wafer stepper 20–30 
times. For a detailed description of mask alignment 
equipment, we refer the reader to the specialized lit-
erature.58 We discuss the types of errors that can be 
expected from mask alignment below.
Mask alignment errors can have catastrophic 
effects on the performance of integrated circuits and 
miniature machines, often rendering them inca-
pable of operating. For example, a device that has 
a minimum line width between 1 and 1.5 µm can 
only tolerate a variation of ±0.25 µm with respect 
to the alignment of masks without encountering 
greatly increased device failure rates. Product fail-
ure is caused mainly by poor alignment between the 
image being projected and the pre-existing patterns 
on the wafer. To align one layer with a previously 
fabricated layer when performing photolithography, 
appropriate fiducial marks are created on the mask. 
Different laboratories and foundries use different 
marks, and these may need to be placed in a specific 
position on the design. Additional requirements 
include a scribe lane around each chip to indicate 
where the wafer is to be cut when it is diced. The 
inclusion of a unique mask number and an indica-
tion of layer names on the mask make it possible 
to tell by looking how far through the fabrication 
process a wafer has progressed (http://www.dbanks.
demon.co.uk/ueng).  In Figure 1.58, we illustrate a 
mask set with many of the common features: fidu-
cial marks, arrows to point to the marks, test struc-
tures, and mask and layer numbers. Optical vernier 
(Figure 1.59) patterns created on the different lev-
els to be aligned are another common and useful 
feature. Vernier scales allow us to resolve alignment 
errors more accurately than the minimum feature 
size for a given process. To gain this fine resolution, 
vernier scales depend on accurately spaced lines. 
A pictorial tutorial on how to use vernier scales in 
lithography can be found on the Internet at http://
www.schlenkent.com/vernier.htm.
Types of errors encountered in projection printing 
are illustrated in Figure 1.60. They range from mis-
alignment to mask error, optical distortion, wafer or 
Test structures
Arrows point to
mark to make it
easy to ﬁnd
M001   L1
M001         L2
M001   L1   L2
Mask number
Layer i.d.
Scribe lane
Alignment
marks as they
appear when
drawn one
above the
other
A very simple alignment design for two
layers (example only, not to scale)
FIGURE 1.58 A simple set of fiducial marks and other 
important guiding features often found on masks. (Based 
on Banks at http://www.dbanks.demon.co.uk/ueng.)
Level 1
Vernier pattern
Level 2
Vernier pattern
Levels 1 and 2
Vernier aligned
FIGURE 1.59 Standard optical vernier test pattern 
for overlay evaluation. (From Moreau, W.H. 1988. 
Semiconductor lithography. New York: Plenum Press. With 
permission.28)

[Page 64]
64   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
mask expansion, and magnification change. Pattern 
registration capability is the degree to which the pat-
tern being printed can “fit” mask alignment marks 
and previously printed patterns. With an optical 
stepper, the step-and-repeat operation is performed 
by laser interferometer-controlled stages to a posi-
tioning accuracy of <40 nm, thereby allowing the 
registration of successive layers of a semiconductor 
device with similar precision. Because interferomet-
ric schemes enable sensitivities at less than 10 nm, 
it appears feasible that aligners compatible with line 
widths of 0.1 µm or even 50 nm can be developed. 
For CDs of 0.25 µm and even down to 0.20 µm, con-
ventional wafer steppers can be used. However, at 
design rules of 0.18 µm, step and scan technology 
becomes more important (see above under Types of 
Projection Methods).
Alignment in MEMS Alignment is more complex in 
3D miniaturized machines than that in IC manu-
facture. Not only does one deal with high-aspect-
ratio 3D features, which can cause problems for 
alignment systems with low DOF, but one also fre-
quently needs to align 3D features on both sides of 
the wafer. The objective is to position alignment 
marks opposite each other on the two surfaces of the 
same wafer, allowing accurate positioning of all later 
feature-defining photolithographic patterns. There 
are several options for front-to-back alignment. 
One not too elegant or desirable way is by etch-
ing holes through the silicon wafer. Another better 
way is to use infrared to see through the silicon or, 
with visible light, to use a double-sided mask align-
ment system defining marks on opposite sides of the 
wafer with a set of mirrors, two light sources, and 
two masks. In the latter double-sided mask aligner, 
mask 2 is first aligned to mask 1; then the wafer is 
inserted and aligned, and UV exposure of both sides 
can begin. Wafers polished on both sides are used to 
minimize light scattering. Two popular commercial 
double-sided alignment and exposure systems are 
by SUSS, Germany, and Electronic Visions, Austria. 
The operation of the SUSS MA-150 is illustrated 
in Figure  1.61. Cross-hair marks on the mask are 
aligned to cross-hair marks on the back of the wafer. 
In the alignment process the alignment marks on the 
mask are first viewed by two microscope objectives, 
and the image is electronically stored. The wafer is 
then loaded with the back-side alignment marks fac-
ing the microscope objectives, and the wafer stage is 
moved and adjusted until the marks are aligned to 
Errors:
Misalignment
Mask error
Optical distortion
Wafer expansion
Mask expansion
Magniﬁcation change
x - y
Pincushion
Barrel
Magniﬁcation error
Random
FIGURE 1.60 Sources of errors in projection printing.
Mask alignment keys
Mask
Front side
Wafer
Chuck
Wafer alignment
keys 
Microscope
objectives
(a)
(b)
(c)
X
Y
Microscope view
FIGURE 1.61 Double-sided alignment scheme for the 
SUSS MA-150 production mode system: the image of mask 
alignment marks is electronically stored (a); the alignment 
marks on the back side of the wafer are brought in focus 
(b); the position of the wafer is adjusted by translation 
and rotation to align the marks to the stored image (c). 
The right side illustrates the view on the computer screen 
as the targets are brought into alignment. [Adapted from 
product technical sheet (SUSS, Munich, Germany) and 
Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectrochemical 
systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.59]

[Page 65]
Photolithography   65
the electronically stored image. With the alignment 
finished, exposure of the mask on the front side of 
the wafer is completed either in contact or prox-
imity mode. On a SUSS MA-150 RH, with robotic 
 bottom-side alignment (BSA), a standard deviation 
less than 0.33 µm on front-to-back alignment has 
been demonstrated; of course, the alignment accu-
racy depends on a multitude of process parameters, 
but in a typical production mode this mask aligner 
can achieve an accuracy of better than 1 µm (3σ).
Because two-sided mask aligners and infrared 
microscopes are costly, researchers have been look-
ing into less expensive but still accurate alternatives. 
In the simplest, least-accurate approach, wafer flats 
can be used as reference for the double-sided align-
ment with, at best, 5-µm accuracy. In a slightly more 
sophisticated procedure, White and Wenzel60 use 
a simple laboratory jig as shown in Figure 1.62. In 
this approach, mask 1, containing only alignment 
marks, is contact printed onto photoresist-coated 
mask 2 while both are positioned snugly against 
the three pins on the jig. After developing and etch-
ing the alignment marks on mask 2, the individual 
alignment patterns from the two masks are trans-
ferred onto the opposite faces of a semiconductor 
wafer coated on both sides with photoresist. This is 
accomplished by sandwiching the resist-coated Si 
wafer between the two alignment masks (again set 
snugly against the three pins of the jig), exposing 
each wafer surface (directly for one side and through 
the large hole in the jig for the other side). The align-
ment patterns then are etched into the wafer and 
used in a conventional one-sided mask aligner. The 
authors estimate the predictable alignment errors 
to be less than 1 µm across a 250-µm-thick, 2-in. 
wafer. Kim et al.61 describe a different front-to-back 
alignment technique involving the visual alignment 
of stepper crossbars (alignment keys) to the center of 
a transparent thin diaphragm etched from the back 
of the wafer. These authors claim a <1-µm alignment 
error, but no experimental evidence is presented. 
Tatic-Lucic et al.62 elaborated on the latter type of 
double-sided alignment method and demonstrated 
a <2-µm error across a 4-in. wafer. In this upgrade, 
only alignment marks on the front of the wafer 
formed in a low-stress insulating layer are required. 
This insulating layer with the alignment marks is 
later etched from the back so that a freestanding 
diaphragm with a cavity underneath it results. This 
cavity makes the front-side alignment marks visible 
from the back. This allows visual alignment from 
both sides of the wafer with a traditional GCA 4800 
stepper. Yet another alternative to facilitate double-
sided alignment is the pickup of capacitive signals 
between conductive metal fingers on the mask and 
ridges on a small area of the Si wafer. This technique, 
requiring close proximity between mask and wafer, 
is only applicable for 1:1 proximity lithography as 
used, for example, in LIGA (see Chapter 10).
There are numerous problems associated with 
using classical exposure tools for fabricating highly 
non planar miniature machines. Therefore, maskless 
exposures to photons (in air) or electrons (in vacuum) 
with high-precision linear and rotary positioning 
stages and numerically controlled beam direction 
and stage position are gaining popularity with non-IC 
machinists. Nonplanar lithography methods are dis-
cussed in Chapter 2 on next generation lithographies.
Mathematical Expression for Resist Profiles
The slope of the resist edge (dz/dx) of an image of a 
mask feature of width W (see Figure 1.63), for a case 
where the dose D is low and the developer influence 
dominant, can be written as:
 
dz
dx
dz
dD
dD
dx
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(1.22)
FIGURE 1.62 Sketch of two-sided alignment jig with the 
two alignment masks in place for contact printing marks 
onto mask 2 (top mask). The cross represents an alignment 
mark on mask 1. (Courtesy of Dr. Richard White, University 
of California, Berkeley.)

[Page 66]
66   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
where z is the thickness dimension and x is the lat-
eral dimension in the resist.
The term dz/dD (developer elution term) is only 
resist- and resist-processing dependent. Additionally, 
the term dD/dx, the derivative of the energy or dose 
absorbed, also called the intensity profile, is a term 
dependent only on the exposure system and the 
object that is being imaged. The response of a posi-
tive resist to dose D is given by γp, the contrast of the 
resist, and the developer-process term in Equation 
1.22 can be approximated by63:
 
dz
dD
D
p
p
= −γ
 
(1.23)
where γp is the contrast of a positive resist as given 
by Equation 1.11, that is, the slope of the curve of 
thickness remaining versus log of exposure dose. In 
Equation 1.11, Dp
0 represents the exposure energy 
below which no resist removal by the solvent takes 
place, and Dp embodies the sensitivity of the resist 
or the exposure energy at which no resist remains 
after development. Exposure energy Dp
0 is indepen-
dent of the thickness t of the resist. Resist sensitivity 
Dp, on the other hand, will vary strongly with the 
thickness, predominantly through the absorbance 
of the film:
 
D
D
p
T
t
≈
.10α  
(1.24)
with α the resist absorbance per unit thickness and 
DT a threshold exposure that depends on resist 
type and is equal to or smaller than Dp
0. With these 
further  simplifications we can rewrite Equation 
1.23 as:
 
dz
dD
a
t)Dp
≈
+
1
(
α
 
(1.25)
where a is a constant for the resist and α is the 
absorption coefficient. The dD/dx term in Equation 
1.22, or the intensity profile, depends on the object 
and the imaging system. The intensity profile of the 
image is affected by the wavelength of exposure λ, 
the numerical aperture NA, the depth of focus of the 
exposure tool DOF, and the uniformity of illumina-
tion and can be written as:
 
dD
dx
2NA
1
k DOF
NA2
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
λ
−
× 
λ
2
 
(1.26)
where k is a parameter depending on the coherence 
of the light source. Based on Equations 1.25 and 
1.26, we can rewrite Equation 1.22, describing the 
resist profile, in identifiable parameters, as:
 
dz
dx
2NA
a
t) 1
k DOF
NA2
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
λ
+ α
−
×
λ
(
2
 
(1.27)
It follows that, for a steeper edge slope, dz/dx, the 
thickness and the absorption of the resist should be 
reduced, and the resist contrast γp should be as high 
as possible; finally the shorter the exposure wave-
length λ and the higher the NA, the sharper the 
image profile. Because a higher NA means a lower 
DOF, which deteriorates image profiles at larger 
depths, there is an optimum NA for each exposure/
resist system.
When imaging the grating of Figure 1.55 with 
a period p = 2b, the image intensity will be sinu-
soidal [D ≈ 1/2 (1 + M cos 2πx/p)], where x is the 
lateral dimension, and M is the normalized mod-
ulation. The maximum image edge slope is then 
simply dD/dx = πM/p, and Equation 1.27 may then 
θ
Mask
width: W
Substrate
Z
X
dz
dx
Resist
h
L1
L2
∆W= image bias
FIGURE 1.63 Edge slope of a positive resist, dz/dx primar-
ily determines the image bias, ∆W. The change of line 
width of a feature developed in resist with a topographic 
feature of height h is given by L2 – L1 = ∆CD.

[Page 67]
Photolithography   67
be written with the maximum of the dz/dx term 
expressed as a function of the normalized modula-
tion M, or:
 
dz
dx
M
a
t)D b
p
=
π
+ α
2(
 
(1.28)
From this expression, we would want to work with 
the largest possible image modulation M.63 Equation 
1.27 also implies that a high-contrast resist with a 
low absorbency will have wider exposure latitude 
and can tolerate a larger intensity variation in expo-
sure system output (Dp).
The image bias or error, ΔW, shown in Figure 1.63, 
is primarily a function of the resist edge slope and 
grows smaller as dz/dx becomes steeper. At a high 
radiation dose (>100 mJ/cm2), the profile of a posi-
tive resist is dominated by the absorption of radia-
tion, the reflected photons, and the quantum yield 
[Φ or G(s)] of the photochemical reaction (see Table 
1.9Aa). The absorbed energy per depth z dominates 
the rate of dissolution. In a developer-dominated 
(also force-developed) resist profile (also overcut), 
the profile recedes, and thinning of the whole resist 
layer occurs (see Table 1.9Ac). This thinning does not 
occur in the case of insolubilized traditional nega-
tive resists, rendering those resists less susceptible 
to overdevelopment (see Table 1.9B). For traditional 
negative resists, γn is not influenced by the solvent, 
and apart from some uncontrollable swelling of neg-
ative resists during development, the resist profile 
cannot be manipulated in the development step. By 
using a normal exposure dose with moderate devel-
oper influence, a “perfect” image transfer can be 
accomplished with a positive resist as shown in Table 
1.9 Ab. At those moderate doses, both the developer 
elution term and the energy absorption term con-
tribute to the formation of the resist profile.
From Figure 1.63, we can see how the exposure 
gradient results in the developed positive resist pro-
file having a larger opening on top, forming a so-
called normal or overcut profile. This profile results 
in a difference of dimension in subsequent pattern-
ing steps over features with different topography. 
The change in CDs, ΔCD, relates to profile angle θ 
and topography height h, and can be expressed as:
 
ΔCD = L1 − L2 = 2h (tanθ)−1 
(1.29)
A lithography simulator such as PROLITH/2 
(http://www.finle.com/index.asp) or Sample (http://
cuervo.eecs.berkeley.edu/Volcano/docs/sample3D.
html) may be used to perform resist profile simu-
lations.64 Experimentally determined parameters 
are fed into the simulated models to make the pre-
dicted resist profiles more accurate. An example is 
the measurement of deprotection reaction para-
meters of chemically amplified (CA) resists.65 The 
concentration of the protection groups determines 
the solubility of the resist, and consequently the 
simulation parameters related to the deprotection 
reaction will have a significant influence on the 
accuracy of profile simulations of CA resists. The 
measurement is carried out by incorporating a PEB 
system inside a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) 
spectrometer.
Planarization
Introduction
Microlithography process latitude can become seve-
rely limited by nonsmooth topography. Resist films 
crossing over steps have their local thickness altered; 
thinning occurs over high features, and pileup hap-
pens in low-lying regions. During exposure, the thin 
resist may get overexposed and the thick regions 
underexposed. Moreover, resist pileup regions may 
exhibit/standing wave effects (see below), leading to 
resolution losses. Reflective notching on buried topo-
graphical features could decrease resolution even fur-
ther (see Figure 1.64). This rough topography creates 
problems for uniformity of subsequent layers, creating 
a need to planarize surfaces after each new layer. As 
seen above, practical DOF should encompass device 
topography, resist thickness, wafer flatness, focus, and 
tilt errors for the projected image to remain sharp over 
the whole wafer. Shallow DOF of high NA-optical-
exposure tools, standing waves, and reflective notch-
ing can be solved by using very thin resist layers on 
planar substrates or by planarizing resist layers on 
nonplanar substrates. Chip makers stack metal lines 
four layers high, and five- and six-level devices are 
possible. These “high-rise” chips need rigorous inter-
level planarization. The SEM image in Figure 1.65a 
is a cross-section of a modern IC device showing 
the various metallization lines (yellow) embedded 

[Page 68]
68   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
in passivation material (e.g., silicon nitride). In 
Figure 1.65b we show an SEM section through 4-MB 
dynamic random access memory (DRAM) cells. The 
section was made by using a focused ion beam micro-
scope a technique capable of performing corrective 
microsurgery on IC chips. The extremely high features 
often encountered in micromachining pose further 
challenging planarization problems. Strategies often 
rely on an interplay of deposition and removal of sac-
rificial layers (e.g., resist); some of the terminology 
used in this  section will become better understood 
after reading Chapter 3 on dry etching and Chapter 7 
that covers additive processes.
Planarization Strategies
Planarization provides a means of having very flat 
wafers even after previous patterning steps, and 
allows for very high-resolution (high R) lithography 
with limited depth of field (low DOF). Planarization 
methods provide degrees of smoothing rather 
Polysilicon
Substrate
STI
STI
UV exposure light
Mask
Exposed
photoresist
Unexposed
photoresist
Notched photoresist
Edge
Surface
FIGURE 1.64 Reflective notching degrades resist profile. STI, shallow trench isolation.
FIGURE 1.65 (a) SEM image of a cross-section of a modern IC device showing the various metallization lines (yellow) 
embedded in passivation material (silicon nitride, for example. (Courtesy of IBM.) (b) SEM section through 4-MB DRAM 
cells. The section was made using a focused ion beam microscope. (Courtesy of FIB International.)

[Page 69]
Photolithography   69
than true absolute flatness. In IC fabrication, the 
 chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) process is 
used for interlevel dielectric layers (IDL), shallow 
trench isolation (STI—see Figure 1.64), and copper 
metallization (the “damascene” process).
A major cause for nonsmooth topography is 
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of dielectric lay-
ers. CVD methods experience difficulty depositing 
thin layers conformably. More film tends to build 
on flat than vertical surfaces, and the pronounced 
tendency for narrow spaces to be covered (shallow 
trench isolation) before being completely filled in 
creates voids. Smoothing in this case should entail 
two components: filling in gaps and planarizing a 
film’s top surface.
In the planarizing etch-back process, hilly con-
tours left behind by, for example, a CVD oxide 
deposition technique, are planarized by spin-on 
glasses (SOGs) or resist sacrificial layers, after which 
both sacrificial layer and oxide are etched back 
simultaneously. As its name implies, a SOG dielec-
tric is spun onto a wafer as a liquid and then cured 
at elevated temperatures. The etch-back process 
is adjusted, usually by adding oxygen to the etch 
gases to cause the sacrificial layer and the underly-
ing film, principally oxide or other dielectrics such 
as PECVD silicon nitride, to etch at equal rates (see 
Chapter 3). In the etch-back planarization, photo-
resists are more popular than SOG because they 
tend to provide a more planar result.66 SOG often 
is used in the dielectric sandwich approach for nar-
row gap filling. Using many thin dielectric layers 
piled on top of one another until the narrow spaces 
between metal lines are completely filled averts 
voids. In this sandwich, layers of CVD oxide alter-
nate with coats of a SOG dielectric. Etching back 
with photoresist may then planarize the top sur-
face of the film.
There are two types of SOGs: silicates (inorganic) 
and siloxanes (organic). The film properties of both 
resemble those of low-temperature CVD glasses. 
Silicate films tend to absorb water, resulting in a 
higher relative dielectric constant. In both cases, 
films tend to crack because of tensile strength as 
they are densified at 300–500°C. Film stress may be 
as high as 200 MPa in tension, but annealing low-
ers tension considerably. Silicate glasses are more 
prone to cracking, but doping with phosphorus 
makes them more crack resistant. Even phosphosili-
cate glasses can only be applied in layers of 1000 Å; 
thus, often two or three coats are required. It is eas-
ier to apply siloxane in a thicker film, for example, 
greater than 3000 Å. Hitachi Chemical Company 
America, Ltd. (http://www.hitachi.com) has devel-
oped an organosiloxane SOG able to deposit films 
thicker than 1 mm. As gaps in shallow trench isola-
tion become increasingly narrow, the gap-filling to 
planarize a surface becomes more difficult. At gap 
spacings less than 0.3 µm, current SOGs fail to fill 
the gap completely and are prone to leave a small 
circular or teardrop-shaped void. Such voids appear 
with increasing frequency as the gap size decreases 
and as the gap aspect ratio increases. The effect is 
most pronounced with re-entrant angles.67
Replacing the oxides with a type of dielectric that 
fills and planarizes much the same as a liquid film 
may help to eliminate the severe topologies that 
CVD oxides create. Polyimides fit that dielectric by 
forming crack-free films that have virtually no pin-
holes, absorb stress, and generally exhibit a much 
lower dielectric constant than oxides. Currently, 
polyimides that will planarize a large pitch geom-
etry to a 90% level with a single coat are available. 
Reluctance to expand the use of polyimide at this 
point is linked to its poor barrier properties toward 
moisture and ions. Also, the prevailing tendency is 
to trust inorganic CVD oxides more than organic 
polyimides.66
Because the electrical properties of SOGs are 
poor compared with CVD silicon oxides, an ideal 
solution would be if the CVD process itself filled 
the spaces between metal lines and planarized the 
top surface without breaking the vacuum within 
a single processing chamber. One example of this 
type of processing is electron cyclotron resonance 
CVD (ECRCVD) (see Figure 7.45 illustrating pla-
narization using ECRCVD). ECRCVD uses ECR to 
generate high-density plasma that can deposit CVD 
SiO2 at high rates while temperatures and pressures 
remain low. As deposition proceeds, the wafer is 
radio frequency-biased so that argon atoms from 
the plasma can simultaneously sputter-etch the sub-
strate. The sputtering keeps submicrometer spaces 
open until they are filled. By carefully balancing the 

[Page 70]
70   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
two processes, one can deposit a film and sputter it 
back in such a way that high-aspect-ratio spaces are 
completely filled while the oxide surface planarizes. 
If planarization needs improvement, ECRCVD can 
be combined with an etch back.
CMP combines mechanical action with chemi-
cal etching; it typifies a planarization technique 
where a wafer with an uneven surface is polished 
in an abrasive suspended in an alkaline solution on 
a polishing pad (see Figure 1.66). Material removal 
rate is controlled by the slurry flow and pH, applied 
pressure on the polishing head, rotational speed, 
and operating temperature. Although slow (with 
removal rates less than 100 nm/min), CMP results 
in large surfaces with a roughness less than 1 nm.
The CMP process has been around for a long 
time but became popular only in the 1990s when 
it became one of the crucial steps in the manufac-
turing of IC chips. The reason CMP became crucial 
is because of its ability to achieve defect-free global 
planarization of surfaces. The chemicals in the 
slurry have a “softening” effect on the surface to be 
polished, thus reducing damage when the abrasives 
abrade the surface. Oxides, polysilicon, and metal 
topography can be planarized this way. For oxide 
or silicon polishing, an alkaline slurry of colloidal 
silica (SiO2 particles in a KOH solution or NH4OH) 
is continuously fed to the pad/wafer interface. CMP 
is also popular with micromachinists. For example, 
Sniegowski68 is using CMP to enhance the manu-
facturability of polysilicon surface micromachinery. 
CMP planarization alleviates processing problems 
associated with the fabrication of multilevel struc-
tures, eliminates design constraints linked with 
nonplanar topography, and provides an avenue for 
integrating different process technologies. A typical 
CMP setup looks very similar to a lapping machine, 
but the precision is much higher.
The damascene process (named after an art form 
from the Damascus, Syria area) for inlaid metal 
objects (see Chapter 8, Figures 8.41 and 8.42) used 
for copper metallization is also dependent on CMP 
as one of its key steps.
A thin film of Au, Al, or Cu can effectively pla-
narize when melted briefly with a laser. Planarization 
occurs rapidly because of the high surface tension 
and low viscosity of clean liquid metals.69
Photolithography Resolution 
Enhancement Technology
Introduction
Since the mid-1980s, the demise of optical lithog-
raphy has been predicted as being only a few 
years away, but each time a new resolution limit 
approaches, some new method extends the useful 
life of the technology. The three main technologies 
involved in printing ICs and other miniaturized 
devices are resist technology, mask technology, and 
the exposure tool, all of which need to be addressed 
to optimize lithography resolution.
From the previous section, we learned that opti-
mized production lithography uses projection print-
ing operated close to the conventional Rayleigh 
diffraction limit with features about the size of 
the wavelength of the exposure source printed. In 
this section, we learn about resolution enhance-
ment technology (RET) enabling subdiffraction 
printing through improvements in resist strategies, 
mask engineering, and exposure tools. However, 
the cost of RET is often prohibitive, and in the 
past, printing with shorter wavelengths has proven 
more economical.25 But with CDs of 65 nm, one 
is forced to rely on RET. Miniaturization science is 
well suited to contribute to the development of new 
RET techniques,  especially in the area of new mask 
engineering.
CMP slurry
Pad
Pressure
Head
Wafer
Platen
Conditioner
FIGURE 1.66 Schematic of chemomechanical-mechanical 
polishing (CMP). The CMP process involves pressing the 
face of the wafer to be polished against a compliant 
polymeric polishing pad and generating relative motion 
between the two surfaces. A slurry consisting of abrasives 
and chemicals is fed in between the interface between 
the wafer and the pad.

[Page 71]
Photolithography   71
Strategies for Improved Resolution 
through Improved Resist Performance
Chemically Amplified Resists
Quantum yields for typical positive-tone resists are 
0.2–0.3; for negative-tone resists they are 0.5–1 (see 
Table 1.6). As several photons are required for one 
useful scission (positive resist) or polymerization 
(negative) event, this places a fundamental limit on 
the photosensitivity of these resists. The situation 
is worse at shorter exposing wavelengths. Typical 
near-UV positive resists (e.g., DNQ-sensitized 
novolak resins) are not useful for deep UV lithog-
raphy because of the strong unbleachable absorp-
tion at less than 300 nm (reminder: bleaching is the 
decrease in optical density during exposure enabling 
further penetration of the resist as the top layers are 
being cleared). The short wavelength absorption 
coefficients of the base resin and the added sensitiz-
ers are too high to allow uniform imaging through 
practical resist thicknesses (0.5–1 µm for ICs).
In the late 1970s, commercially available resists 
performed poorly at short wavelengths; those with a 
good plasma etching resistance, frequently based on 
novolak resins, had excessive unbleachable absorp-
tion, whereas those with an acceptable transparency, 
such as methacrylate-based resists, had insufficient 
etching resistance. This is of even greater concern in 
miniaturization science where often much thicker 
resist layers are used. Short wavelengths do not pen-
etrate thick resist films completely, and very long 
exposure to dry or wet etchants, needed to create the 
desired features, degrades the resist. An additional 
problem, touched on before, is that deep UV optics 
absorb more light, thus making less light available at 
the resist plane.
To circumvent the intrinsic sensitivity limitation 
of low quantum yield resists, chemical amplifica-
tion was proposed in 1980 and developed at IBM 
(http://www.ibm.com) in the early 1980s.37,70–72 In 
this approach, a single photon initiates a cascade 
of chemical reactions of the sort that characterizes 
a silver halide photographic emulsion system. This 
amplification or gain is based on the photogene-
ration of a catalytic photoproduct, often an acidic 
species that catalyzes the scission of the base resin 
for a positive-tone resist or the cross-linking of the 
resin for a negative-tone resist. The overall quan-
tum efficiency of the catalyzed reaction is higher 
than the efficiency for the initial acid generation.73 
Within a resist, which has been sensitized with an 
onium salt such as diphenyliodonium hexafluo-
roarsenate, a Lewis acid is released on photolysis. 
Compared with conventional free-radical initia-
tors, the onium salts have excellent thermal stabil-
ity and are not sensitive to oxygen.29 In the case 
of a positive resist, the released acid, on baking at 
100°C, may catalyze the cleavage or scission of the 
resist, making it more soluble. This type of imag-
ing involves the usual formation of a latent image 
during exposure. However, the latent image, a 3D 
distribution of the catalytic photoproduct, does 
not immediately generate a concomitant change in 
dissolution rate, as do regular resists. Image forma-
tion only takes place after an activating thermal 
step—to diffuse the photogenerated acid (PGA) 
and complete the reaction—in a postexposure bake 
(PEB) at 100°C. A typical turnover rate for one 
acid catalyst molecule is in the range of 800–1200 
cleavages. Resists amplified this way may attain 
a photosensitivity of 5 mJ/cm2 or better. Tenfold 
sensitivity increases are common. Both the acid-
catalyzed scission and cross-linking reactions are 
highly dependent on the PEB temperature, time, 
and method. The control of these parameters rep-
resents a significant difference with conventional 
resists. In Figure 1.67, a schematic representation of 
a generalized chemically amplified resist process is 
shown, as well as typical chemicals. Depending on 
the developer being polar or nonpolar, a positive 
or a negative image can be generated. Their dual-
tone nature makes these resist systems more flex-
ible. Chemical amplification resists are continually 
improving and today constitute an important foun-
dation for the design of advanced resist systems for 
use in short-wavelength (<300 nm) lithographic IC 
technologies and miniaturization science applica-
tions. It was the advent of chemical amplification 
that made 248-nm lithography finally possible.
The pioneering chemical amplification work 
involved a catalytic deprotection scheme based on 
poly(tert-butoxycarbonyloxystyrene) and a triph-
enylsulfonium hexafluoroantimonate onium salt 
(Figure 1.68), in which a thermally stable, acid-labile 

[Page 72]
72   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
tert-butoxycarbonyl group (tBOC) is used to mask 
the hydroxyl functionality of poly(vinylphenol).24
In this amplification scheme, development is based 
on polarity changes rather than molecular weight 
changes through scission and polymerization. On 
exposure to deep UV and subsequent baking to dif-
fuse the photogenerated acid (PGA) and complete 
the reaction, the acid cleaves the labile tBOC pro-
tecting group to form a polar polyvinyl phenolic 
polymer. Deprotection (cleavage) of pendant groups 
(b)
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
ROH2C
CH3
CH2
(CH2 CH)x
ROH2C
CH2OR
CH2OR
CH2OR
CH2OR
N
CI
CCl3
CH
DDT
Cl
Ar
CCl3
(CH2OR)n
CCl3
x
OH
OH
(
)
Matrix resins
Cresol novolak
Poly (hydroxystryrene)
Photoacid generators
Onium salts
S-triazine derivatives
Cross-linking agents
Melamine derivatives
Benzyl alcohol derivatives
(a)
Coated
resist
Substrate
Expose
Imaging radiation
Mask
Postexposure bake
Latent image
(distributed catalytic
photoproduct [C])
Nonpolar
develop
Polar
develop
Region of altered
dissolution
characteristic
Positive imaging
Negative imaging
C C C
C C C
FIGURE 1.67 (a) Schematic representation of a generalized chemically amplified resist process. Depending on the devel-
oper being polar or nonpolar a positive or negative image can be created. (b) Typical chemicals used in amplification 
type resists. [Part (a) based on Reichmanis, E., L.F. Thompson, O. Nalamasu, A. Blakeney, and S. Slater. 1992. Chemically 
amplified resists for deep-UV lithography: a new processing paradigm. Microlithogr World November/December:7–14;74 
Part (b) based on Lamola, A.A., C.R. Szmanda, and J.W. Thackeray. 1991. Chemically amplified resists. Solid State Technol 
53:53–60. With permission.75]
(CH2 CH)
2
3
(CH2CH)
3
O
O
O
C
C
CH
3
CH
3
CH
H
OH
C
C
H3C
CO
CH
CH3
3
CH
3
CH
2
CH
=
+
H
+
+
Lipophilic
 PBOST
Hydrophilic
    PHOST
Regeneration of
         acid
Acid-catalyzed deprotection for polarity change (tBOC resist);
cleavage of a pendant group to convert a lipophilic polymer
(PBOCST) to a hydrophilic polymer (PHOST)
FIGURE 1.68 Chemical amplification with a catalytic deprotection scheme based on poly(tert-butoxycarbonyloxysty-
rene) (PBOCST) and a triphenylsulfonium hexafluoroantimonate onium salt, in which a thermally stable, acid-labile 
tert- butoxycarbonyl group (tBOC) is used to mask the hydroxyl functionality of poly(vinylphenol). (Reichmanis, E., O. 
Nalamasu, F.M. Houlihan, and A.E. Novembre. 1999. Radiation chemistry of polymeric materials. Polym Int 48:1053–59.24)

[Page 73]
Photolithography   73
in tBOC induces a polarity change and allows for 
dual-tone (positive/negative) imaging. By using a 
non polar solvent, the unexposed resist is removed 
and a negative image formed. A polar solvent is used 
to remove the exposed area, resulting in a positive 
image. By the mid-1980s, tBOC was used in the pro-
duction of millions of 1-MB DRAM devices at IBM.37
We encountered dual-tone resists earlier when 
reviewing the novolak/DNQ system by Rohm and 
Haas (see Figure 1.8).
The chemical amplification resist family today 
has become prolific and can be grouped into cate-
gories according to imaging mechanisms: deprotec-
tion (see tBOC), depolymerization, rearrangement, 
intramolecular dehydration, condensation, and cat-
ionic polymerization (SU-8). Cationically polym-
erizing monomers such as epoxies and vinyl 
compounds and condensation reactions between 
phenol formaldehyde resins and amino-based cross-
linkers increase the molecular weight after exposure. 
Changes in polarity are achieved through the acid-
catalyzed deprotection of a variety of esters.
Although chemically amplified resists provide 
reasonable throughput for e-beam and deep UV 
lithographies (short wavelengths), they often suffer 
from poor environmental stability and too high a 
sensitivity to processing conditions. Environmental 
effects (oxygen) cause surface inhibition by neutral-
ization of photogenerated acid in the top resist layer. 
A resist topcoat can be used to minimize this effect. 
Unfortunately, such a multilayer resist further com-
plicates the photoresist process.
Antireflection Coatings: Thin 
Film Interference Effects
When using single-layer resists, the deleterious 
effects  of thin film interference effects need to be 
overcome for good CD control, especially of sub-
micrometer features. The most important thin film 
interference effects are schematically illustrated in 
Figure 1.66. The effects manifest themselves as non-
vertical resist profiles, line-width variations, reflective 
notching, scumming (underexposed resist leaving 
organics behind after development), and alignment 
inaccuracies. Solutions to thin film interference 
effects involve the use of antireflective coatings and 
the use of MLRs (see below). Antireflective coatings 
overcome interference effects caused by reflections 
from either the top or bottom of the resist (Figure 
1.69a and b). Example antireflective coatings are the 
ARC coatings (trademark from Brewer; http://www. 
brewerscience.com), liquid resins that are cast into a 
film before coating the photosensitive resist layer. A 
key design element is for the cast film to absorb light 
very efficiently at specific wavelengths. In designing 
the light-absorbing properties of ARC coats, two strat-
egies were pursued. One is the mixing of dyes with a 
polymer resin. The second is to design the polymer 
with molecular chains that intrinsically absorb light.
When a resist is exposed to monochromatic radi-
ation, standing waves are formed in the resist as a 
consequence of coherent interference from reflecting 
substrates creating a periodic intensity distribution 
in the direction perpendicular to the surface (see 
Figures 1.69c and 1.70). The standing wave effect 
leads to light intensity variations, perpendicular to 
the resist film, of as much as a factor of three from 
one position to another. The standing wave effect is 
a strong function of resist thickness, and exposure 
variations resulting from variation in resist thick-
ness in the vicinity of steps result in changes in 
(a)
(b)
Dose
to
clear
Dose
to
clear
(d)
hv
hv
hv
hv
Photoresist
Reﬂective
notching
Silicon substrate
Al
Si3 N4
Standing
wave
proﬁle
(c)
FIGURE 1.69 Thin film interference effects. Light 
reflected from resist/Si (a) or Si3N4/Si (b) interfaces through 
various resist or nitride thicknesses changes the dose 
necessary to clear the resist. Also, standing-wave profile 
(c) and reflective notching effects (d) are shown. (From 
Horn, M.W. 1991. Antireflection layers and planarization 
for microlithography. Solid State Technol 31:57–62. With 
permission.76)

[Page 74]
74   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
line width. Because standing waves are the result of 
coherent interference of monochromatic light, using 
broadband illumination can decrease the effect. To 
minimize standing wave effects, one also can use 
thinner resists (<0.3 µm), but these cause a degrada-
tion in line-width control over varying topography. 
Reflective notching (Figures 1.69d and 1.70) comes 
about when light is reflected from the more reflec-
tive topological features buried in the resist.
Thin Film Imaging
Introduction Variations in resist thickness over 
steps lead to line-width control problems (see 
Figure 1.71). This lack of line-width control and the 
limitations of low source intensity and shallow DOF 
are overcome in thin film imaging (TFI). In TFI, the 
projected image is confined to a thin layer near the 
surface of the resist. Because the thin exposed layer 
is optically isolated from the substrate, the previ-
ously mentioned deleterious effects such as standing 
waves and scattering from underlying topography 
are avoided. There is often a need for a thick pla-
narizing resist underneath because of topography 
and because a very thin film by itself usually does 
not have the required etch resistance. As a conse-
quence, TFI usually involves a surface modified 
thick resist in the case of top surface imaging (TSI) 
or a multilevel resist stack (bilayer, trilayer, or multi-
layer). After the image has been transferred onto the 
thin top surface layer, it is transferred to the under-
lying resist layer(s). Pattern transfer often involves 
dry etching in oxygen plasma, that is, “dry devel-
opment.” We will discuss single-layer resist TSI first, 
and then discuss multilayer resist methods.
Thin Film Imaging in Single-Layer Resist—Top Surface 
Imaging Top surface imaging (TSI) is one approach 
to thin film imaging (TFI). In TSI, only the top sur-
face of an SLR is modified under light exposure. A 
single layer of a thick, opaque resist is used, and 
exposure leads to  differential diffusion/reaction 
rates of a silicon-containing compound into either 
exposed or unexposed areas (depending on the 
resist tone). It was Taylor et al.77 who discovered that 
small amounts of Si (about 10%) drastically lower 
the etching rates of organic polymers. Areas contain-
ing Si convert to SiOx in oxygen plasma and thus 
become plasma resistant.
 Standing waves cause nonuniform exposure
along the thickness of the photoresist ﬁlm
Incident wave
Reﬂected wave
Te use of antireﬂective
coatings, dyes, and ﬁlters can
help prevent interference.
Incident wave
Antireﬂective
Film
Substrate
Substrate
Film
Photoresist
Photoresist
coating
FIGURE 1.70 Standing waves and antireflective coatings.

[Page 75]
Photolithography   75
The DESIRE (dry etching of silylated image resist) 
process by UCB (Belgium, http://www.ucb.be), illus-
trated in Figure 1.72, exemplifies a single-layer resist 
TSI scheme. In this case, a short exposure of a thick 
layer of planarizing positive DQN-novolak resist 
produces latent images of indenecarboxylic acid. In 
a postexposure bake, in a vacuum, the layer is con-
verted into a film enabling selective silylating. In the 
silylating process, Si atoms only diffuse/react on/
into the surface of the exposed resist, locally forming 
a thin Si-containing resist layer. The polymer film is 
typically exposed and silylated to a depth of at least 
1000 Å to provide sufficient differential plasma etch 
resistance for pattern transfer. An oxygen plasma 
etch subsequently removes the unexposed, unre-
acted resist, and the silylated mask remains because 
of the formation of a protecting silicon oxide layer; 
a negative-tone image of the mask results. The 
DESIRE process in Figure 1.72 illustrates not only 
dry resist development but also image reversal.
A major advantage of TFI techniques is that only 
the surface of the resist requires exposure, which, 
coupled with the anisotropic nature of plasma etch-
ing, allows for the use of thick resist layers that pla-
narize the underlying topography to a higher degree 
than resists with more typical thicknesses could. 
The lithography process also remains unaffected by 
substrate reflection, and resist thickness variation as 
light does not have to penetrate the thickness of the 
resist. Image quality with DESIRE is excellent. An 
advantage of TSI over bilayer or multilayer TFI tech-
niques is that only one single layer is spun on before 
silylation. DESIRE made it from research and devel-
opment into manufacturing in the late 1980s at TI 
(http://www.ti.com).78 It was used for the top metal 
level patterning in DRAM manufacture. This level 
had the most reflectivity and most topography. The 
resist that TI applied, using a standard coater, was 
the Plasmask® 200-g from Japan Synthetic Rubber 
(JSR, http://necsv01.keidanren.or.jp/A2J/data/06025.
html). Two additional machines, a silylation tool 
and a dry develop etcher, were developed for the 
TSI process. Both liquid and vapor silylation are 
feasible and have been compared at IBM.78 The use 
of a dry etch in development leads occasionally to 
FIGURE 1.71 The dimensional variation of resist lines going over steps is a well-known phenomenon: reflection of light 
by the nonvertical sidewalls of the step causes increased incoupling of light into the resist adjacent to the step, leading 
to a reduction in line width. Similar effects may be observed on reflective materials with a particularly coarse-grained 
structure. 
Expose
Silylate
SiO2
O2 RIE
Resist
Topography
Substrate
Mask
FIGURE 1.72 The DESIRE (dry etching of silylated image 
resist) process developed by UCB Chemical Company. 
Exposure and silylation are confined to the upper layers of 
the resist coating.

[Page 76]
76   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
so-called grass residue in open areas (see Chapter 3, 
Figure 3.23).  The grass is assumed to stem from 
sputtered silicon from silylated areas. With higher 
plasma density systems, less grass forms. This can be 
explained by the lower energy of the ions attacking 
the resist surface.
Pure poly(hydroxystyrene) (PHOST) (sensitivity 
22 mJ/cm2) has been studied extensively as a model 
TSI resist for use with 193-nm optical projection 
lithography.79
Multilayer Resist Thin Film Imaging In the bilayer TFI 
approach shown in Figure 1.73, the resist stack con-
sists of a thick, planarizing bottom layer and a thin, 
top imaging overlayer. These layers function syn-
ergistically to achieve higher resolution otherwise 
impossible to obtain with thick, planarizing single-
layer resists. After exposure and development of the 
thin imaging overlayer, the pattern is transferred to 
the planarizing underlayer. An intermediate isolation 
layer sometimes separates the planarizing and imag-
ing layers, preventing their mixing. Depending on 
the exposure dose and development condition (wet 
etching) of the planarizing resist layer, an undercut 
or overcut may be generated. Alternatively, if good 
fidelity of the mask pattern is desired, dry directional 
etching (RIE) may be used (see Figure 1.73).
In a trilayer system, a thin imaging layer is spun 
onto a thin oxygen dry etch-resistant hard mask 
coated on top of a thick planarizing layer. The 
hard  mask may be a plasma-deposited or spin-on 
silicon oxide.
With the advent of 193-nm lithography, TFI will 
become increasingly popular as radiation is readily 
absorbed by most photoresists at this short wave-
length. Once extreme UV is used as the exposure 
radiation of choice (see below), widespread use of 
TFI might be unavoidable.78
Strategies for Improved Resolution 
through Improved Mask Technology
Background
Besides improved resists, mask engineering also pro-
vides important contributions to RET. Interestingly, 
Richard Feynman in the second of his now famous 
lectures on micromachining imagined a microma-
chined mask with miniature levers and valves that 
could be used over and over to generate different 
patterns.80 The mask techniques described above are 
timid attempts to use micromachining technology 
for mask engineering. In one scenario, by control-
ling the phase and the amplitude of the light at the 
image plane in a phase-shifting mask, resolution 
and depth of focus are greatly improved.
In miniaturization science, where we often print 
high-aspect-ratio features, masks with an expanded 
DOF are favored—but masks with increased 
resolution remain of greater importance in IC 
manufacture.
Phase-Shifting Masks
One method that allows further improvement of 
photolithography resolution and DOF at a given 
wavelength (λ) and NA is to carefully control light 
diffraction using constructive and destructive inter-
ference to help create a circuit pattern. The idea 
of selectively altering the phase of the light pass-
ing through certain areas of a photomask to take 
advantage of destructive interference to improve 
resolution and DOF in optical lithography was 
first proposed in 1982.81 The method is based on 
building PSMs. Using such a mask one can con-
trol both the amplitude and the phase of the light 
Isolation layer may be omitted
Tin imaging resist layer
Planarizing
resist layer
Topographic
feature
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Wet
development
RIE
FIGURE 1.73 Multilayer resist scheme. Thick planarizing 
underlayer for planarizing of wafer topography, optional 
intermediate isolation layer, and thin imaging overlayer 
for optimum resolution. Wet etching (development) and 
dry etching (RIE) produce different resist profiles.

[Page 77]
Photolithography   77
and, in particular, arrange the mask so that light 
with the opposite phase emerges from adjoining 
mask features. Destructive interference can be used 
to cancel some of the image-spreading effects of 
diffraction.
In Figure 1.74, we illustrate the effect for three 
nearby mask apertures; a classical transmission 
mask is added for comparison.82 The amplitude pro-
file at the plane of the classical transmission mask 
consists of three square-cornered features with posi-
tive amplitude. The amplitude at the wafer level is 
broadened and rounded but does not change sign. 
With a PSM, a shifter layer results in a reversal of 
the phase of the light at the mask. As the photoresist 
only shows sensitivity toward the intensity of the 
light and not to the sign, the three bright features 
develop identically, and the areas where the light of 
opposite phases causes destructive interference form 
very dark contrast lines.
One type of PSM is an alternating aperture 
PSM (AAPSM), also called a hard shifter. Going 
beyond the traditional chrome-on-quartz approach, 
AAPSMs accomplish the task of shifting the phase of 
the light by etching regions of the quartz substrate 
to the precise depth (which depends on the wave-
length of the light to be used to expose the wafer) 
where shifting is desired and have become known 
as Levenson-type PSMs. The etched areas cause the 
light to become 180° out of phase with the light 
passing through the unetched regions (Figure 1.75).
An important alternative PSM is the embedded 
attenuated PSM (EAPSM). EAPSMs, or soft shifter 
masks, are similar to ordinary (binary) masks in that 
a quartz substrate is coated with a material in which 
the design is etched. The most common material 
used today is molybdenum silicide. Unlike chrome, 
molybdenum silicide allows a small percentage 
of the light to pass through; however, the amount 
passing through is “soft” and does not expose the 
resist on the wafer. Where it does pass through, the 
light is 180° out of phase compared with light pass-
ing through the quartz alone. Where the coating 
and quartz meet, light interferes in such a way as 
to sharpen the edges of the design. The most dif-
ficult task in the case of EAPSMs is to create a thin 
film structure with the desired transmission (4–8%) 
and phase (180°) at a specific wavelength (i-line 
or deep UV) that can be patterned, inspected, and 
repaired using currently available tools.83 It has been 
+
_
+
_
+
_
+
_
+
_
+
_
Chrome patterns    Shifter layer
(a) Conventional
(b) Phase shifting
Light intensity
distribution on a wafer
Light amplitude
distribution on a wafer
Light amplitude
distribution on a mask
FIGURE 1.74 Comparison of a conventional transmission 
mask (a) and a “Levenson-type” phase-shifting mask (b). 
Both contain opaque chrome (Cr) regions, but the light 
passing through some of the apertures of the phase-
shifting mask also passes through the transparent mate-
rial of the phase shifter. This reverses the phase of the 
light at the mask, giving rise to destructive interference at 
the photoresist plane. (From Levenson, M.D. 1992. Phase-
shifting mask strategies: isolated dark lines. Microlithogr 
World 6:6–12. With permission.82)
Etched quartz
(180° phase)
Quartz
(0° phase)
Chrome
Reticle
Phase
(energy)
Intensity
(energy2)
Wafer
Resist threshold
Remaining resist
after develop
+
_
FIGURE 1.75 A hard shifter alternating aperture PSM or 
AAPSM.

[Page 78]
78   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
estimated that a PSM mask for 100-nm work could 
cost up to $50,000. This makes RET often synony-
mous for Really Expensive Technology!
How narrow a feature can one make using PSMs? 
Oki Electric Industries (http://www.oki.de) sells a 
metal semiconductor field effect transistor (MESFET) 
device with a 0.18-µm gate patterned by i-line litho-
graphy, ordinarily considered capable of only 0.5 µm 
resolution!82 Thus, PSMs can easily improve resolu-
tion by 50–100%. Using 248-nm deep UV lithog-
raphy researchers at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory have 
reported sub-100-nm features using phase-shifting 
masks. Because the same method is applicable to 
193-nm radiation, the approach appears promising 
for further extending photolithography.84
The use of TSI and PSM techniques can reduce k1 
in Equation 1.16 to 0.4, well below the 0.61 expected 
from Rayleigh’s criterion.
Optical Proximity Correction
Optical proximity correction (OPC) printing was 
first developed in the early 1970s as a means of 
addressing lithography distortions in IC manu-
facturing. The goal is to produce smaller features 
in an IC using current lithography equipment by 
enhancing the “printability” of a given wafer pat-
tern. OPC applies systematic changes to photomask 
geometries to compensate for nonlinear image dis-
tortions. These distortions include line-width varia-
tions (nonuniform CDs), line-end shortening, and 
rounding of sharp corners. Sharp features, in gen-
eral, are lost because higher spatial frequencies are 
lost as a result of diffraction. Causes of these distor-
tions include reticle pattern fidelity, optical proxim-
ity effects, and diffusion and loading effects during 
resist and etch processing. Thus, a mask incorporat-
ing OPC is a system that negates undesirable dis-
tortion effects during pattern transfer. In OPC, the 
traditional (WYSIWYG—what you see is what you 
get) relationship between layout, mask, and sili-
con is no longer valid. OPC works by making small 
changes to the IC layout that anticipate these dis-
tortions. To compensate for line-end shortening, 
for example, the line is extended using a hammer-
head shape that results in a line in the resist that 
is much closer to the original intended layout. To 
compensate for corner rounding, serif shapes are 
added to (or subtracted from) corners to produce 
corners on the silicon that are closer to the ideal 
layout (see Figure 1.76). Determining the optimal 
type, size, and symmetry (or lack thereof) is very 
complex and depends on neighboring geometries 
and process parameters. A sophisticated computer 
program is necessary to properly implement OPC. 
OPC improves the resolution by decreasing k1.
Strategies for Improved Resolution 
through Improved Exposure Technology
Background
Under “Improved Exposure Equipment,” we describe 
progress in decreasing k1 and NA in Equation 1.16 
to further enhance resolution R by modifying the 
exposure equipment. Off-axis illumination (OAI) 
is one of the three major resolution enhancement 
technologies that have enabled optical lithography 
to push practical resolution limits far beyond what 
was once thought possible (the others being phase-
shifting masks and optical proximity corrections; 
see above). We will briefly review OAI and Köhler 
illumination and finish this chapter by introducing 
immersion lithography.
Off-Axis Illumination and Köhler Illumination
With OAI, diffraction information is distributed 
selectively over the lens pupil, influencing the impact 
FIGURE 1.76 Optical proximity correction (OPC). (a) Mask 
of a standard cell before OPC. (b) Mask after OPC.

[Page 79]
Photolithography   79
of aberrations on imaging. Off-axis illumination 
allows some of the higher order diffracted light to 
be captured and hence can improve resolution (by 
decreasing k1). OAI refers to any illumination shape 
that significantly reduces or eliminates the “on-
axis” component of the illumination, that is, the 
light striking the mask at near-normal incidence. 
By tilting the illumination away from normal inci-
dence, the diffraction pattern of the mask is shifted 
within the objective lens. This enables higher dif-
fracted orders to be included in the lens aperture, 
which increases the resolution (see Figure 1.77). 
The increased focal depth for OAI can be under-
stood in terms of the path difference, which is now 
shorter for all the waves arriving at the resist sur-
face. OAI can improve imaging resolution by 20% 
and DOF by 40%.
Köhler illumination, named after August Köhler, 
the man who invented it in 1983, is also known as 
double diaphragm illumination because it uses both 
a field and an aperture iris diaphragm to set up the 
illumination in microscopy. If the light path is set up 
properly, one has the advantages of an evenly illu-
minated field, essential to avoid shadows, glare, and 
incorrect contrast. Köhler illumination in lithogra-
phy achieves the same goals by using a collector lens 
in front of the light source (see Figure 1.78). This 
“captures” diffracted light equally well from all posi-
tions on the mask. This improves the resolution by 
bringing k1 down.
Immersion Lithography
From the discussion up until this point, the resolu-
tion limit for 193-nm exposure systems may be cal-
culated using the Rayleigh equation with λ = 193 nm, 
NA = 0.93, and k1 = 0.25 (see Equation 1.16) as:
 
R = 0.25 × 193/0.93 = 52 nm 
(1.30)
From this calculation, a highly optimized 
ArF  exposure system has an absolute optimal 
FIGURE 1.77 Off-axis-illumination (OAI).
FIGURE 1.78 Köhler illumination in lithography.

[Page 80]
80   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
resolution of 52 nm, sufficient for the 65-nm line 
widths introduced in 2005 but not capable of meet-
ing the 45-nm line widths forecast in 2007. The 
technical challenges with 157-nm and shorter wave-
length exposure systems make any technique that 
can improve the resolution of the 193-nm exposure 
systems and delay the need to move to shorter wave-
lengths an important development.
The NA is determined by the acceptance angle of 
the lens and the index of refraction of the medium 
surrounding the lens: NA = nsinθ (Volume I, 
Equation 5.3), where n is the index of refraction and 
θ is the acceptance angle of the lens. Because the sine 
of any angle is always <1 and n = 1 for air, the physi-
cal limit for an air-based system is clear, but what if 
a medium with a higher index of refraction is sub-
stituted for air? Microscopy has for years used oil as 
the medium surrounding the lens and the sample 
for resolution enhancement, and it is somewhat sur-
prising that the semiconductor industry has taken 
this long to seriously consider the merits of replac-
ing air with an alternative.
The medium between the lens and the wafer 
being exposed needs to have an index of refraction 
>1, have low optical absorption at 193 nm, be com-
patible with photoresist and the lens material, and 
be uniform and noncontaminating. Surprisingly, 
ultrapure water may meet all these requirements. 
Water has an index of refraction n = 1.47, absorption 
of <5% at working distances of up to 6 mm, is com-
patible with photoresist and lens, and in its ultra-
pure form is noncontaminating. Plugging n = 1.47 
into Equation 5.3 (Volume I) and assuming sinθ can 
reach 0.93, then the resolution limits for 193-nm 
immersion lithography are:
 
R = 0.25 × 193/1.470.93 = 35 nm 
(1.31)
A 35-nm theoretical resolution carries 193-nm 
exposure beyond 2007. Similar techniques applied 
to 157-nm exposure could carry optical lithogra-
phy even further, although it should be noted that 
water is not a usable medium at 157 nm and suit-
able mediums are still being researched (a high 
index fluid such as polyfluoropolyether is a candi-
date medium in this case). The resolution enhance-
ment from immersion lithography is about 30–40% 
(depending on materials used), or about one tech-
nology node. The depth of focus is also 40–70% 
better (proportional to the refractive index of the 
imaging medium considered) than a corresponding 
“dry” tool at the same resolution.85
In Figure 1.79 we illustrate a schematic of an 
immersion lithography setup. It is estimated that 
such a setup may cost $30 million.
There are a large number of practical issues yet 
to resolve to implement immersion lithography. The 
stage on a 193-nm exposure tool steps from loca-
tion to location across the wafer scanning the reticle 
image for each field. To achieve high throughput, 
the stage must accelerate rapidly, move accurately 
to the next field location, settle, scan the image, 
and then step to the next location all in a short 
period. Maintaining a consistent bubble-free liquid 
between the lens and the wafer is very difficult. One 
other issue that is likely to be significant for immer-
sion lithography is temperature control. Variations 
in temperature cause variations in n and therefore 
image distortion. Maintaining temperature uni-
formity with a rapidly moving stage and a pulsed 
laser passing through the fluid will likely be a sig-
nificant challenge. A more complete listing of issues 
includes:
 
◾Very big lenses (hence expensive)
 
◾Field size reduction
 
◾Mechanical issues and hydrodynamics
 
◾Stage vibrations transferred to lens
 
◾Heating of immersion liquid on exposure
 
◾New defect mechanisms at wafer level
 
◾Interaction of photoresist with immersion 
liquid
 
◾Fluid contamination
 
◾Polarization effects degrading contrast
Summary Projection Lithography
As minimum line widths have shrunk, the exposing 
wavelength has also periodically shrunk. Table 1.10 
lists the year, minimum line-width generation, and 
exposure wavelength for state-of-the-art ICs since 
the mid-1980s. At 1.2-µm and larger line widths, 
the g-line output of mercury lamps (λ = 436 nm) 
was used; at the 0.8-µm (800 nm) generation, the 

[Page 81]
Photolithography   81
i-line output of mercury lamps (λ = 365 nm) was 
introduced for critical layers, and i-line use contin-
ued to the 350-nm line width, where early adopt-
ers began to use KrF excimer lasers (λ = 248 nm) 
as the exposure source. KrF use has surprised many 
observers by persisting through the 130-nm line-
width generation. With 90-nm line widths now 
entering production, KrF is finally running out of 
stream, and ArF excimer lasers are being introduced 
(λ = 193 nm). Beyond ArF, there are fluorine excimer 
lasers (F2) with λ = 157 nm, but there are a num-
ber of technical challenges to overcome. At less than 
the 157-nm wavelength, the optical exposure sys-
tems must change to all reflecting optics because of 
high levels of absorption in refractive lens at shorter 
wavelengths. The introduction of an all-reflective 
lens exposure system introduces a number of tech-
nical challenges.
At the same time that exposure wavelengths have 
been reduced, improvements in lens design have led 
to improvements in the NA of the exposure systems 
lens, as shown in Figure 1.80. In the mid-1980s an 
NA value of approximately 0.4 was typical; today 
248-nm exposure systems are available with an NA 
greater than 0.8. The physical limit to NA for expo-
sure systems using air as a medium between the lens 
and the wafer is 1; the practical limit is somewhere 
around 0.9, with recent reports suggesting that an 
NA as high as 0.93 may be possible for ArF systems 
in the future.
FIGURE 1.79 Schematics of an immersion lithography setup.
TABLE 1.10 Minimum Line Width and Exposure 
Wavelength versus Year
Year
Line Width (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
1986
1200
436
1988
800
436/365
1991
500
365
1994
350
365/248
1997
250
248
1999
180
248
2001
130
248
2003
90
248/193
2005 (fcst)
65
193
2007 (fcst)
45
193

[Page 82]
82   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The third element in the Rayleigh equation is k1, a 
complex factor of several variables in the photolithog-
raphy process such as the quality of the photoresist 
and the use of resolution enhancement techniques 
such as phase shift masks, OAI, and OPC. While 
exposure wavelengths have been decreasing and NA 
has been increasing, k1 has been decreasing as well 
(see Figure 1.81). The practical lower limit for k1 is 
thought to be about 0.25. In Figure 1.81, we plot the 
evolution of k1 during the past 18 years.
From this chapter it is clear that photolithogra-
phy remains the only viable IC, MEMS, and NEMS 
production technology. As we realize now it is very 
urgent that we look beyond photolithography for 
the next generations of ICs and NEMS. This is the 
problem we tackle in Chapter 2 on NGLs and lithog-
raphy research.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Maria Amasia and Genis Turon.
Appendix 1A: Spin Coating 
Process Troubleshooting
Film Too Thin
Spin speed too high: select lower speed. Spin time 
too long: decrease time during high-speed step. 
Inappropriate choice of resin.
Film Too Thick
Spin speed too low: select higher speed. Spin time too 
short: increase time during high-speed step. Exhaust 
volume too high: adjust exhaust. Inappropriate 
choice of resin.
Air Bubbles on Wafer Surface
Air bubbles in dispensed fluid. Dispense tip is cut 
unevenly or has burrs or other defects.
Swirl Patter
Spin bowl exhaust rate is too high. Fluid strikes sub-
strate surface off center. Spin speed and acceleration 
setting is too high. Spin time is too short.
193 nm
248 nm
l-line
g-line
Physical limit for air
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Numerical aperture
Year of system introduction
FIGURE 1.80 The evolution of the numerical aperture in 
lithography systems as a function of time.
g-line
l-line
248 nm
193 nm
1982
1985
1990
1995
2000
Year
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
k1
FIGURE 1.81 The evolution of k1 versus time.

[Page 83]
Photolithography   83
Center Circle
If the circle is the same size as the spin chuck: proper 
chuck selection should be based on substrate size 
and rigidity. The proper chuck diameter is 1/4–1-in. 
smaller than the substrate diameter.
Uncoated Areas
Insufficient dispense volume.
Pinholes
Air bubbles. Particles in fluid. Particles exist on sub-
strate surface before dispense.
Comets, Streaks, or Flares
Fluid velocity (dispense rate) is too high. Spin bowl 
exhaust rate is too high. Resist sits on wafer too long 
before spin. Spin speed and acceleration setting are 
too high. Particles exist on substrate surface before 
dispense. Fluid is not dispensed at the center of the 
substrate surface.
Poor Reproducibility
Variable exhaust or ambient conditions: adjust 
exhaust lid to fully closed. Substrate not cen-
tered properly: center substrate before operation. 
Insufficient dispense volume: increase dispense vol-
ume. Inappropriate resin material. Unstable balance 
in speed/time parameters: increase speed/decrease 
time or vice versa.
Poor Film Quality
Exhaust volume too high: adjust exhaust lid or 
house exhaust damper. Acceleration too high: select 
lower acceleration. Unstable balance in speed/time 
parameters: increase speed/decrease time or visa 
versa. Insuffi cient dispense volume: increase dis-
 Insufficient dispense volume: increase dis-
pense volume. Inappropriate resin material: contact 
resin manufacturer.
Questions
 1.1: Analyze each of the expressions for photo-
lithography resolution and explain how to 
improve resolution in each case. What are 
the advantages and disadvantages of using 
e-beam lithography compared to typical pho-
tolithography using UV radiation? What is 
the most likely next-generation lithography?
 1.2: An exposure is performed with coherent light 
using a step and repeat projection printing 
system. The light source has a wavelength of 
365 nm (i-line of a Hg arc lamp).
 
 
The pattern is a grating with a line-to-line 
spacing of 1 µm.
 (a) Calculate the minimum value of the 
numerical aperture (NA) that will pro-
vide contrast at the image plane (the 
plane of the resist).
 (b) What is the maximum value of the numer-
ical aperture, above which there will be 
no improvement in image quality?
 (c) Calculate the depth of field of the image 
for cases (a) and (b).
 1.3: Lift-off refers to the process of exposing a pat-
tern into a photoresist, depositing a thin film 
such as a metal or dielectric over the entire 
area, and then washing away the photoresist 

[Page 84]
84   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
to leave behind the film only in the patterned 
area. Why is it easier to obtain a lift-off pro-
file with a negative resist than with a positive 
resist?
 1.4: Which of the following statements are NOT 
correct?
 (a) Short exposure wavelengths can create 
standing waves in a layer of photoresist.
 (b) Regions of constructive interference cre-
ate increased exposure.
 (c) Standing waves can impair the structure 
of the resist, but they can be eliminated 
by use of multiple wavelength sources or 
postbaking.
 (d) Standing waves effects are most notice-
able at the center of the resist.
 (e) The primary components of a positive 
photoresist are
 
1. Nonphotosensitive base phenolic resin
 
2. Photosensitive dissolution inhibitor
 
3. Coating solvent
 (f) Projection lithography resolution is lim-
ited by exposure wavelength, resist thick-
ness, and diffraction and dispersion of 
light.
 (g) Proximity lithography resolution is lim-
ited only by exposure wavelength and 
resist thickness.
 1.5: Indicate which line in this graph corresponds 
to negative photoresist and which corre-
sponds to positive photoresist.
Line width, L
Exposure dose
Drawn mask feature size
L
 1.6: Why is it easier to find good data from the 
literature on resist sensitivity than on litho-
graphic sensitivity?
 1.7: Sketch the lithography steps involved in gen-
erating a staircase resist pattern that is ori-
ented in the same direction on both sides 
of a Si wafer. The steps of the staircase need 
to be aligned within 2 µm and your labora-
tory cannot afford a >$250,000 double-sided 
mask aligner.
 1.8: Present a comparison of negative and positive 
photo resists. Also explain what a permanent 
resist is. Describe what happens chemically 
to positive and negative resists when exposed 
to UV radiation.
 1.9: A polyimide photoresist requires 100 mJ/cm2 
per micron of thickness to be developed prop-
erly. If a lamp provides 1000 W/m2, how long 
does it take to expose a 20-µm-thick film?
 1.10: List four major factors in which IC technol-
ogy differs from MEMS or miniaturization 
science.
 1.11: Why does one prefer a high Tg in a resist and 
why are there no crystalline materials used in 
lithography?
 1.12: Provide a simple rule of thumb for dimen-
sional tolerances in lithography. Why is the 
resolution with incoherent light larger than 
that for coherent illumination? How is the 
depth of focus (DOF) of an imaging system 
influenced by the numerical aperture NA of 
the imaging lens, the resolution of the sys-
tem, and the wavelength of the exposing 
light?
 1.13: Demonstrate with some simple sketches how 
you would pattern a small Pt electrode for an 
electrochemical sensor using wet etching. The 
substrate is an oxidized Si wafer. (Remember 
that Pt is very difficult to wet etch.)
 1.14: Mark the INCORRECT statement(s).
 (a) If we want to do the lift-off process, we 
do not need a postbake.
 (b) Before we spin dry a wafer, we need to 
make sure the vacuum is off.
 (c) To increase the pump-down speed for the 
metal evaporation process, we need to 
turn on the roughing and foreline pump 
at the same time.
 (d) Ultrasonic vibration can help the lift-off 
process.

[Page 85]
Photolithography   85
 (e) Four-point resistivity measurements can 
be used to determine the doping concen-
tration of the water.
 (f) O2 plasma etching can be used to remove 
the photoresist.
 (g) After the fabrication is completed, we can 
deposit a thin layer of Si3N4 to protect the 
Al wires.
 1.15: How is the diffraction limit expression derived? 
Hint: Use the mathematical expression for the 
intensity variation of the Fraunhofer diffrac-
tion pattern of a circular aperture (Airy disk) 
with radius a.
 1.16: How does immersion lithography influence 
the value of the DOF?
 1.17: What are the pros and cons of proximity, con-
tact, and projection lithography?
 1.18: Explain what happens chemically to positive 
and negative photoresist when exposed to 
UV radiation. 
 1.19: List the most important methods that 
can be employed to improve resolution in 
photolithography.
References
 
1. Harris, T. W. 1976. Chemical milling. Oxford, UK: Clarendon 
Press.
 
2. Cunningham, J. A. 1992. The remarkable trend in defect 
densities and chip yield. Semicond Int 15:86–90.
 
3. Iscoff, R. 1991. Wafer cleaning: can dry systems compete? 
Semicond Int 14:48–54.
 
4. Bok, E., D. Kelch, and K. S. Schumacher. 1992. Supercritical 
fluids for single wafer cleaning. Solid State Technol 
35:117–19.
 
5. Singer, P. H. 1992. Trends in wafer cleaning. Semicond Int 
15:34–39.
 
6. Tolliver, D. L. 1988. Handbook of contamination control in 
microelectronics: principles, applications, and technology. Park 
Ridge, NJ: Noyes Publications.
 
7. Deal, B. E. 1993. Handbook of semiconductor wafer cleaning 
technology. Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes Publications.
 
8. Sure, A., T. Dillon, J. Murakowski, C. Lin, D. Pustai, and D. 
W. Prather. 2003. Fabrication and characterization of three-
dimensional silicon tapers. Optics Express 11:555–61.
 
9. Feely, W. E. 1988. Technical digest: solid state sensor and actu-
ator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: IEEE.
 10. Feely, W. E., J. C. Imhof, and C. M. Stein. 1986. The role of 
the latent image in a new dual image, aqueous developable, 
thermally stable photoresist. Polym Eng Sci 26:1101–04.
 11. Six, P. 1995. Phase masks and grey-tone masks. Semiconductor 
Fabtech 5.
 12. Reimer, K., R. Engelke, U. Hofmann, P. Merz, K. T. K. v. 
Platen, and B. Wagner. 1999. MF-Conf., micromachine 
technology for diffractive and holographic optics. Santa Clara, 
CA: SPIE.
 13. Stauffer, J. M., Y. Oppliger, P. Regnault, L. Baraldi, and M. T. 
Gale. 1992. Electron beam writing of continuous resist pro-
files for optical applications. J Vac Sci Technol B10:2526.
 14. Windt, D. L., and R. A. Cirelli. 1999. Amorphous carbon 
films for use as both variable-transmission apertures and 
attenuated phase shift masks for deep ultraviolet lithogra-
phy. J Vac Sci Technol B17:930–32.
 15. Arnone, C. 1992. The laser-plotter: a versatile lithographic 
tool for integrated optics and microelectronics. Microelectron 
Eng 17:483–86.
 16. Duffy, D. C., J. C. McDonald, O. J. A. Schueller, and G. M. 
Whitesides. 1998. Rapid prototyping of microfluidic sys-
tems in poly(dimethylsiloxane). Anal Chem 70:4974–84.
 17. Smith, H. I., R. Menon, A. Patel, D. Chao, M. Walsh, and 
G. Barbastathis. 2006. Zone-plate-array lithography: a low-
cost complement or competitor to scanning-electron-beam 
lithography. Microelectron Eng 83:956–961.
 18. Metz, T. E., R. N. Savage, and H. O. Simmons. 1992. In 
situ control of photoresist coating processes. Semicond Int 
15:68–69.
 19. Thompson, L. F. 1994. Introduction to microlithography. 
Eds. L. F. Thompson, C. G. Willson, and M. J. Bowden. 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.
 20. Webster, R. J. 1998. Thin film polymer dielectrics for high-
voltage applications under severe environments. Master’s thesis, 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.
 21. Merricks, D. 1995. Special polymers for electronics and opto-
electronics. Ed. J. A. Chilton and M. T. Goosey. London: 
Chapmann & Hall.
 22. Boellaard, E., P. N. Pham, L. D. M. v. d. Brekel, and G. J. 
Bertens. 2003. Electrodepositable photoresist processing 
for RF-devices in MEMS technology. MEPTEC Rep Quarter 
Two:29–31.
 23. Pham, N. P., E. Boellaard, P. M. Sarro, and J. N. Burghartz. 
2002. SAFE 2002. Veldhoven, the Netherlands: STW.
 24. Reichmanis, E., O. Nalamasu, F. M. Houlihan, and A. E. 
Novembre. 1999. Radiation chemistry of polymeric mate-
rials. Polym Int 48:1053–59.
 25. Harriott, L. R. 1999. Next generation lithography. Mater 
Today 2:9.
 26. Ito, T., and S. Okazaki. 2000. Pushing the limits of lithog-
raphy. Nature 406:1027–31.
 27. Le Barny, P. 1987. Molecular engineering of ultrathin polymeric 
films. Eds. P. Stroeve and E. Franses. New York: Elsevier.
 28. Moreau, W. M. 1988. Semiconductor lithography. New York: 
Plenum Press.
 29. Shaw, J. M., J. D. Gelorme, N. C. LaBianca, W. E. Conley, 
and S. J. Holmes. 1996. Negative photoresists for optical 
lithography. IBM J Res Dev 41:81–94.
 30. O’Brien, M. J., and D. S. Soane. 1989. Microelectronics pro-
cessing. Eds. D. W. Hess, and K. F. Jensen. Washington, DC: 
American Chemical Society.
 31. Ando, S., T. Matsuura, and S. Sasaki. 1994. Polymers for 
microelectronics: resists and dielectrics. Eds. L. F. Thompson, 
C. G. Willson, and S. Tagawa. Washington, DC: American 
Chemical Society.
 32. Studt, T. 1992. Polyimides: hot stuff for the ‘90s. Res Dev 
August:30–31.
 33. Furuya, A., F. Shimokawa, T. Matsuura, and R. Sawada. 
1994. Fluorinated polyimide fabrication by magnetically 
controlled reactive ion etching (MC RIE). J Micromechan 
Microeng 4:67.

[Page 86]
86   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 34. Suzuki, K., I. Shimoyama, and H. Miura. 1994. Insect–model 
based microrobot with elastic hinges. J Microelectromech 
Syst 3:4–9.
 35. Shioda, T. 2007. Next generation packaging technology 
which supports the ubiquitous devices. Application of the 
flexible optical waveguide to the consumer products. Electr 
Parts Mater 46:38–42.
 36. Flack, W., S. Kulas, and C. Franklin. 2000. Process charac-
terization of an aqueous developable photosensitive poly-
imide on a broadband stepper. SPIE 3999-45.
 37. Ito, H. 1996. Chemical amplification resists: history and 
development within IBM. IBM J Res Dev 41:69–80.
 38. LaBianca, N. C., J. D. Gelorme, E. Cooper, E. O’Sullivan, 
and J. Shaw. 1995. JECS 188th Meeting. Chicago: JECS.
 39. Angelo, R., J. Gelorme, J. Kuczynski, W. Lawrence, S. Pappas, 
and L. Simpson. 1992. U.S. Patent 5,102,772, IBM.
 40. Reznikova, E. F., J. Mohr, and H. Hein. 2005. Deep photo-
lithography characterization of SU-8 resist layers. Microsyst 
Technol 11:282–91.
 41. Lee, S. J., W. Shi, P. Maciel, and S. W. Cha. 2003. University/
government/industry microelectronics symposium. Boise, ID: 
IEEE.
 42. Guerin, L. J. 1999. Industrial exhibition. Montreux, 
Switzerland.
 43. Bertsch, A., H. Lorenz, and P. Renaud. 1999. 3D 
Microfabrication by combining microstereolithography and 
thick resist UV lithography. Sensors Actuators 73:14–23.
 44. Yang, R., and W. Wang. 2005. A numerical and experimen-
tal study on gap compensation and wavelength selection in 
UV-lithography of ultra-high aspect ratio SU-8 microstruc-
tures. Sensors Actuators Chem 110:279–88.
 45. MicroChem Corp. 2000. http://www.microchem.com.
 46. Sotec Microsystems. 2000. http://mems.isi.edu/mems/yp/
LOU.html.
 47. Madou, M., and J. Florkey. 2000. From batch to continu-
ous manufacturing of microbiomedical devices. Chem Rev 
100:2679–91.
 48. Braun, A. E. 1999. Photoresist stripping faces low-k chal-
lenges. Semicond Int October:64–74.
 49. Flamm, D. L. 1992. Dry plasma resist stripping. Part I: over-
view of equipment. Solid State Technol 35:37–39.
 50. Wolf, S., and R. N. Tauber. 2000. Silicon processing for the 
VLSI era. Sunset Beach, CA: Lattice Press.
 51. Willson, C. G. 1994. Introduction to microlithography. Eds. L. 
F. Thompson, C. G. Willson, and M. J. Bowden. Washington, 
DC: American Chemical Society.
 52. Brodie, I., and J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabri-
cation. New York: Plenum Press.
 53. Sze, S. M. 1988. VLSI technology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 54. Alling, E., and C. Stauffer. 1988. Image reversal photoresist. 
Solid State Technol 31:37–43.
 55. Thompson, L. F., C. G. Willson, and M. J. Bowden, eds. 
1994. Introduction to microlithography. Washington, DC: 
American Chemical Society.
 56. Bowden, M. J. 1994. Introduction to microlithography. Eds. L. F. 
Thompson, C. G. Willson, and M. J. Bowden. Washington, 
DC: American Chemical Society.
 57. Sheats, J. R., and B. W. Smith, eds. 1998. Microlithography: 
science and technology. New York: Marcel Dekker.
 58. Rothschild, M., A. Forte, R. Kunz, C. Palmateer, and J. 
Sedlacek. 1997. Lithography at a wavelength of 193 nm. 
IBM J Res Dev 41:49–55.
 59. Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectrochemical sys-
tems engineering. Boston: Artech House.
 60. White, R. M., and S. W. Wenzel. 1988. Inexpensive and 
accurate two-sided semiconductor wafer alignment. Sensors 
Actuators 13:391–95.
 61. Kim, E. S., R. S. Muller, and R. S. Hijab. 1992. Front-to-
backside alignment using resist-patterned etch control and 
one etching step. J Microelectromech Syst 1:95–99.
 62. Tatic-Lucic, S., and Y.-C. Tai. 1994. Novel extra-accurate 
method for two-sided alignment on silicon wafers. Sensors 
Actuators A41–42:573–77.
 63. Bruning, J. H. 1980. Optical imaging for microfabrication. 
J Vac Sci Technol 17:1148–55.
 64. Oldham, W. G., S. N. Nandgaonkor, A. N. Neureuther, and 
M. O’Toole. 1979. A general simulator for VLSI lithogra-
phy and etching processes: Part I. Application to projection 
lithography. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 26:717–22.
 65. Sekiguchi, A., M. Isono, and T. Matsuzawa. 1999. 
Measurement of parameters for simulation of 193 nm 
lithography using Fourier transform infrared baking sys-
tem. Jpn J Appl Phys 38:4936–41.
 66. Comello, V. 1990. Planarizing leading edge devices. 
Semicond Int November:60–66.
 67. Wiesner, J. R. 1993. Gap filling of multilevel metal inter-
connects with 0.25-µm geometries. Solid State Technol 
October:63–64.
 68. Sniegowski, J. S. 1996. Micromachining and microfabrication 
process technology II. Austin, TX: SPIE.
 69. Ong, E., H. Chu, and S. Chen. 1991. Metal planarization 
with an excimer laser. Solid State Technol August:63–68.
 70. Ito, H., and C. G. Willson. 1982. Chemical amplification 
in the design of dry developing resist materials. Technical 
Papers, Regional Technical Conference, Society of Plastic 
Engineers 331–53.
 71. Ito, H., C. G. Willson, and J. M. J. Fréchet. 1982. New UV 
resists with negative or positive tone. Digest of technical 
papers of 1982 symposium on VLSI technology.
 72. Ito, H., C. G. Willson, and J. M. J. Fréchet. 1985. Positive- and 
negative-working resist compositions with acid generating 
photoinitiator and polymer with acid labile groups pendant 
from polymer backbone. U.S. Patent 4,491,628, IBM.
 73. Reichmanis, E., F. M. Houlihan, O. Nalamasu, and T. X. 
Neena. 1994. Polymers for microelectronics: resists and dielec-
trics. Eds. L. F. Thompson, C. G. Willson, and S. Tagawa. 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.
 74. Reichmanis, E., L. F. Thompson, O. Nalamasu, A. Blakeney, 
and S. Slater. 1992. Chemically amplified resists for deep-UV 
lithography: a new processing paradigm. Microlithogr World 
November/December:7–14.
 75. Lamola, A. A., C. R. Szmanda, and J. W. Thackeray. 1991. 
Chemically amplified resists. Solid State Technol 53:53–60.
 76. Horn, M. W. 1991. Antireflection layers and planarization 
for microlithography. Solid State Technol November:57–62.
 77. Taylor, G. N., T. M. Wolf, and L. E. Stillwagon. 1984. Role 
of inorganic materials in dry-processed resist technology. 
Solid State Technol 27:145.
 78. Seeger, D. E., D. C. La Tulipe Jr., R. R. Kunz, C. M. Garza, 
and M. A. Hanratty. 1997. Thin-film imaging: past, present, 
prognosis. IBM J Res Dev 41:105–18.
 79. (a) Rothschild, M., R. B. Goodman, M. A. Hartney, M. W. 
Horn, R. R. Kunz, J. H. C. Sedlacek, and D. C. Shaver. 1992. 
Photolithography at 193 nm. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 10:2989; 
(b) Hibbs, M., R. R. Kunz, and M. Rothschild. 1995. 193-nm 
Lithography at MIT Lincoln Lab. Solid State Technol. 38:69.
 80. Feynman, R. P. 1993. Infinitesimal machinery. J 
Microelectrochem Syst 2:4–14.

[Page 87]
Photolithography   87
 81. Levenson, M. D., N. S. Visnawathan, and R. A. Simpson. 
1982. Improving resolution in photolithography with 
a phase-shifting mask. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 29: 
1828–36.
 82. Levenson, M. D. 1992. Phase-shifting mask strategies: iso-
lated dark lines. Microlithogr World 6:6–12.
 83. Van Den Broeke, D. 1996. Transferring phase-shifting mask 
technology into mainstream manufacturing. Semiconductor 
Fabtech 6.
 84. Fritze, M., D. Astolfi, H. Liu, C. K. Chen, V. Suntharalingam, 
D. Preble, and P. W. Wyatt. 1999. Sub-100 nm KrF lithog-
raphy for complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor cir-
cuits. J Vac Sci Technol B17:345–49.
 85. Switkes, M., M. Rothschild, R. R. Kunz, S-Y. Baek, D. Coles, 
and M. Yeung. 2003. Immersion lithography: beyond the 
65 nm mode with optics. Microlithogr World May:4.

[Page 88]
[empty page]

[Page 89]
89
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Moore’s Law
Next-Generation Lithographies
Lithography Techniques in the 
Research and Development 
Stage
Questions
References
2
Next-Generation 
Lithographies and 
Lithography Research
Introduction
In the integrated circuit (IC) industry, continuous improvements to 
deep UV (DUV) photolithography have postponed the industrial 
adoption of alternative next-generation litho graphies (NGLs) because 
of the huge financial investment in existing photolithography 
equipment. DUV photolithography is expected to continue until the 
45-nm node through resolution-enhancing techniques (RET) such 
as off-axis illumination (OAI), phase shift masks (PSM), and optical 
(a)
(b)
 (a) AFM image of quantum dot structure created on a GaAs wafer using oxidation 
lithography, 2.5-µm scan. (Courtesy of D. Graf and R. Shleser, Ensslin Group, ETH 
Zurich, http://www.asylumresearch.com.) (b) AFM image of the nanolithographi-
cally patterned polycarbonate with scratch lithography, 5-µm scan. Copy of Pablo 
Picasso’s “Don Quixote” (http://www.asylumresearch.com).
Resolution of photolithography system.

[Page 90]
90   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
proximity correction (OPC) as reviewed in Chapter 1. 
The 32-nm node is viewed as beyond the scope of 
DUV lithography. There are no clear lithography 
solutions listed in the International Technology 
Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS roadmap) for 
2010 and beyond (Volume I, Appendix 1A).
In this chapter we introduce as possible NGLs: 
extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUVL), x-ray lithog-
raphy, charged-particle beam lithography based on 
electrons and ions (such as electron and ion projection 
techniques), and imprint lithography [nanoimprint 
lithography (NIL) and step-and-flash imprint lithogra-
phy (SFIL)]. These techniques are those that are regarded 
today as important technologies for the beyond the 
DUV lithography era, either for mask making or for IC 
production. We also review lithography approaches in 
the research and development stage, including lithog-
raphy based on very thin resist layers and block copo-
lymers, zone plate array lithography (ZPAL), quantum 
lithography (two-photon lithography), and proximal 
probe-based techniques such as atomic force micros-
copy (AFM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), 
dip-pen lithography (DPL), near-field scanning optical 
microscopy (NSOM), and apertureless near-field scan-
ning optical microscopy (ANSOM). Also considered 
are holographic lithography and plasmonic lithogra-
phy. Lithography with superlenses (“Pendry’s dream”) 
was reviewed in Volume I, Chapter 5 and will not be 
repeated here. As an example of a lithography method 
that is capable of patterning resist on nonplanar sub-
strates (e.g., patterning a resist on the surface of a cyl-
inder) we detail soft lithography.
It is possible that some of the alternative lithography 
tools we treat in the research and development cate-
gory will emerge as serious NGLs in the coming years.
IC and miniaturization science are taking increas-
ingly separate paths in adopting preferred litho-
graphy strategies. For ICs, throughput and finer 
geometries are needed, and batch processing is a pre-
requisite. In miniaturization science, modularity, good 
depth of focus (DOF), extension of the z-direction, 
that is, the height of features (skyscraper-type struc-
tures), incorporating nontraditional materials (e.g., 
gas-sensitive ceramic layers, polymers), and repli-
cation methods catch the spotlight, and batch fab-
rication is not always a prerequisite. While reading 
the current chapter, these important differences in 
characteristics of IC manufacture and miniaturiza-
tion science should be kept in mind.
Moore’s Law
Introduction
The dramatic increase in performance and cost redu-
ction in the electronics industry derives from pro-
gress  in IC fabrication and packaging. Speed and 
performance improvement of IC chips and their 
 associated packages, and hence higher-level hardware 
such as computers, all are based on the minimum 
printable feature size [critical dimension (CD)].
Moore’s Law states that the number of transistors 
per square centimeter roughly doubles every 18–24 
months without increase in cost. Recent trends show 
that feature size decreases about 30% every 2 years, 
and one needs more and more upfront investment 
money to fabricate. Moore’s Law—an observation, 
really—might hit an even bigger snag with CDs in 
the 32-nm mode, where DUV lithography runs out 
of steam and quantum effects start wreaking havoc.
After introducing Moore’s Law, we analyze Ray 
Kurzweil’s optimistic speculations about the future 
of Moore’s Law.
Moore’s Law Detailed 
Control of the thickness (z) of films deposited on a 
substrate and control of the depth of a cavity etched 
in a substrate can be achieved with remarkable pre-
cision, down to 20 Å. The width and length (x, y) 
dimensions of a deposit or etch are more difficult to 
control and depend on the type of lithography used. 
The minimum x, y feature is determined primarily by 
the precise focus of the energy source that allows dis-
crimination between areas of exposed resist and non-
exposed resist. Other key factors are the tolerances on 
the mask, the ability to align the mask to the wafer 
and align subsequent layers of masks to create the 
proper vertical geometry, and the ability to control 
the rate and direction of etching and deposition.
Gordon Moore, inventor of the IC and former 
chairman of Intel, first described the rate of prog-
ress in reducing feature sizes for ICs when, in 1965, 
he observed that the surface area of a single transis-
tor reduced by approximately 50% every 12 months. 
In 1975, he revised this to every 2 years, not every 

[Page 91]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   91
18  months as is often quoted.1 Although only 
an engineer’s rule of thumb, this is now widely 
known as Moore’s law. In Table 2.1, based on the 
Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) road map2 
(see also Volume I, Appendix 1A), we summarize the 
minimum feature size (CD), dynamic random access 
memory (DRAM)* bits, microprocessor transistors 
per square centimeter, and DRAM and microprocessor 
die sizes as a function of the year of their introduction.3 
With decreasing CDs comes more rigid CD control: a 
180-nm line width requires ±14-nm CD control, and 
a 50-nm line width requires ±4-nm CD control.
Historically, DRAMs have driven the prog-
ress of microlithography more than microproces-
sors, which exhibit more relaxed design rules (see 
Table  2.1). The state of the art in ICs today is a 
2-GB DRAM with 60-nm features (Samsung). Intel 
(Integrated Electronics) introduced the Core 2 Quad 
“Kentsfield” chip in January 2007, a chip featuring a 
65-nm technology mode.
In Figure 2.1, we illustrate Moore’s law by plotting 
DRAM bit capacity and minimum feature size on a 
logarithmic y-axis with time on the x-axis (see also 
Volume I, Chapter 4). 
Looking ahead, IC developers relying on Si comple-
comple-
mentary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) archi-
semiconductor (CMOS) archi-
 (CMOS) archi-
CMOS) archi-
tecture today will switch more to alternative CMOS 
materials and architectures. At least five fundamental 
technical roadblocks need to be addressed to scale 
down CMOS transistors further (beyond 45 nm):
 
1. Carrier 
mobility 
limitations/clustering 
of 
dopant atoms: As CMOS transistors shrink, 
* Dynamic random access memory. A type of memory component 
used to store information in a computer system. “Dynamic” means 
the DRAMs need a constant “refresh” (pulse of current through all of 
the memory cells) to keep the stored information.
mobility of carriers decreases, and to compen-
sate, smaller devices need a higher amount of 
dopant atoms; however, above a certain limit 
the dopant atoms clump together, forming 
clusters that are not electrically active. The con-
centration cannot be increased further, and 
today’s chips are close to the maximum.
 
2. Tunneling through the gate dielectric: The tran-
sistor gates that control the flow of electrons 
have become so small that they are prey to 
undesirable quantum effects such as tunneling 
through extremely small barriers (e.g., a gate 
oxide of 1.2 nm). High-k dielectrics are used to 
minimize this tunneling current.
 
3. Doping nonuniformity: Doping nonuniformity 
over a wafer surface is becoming statistically 
significant and appears in transistors, showing 
a varying degree of doping (see also point 1).
 
4. Interconnects: Interconnects are becoming the 
dominant portion of circuit speed and process 
complexity. By volume ICs have become all 
wires.
 
5. Power dissipation: The latest Pentium chips 
dissipate more heat than a stove-top cooking 
surface (100 W/cm2).
A few comments and additional details on the 
above technical challenges follow; for yet more 
details, consult Volume I, Chapter 4.
Transistors with feature sizes between 0.5 and 
0.25 µm are operated at low supply voltages to attain 
adequate gain and low leakage currents. A small sup-
ply voltage keeps the dissipated power within rea-
sonable limits, makes for faster transistor switching, 
and allows the implementation of smaller transis-
tors. The latter is an example of favorable downscal-
ing because, as transistors get smaller, the insulation 
TABLE 2.1 CDs, DRAM Bits, MPU Transistor Density, and Die (Chip) Sizes Based on the SIA Road Map*
1997
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
Minimum feature size: CD in nm 
250
180
130
100
70
50
DRAM (bits)
256M
1G
4G
16G
64G
256G
MPU transistors/cm2
3.7M
6.2M
18M
39M
84M
180M
DRAM chip size (mm2)
280
400
560
790
1120
1580
MPU chip size (mm2)
300
340
430
520
620
750
Source:  Semiconductor Industry Association. 1997. The National technology roadmap for semiconductors: technology needs. http://www.
rennes.supelec.fr/ren/perso/gtourneu/enseignement/roadmap97.pdf. For updates visit http://www.sia-online.org.2
*See Figure 2.1 and Volume I, Chapter 4.

[Page 92]
92   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
layer between the gate and the source/drain becomes 
thinner. With too high a supply voltage, electrons 
would “leak” through the thin insulation and com-
promise system stability. Eventually, the thin insula-
tion layer will be only a couple of molecules thick, at 
which point transistor scaling will reach an abrupt 
end. In 1.8-V logic, threshold voltage is only 0.45 V. 
As this threshold becomes lower and lower, it will be 
easier for a minimal flow of electrons to be mistaken 
as a logical 1 instead of 0, thus causing operational 
problems.
Below 0.25 µm, cooling becomes necessary to 
maintain the same adequate transistor characteris-
tics. Cooling of chips might be implemented using 
methods derived from miniaturization science, 
such as the use of miniature thermoelectric cool-
ers or Joule-Thomson refrigerators (see Volume III, 
Chapter 8 on actuators). In the 30–50-nm range, 
quantum effects begin playing an important role. 
Quantum effects, as we saw in Volume I, Chapter 
3 on quantum mechanics, can be exploited, and 
major efforts are underway to manufacture quantum 
boxes, lines, and dots for the next generation of ICs 
(gigascale integration or 1 billion devices per chip). 
Interconnections pose another major challenge 
for further miniaturization of ICs. Like transistors, 
metal connection lines are scaled down with every 
new chip generation, but unlike transistors, their per-
formance decreases as they become thinner because 
of increased resistance and capacitance. In this case, 
downscaling is disadvantageous. Connection lines 
were once aluminum, but copper is now replacing 
aluminum (e.g., in the Coppermine Pentium III) 
as interconnect material in building devices that 
not only run faster—because of copper’s higher 
conductivity— but are also resistant to electromi-
gration. Copper also reduces the number of steps 
required in manufacture. A more drastic advance-
ment would be the use of superconducting materials 
for implementing interconnections, but currently no 
superconductor demonstrates the desired behavior 
under the temperature and current density condi-
tions that exist in modern ICs. Optical interconnects 
are another possibility, although these have size 
limitations (they cannot be thinner than the wave-
length of light they transmit), and the conversion of 
light pulses to electrical ones and vice versa could 
seriously compromise their performance. If opti-
cal interconnections were implemented, a switch 
from Si to GaAs would also be in order because 
GaAs offers far superior light source-making capa-
bilities than Si. In Volume I, Chapter 5, we saw how 
the use of photonic crystals and metal plasmonics 
can circumvent size limitations of traditional opti-
cal waveguides. Photonic crystals and plasmonics 
offer perhaps the first real possibility for the integra-
tion of electronics and optics on the same chip.
One further comment is in order here. Ultimately, 
all the technological barriers listed above might 
be overcome, but the real question is, at what cost? 
Moore’s second law states that capital costs increase 
faster than revenue and that the rate of technological 
#of Transistors
DRAMChip
4K
64K
1M
16M
DRAM
16G
10
100
1000
10000
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
1.E+04
1.E+06
1.E+08
1.E+10
1.E+12
Minimum feature size (µm)
# of  transistors/DRAM chip
ITRS
roadmap
1G
Approximate number of
neurons in the human brain
(in 15 cm2)
256M
x
x x x
x
DRAM
bits/mm2
Areal neuron density
in human brain (# N/mm2)
Year
FIGURE 2.1 Semilog plot of DRAM bits and minimum feature size as a function of time. (Courtesy of Dr. Rashid Bashir, 
Purdue University.) See also Volume I, Chapter 4.

[Page 93]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   93
progress is controlled by financial realities. Specifi-
cally, Moore gloomily predicted that the cost of build-
ing a chip manufacturing plant doubles with every 
other chip generation, or roughly every 36 months. 
This is often referred to as Moore’s “second law.” The 
projected cost of an IC lab in 2015 is ∼$100 billion.
Kurzweil: A View from an Optimist
To explore what the future of Moore’s law holds, 
we consider Ray Kurzweil’s optimistic predictions.4 
Kurzweil (Figure 2.2) and others observed that com-
puting power had been growing exponentially long 
before the invention of the transistor. From Kurzweil 
we learn that from 1900 onward the speed of com-
putation has doubled every three years, and that 
by 2020, computers will equal the human brain in 
terms of memory capacity and computing speed (see 
Figure 2.3).
Kurzweil believes that Moore’s law is an illustra-
tion  of a broader underlying law, The Law of Acce-
lerating Returns, which is based on The Law of Time 
and Chaos. The latter, as quoted from Kurzweil, reads: 
“In a process, the time interval between salient 
events (that is, events that change the nature of 
the process, or significantly affect the future of the 
process) expands or contracts along with the amount 
of chaos.” As a consequence, the Law of Accelerating 
Returns (a sublaw of the Law of Time and Chaos) states 
that as order exponentially increases, time exponen-
tially speeds up, or the interval between salient 
events grows shorter as time passes.* It is assumed 
that another technology will take over when Moore’s 
law, based on photolithography, is no longer valid. 
New technology may involve quantum devices, three-
dimensional (3D) chips, superconductors, photonic 
crystals, plasmonic devices, and metamaterials. 
All that is needed for this evolution to take place is 
the growing order of the evolving technology itself 
and enough surrounding chaos—that is, diversity 
of options or alternatives—from which to draw 
new ideas. This is similar to natural evolution, 
* The other sublaw of the Law of Time and Chaos is the Law of Increasing 
Chaos. With chaos exponentially increasing, time exponentially 
slows down. The events developing after the Big Bang are an illustra-
tion of this law; most salient events occurred immediately after the 
Big Bang and became less frequent thereafter.
which needed the many options provided by a rich 
and varied environment to develop sophisticated 
and intelligent life forms. It follows that Moore’s 
law, describing the speeding up of technology 
developments in the IC world, and Taniguchi’s 
laws (see Chapter 6), describing the speeding up of 
technology developments in me chanical machining 
(tool development), are both examples of the Law of 
Accelerating Returns. Similarly, in data recording, the 
rate of progress has exponentially increased. It started 
slowly, perhaps with crude cave drawings, then 
pictorial script followed by symbolic script, then pen 
and paper followed by a colossal milestone, which 
speeded up things considerably, i.e., the Gutenberg 
printing press. Then magnetic recording in computers 
started with recording using a copper-wound coil; 
when this became too crude, the invention of the 
thin film read/write head by IBM’s L. Romankiw 
in 1973 took over.5 In magnetic data storage with 
thin film read/write, the ultimate limit at room 
temperature is projected to be 40 Gb/in.2,6 A next 
leap forward in recording density is expected when 
proximal probes prove their mettle as read/write 
heads; 45 Gb/in.2 (Terris et al.7) and 400 Gb/in.2 
(Kraus and Chou8) have been demonstrated already. 
Using a 32 × 32 (1024) array of AFM cantilevers, 
King et al.6 thermomechanically wrote data bits 
40 nm in diameter and pitch (this corresponds to a 
data density of 0.4 Tb/in.2), and they read those bits 
thermally at a speed of 480 Mb/s. Figure 2.4 shows 
a picture of a thin film read/write head (a) and an 
STM-based read/write head (b) (IBM’s millipede).
Yet another example of the Law of Accelerating 
Returns is exemplified in the Human Genome 
Project started in the mid-1980s (see Volume III, 
FIGURE 2.2 Ray Kurzweil is on the left, but does Bill 
believe him?

[Page 94]
94   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Chapter 2). The speed of the process of writing down 
all 3.5 billion bits of the human genetic code expo-
nentially increased since the start of the project, caus-
ing the project to finish ahead of schedule. For some 
additional reading from Kurzweil’s work, see The 
Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology.9
Next-Generation Lithographies
Introduction
Having set a rather optimistic forecast for the 
future of miniaturization sciences, we now intro-
duce a set of possible next-generation lithographies 
FIGURE 2.3 What $1000 of computing buys. The number of million instructions per second (MIPS) is a general measure 
of computing performance. (Based on Ray Kurzweil.)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.4 (a) Thin film read/write head. (b) STM-based read/write head (IBM’s millipede).

[Page 95]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   95
(NGLs). This includes extreme ultraviolet lithogra-
phy (EUVL), x-ray lithography, charged-particle-
beam lithography, including scattering with angular 
limitation projection electron-beam lithography 
(SCALPEL) and ion projection lithography (IPL), as 
well as imprint lithography [nanoimprint lithogra-
phy (NIL) and step-and-flash imprint lithography 
(SFIL)]. In the context of electron-beam lithography 
(EBL), we also look at progress made with micro-
electromechanical system (MEMS)-based arrays of 
field emitters.
Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography
As mentioned before, the 32-nm node is viewed 
as beyond the scope of DUV lithography [even when 
applying all the resolution-enhancing technologies 
(RETs) or taking advantage of immersion lithography, 
which we learned about in Chapter 1]. EUVL is one of 
the most likely NGLs to achieve the 32-nm node.
Extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUVL), using 
wavelengths in the 10–14-nm range to carry out 
projection imaging, is the most natural extension 
of optical projection lithography as, in principle, it 
only differs in terms of the wavelength. This type 
of radiation is also referred to as soft x-ray radiation 
and vacuum UV. Sources for this type of radiation are 
laser-produced plasmas and synchrotrons.
To appreciate the merits of EUVL, we take as a 
starting point the expressions for resolution (R):
 
R
k NA
1
=
λ
 
(1.16)
and depth of focus (DOF):
 
DOF
k
NA
2
2
= ± δ = ±
λ
 
(1.17)
In Chapter 1 we learned that in practice, both 
resolution R and DOF are experimentally deter-
mined and are influenced by both resist and expo-
sure systems. In large-scale IC manufacture with 
g- and i-line light, k1 values used to be around 0.6 
(see Figure 1.81) and DOFs were larger than 0.5 µm. 
At that time, these parameters led to the desired CD 
control within a tolerable process window. The push 
for higher resolution with 248-nm and 193-nm 
radiation made it necessary to achieve smaller k1 
values, and this led to processing problems; it became 
more difficult to control the CD, and it created an 
intolerably low DOF. The RETs discussed in Chapter 1 
enhance resolution and the effective DOF, but, as 
we discussed, they are often not very manufacturer-
friendly (people only half-jokingly refer to RET as “real 
expensive technology”). With EUVL, on the other 
hand, one surmounts these problems because of 
its shorter wavelength. The technique is capable of 
printing sub-100-nm features while maintaining a 
DOF of 0.5 µm or larger, and has k-values that make 
the process control less demanding. Unfortunately, 
things are not that simple—EUV is strongly absorbed 
in virtually all materials, and, consequently, imaging 
must be carried out in a vacuum; also, all camera 
optics and masks used must be reflective rather than 
refractive. New resists and processing techniques 
must be developed as well.10–12
In Figure 2.5 a schematic of an EUVL setup is 
shown. A laser is directed at a xenon gas and heats 
up the gas to create a plasma, radiating light at 
13.6 nm—too short for the human eye to see. That 
EUV light is directed onto a condenser, gathering the 
light and directing it onto the mask. The mask is a 
representation of one level of the IC under construc-
tion and is made by patterning an absorber on some 
parts of a mirror but not on others (Figure 2.6). The 
pattern on the mask is reflected onto a series of four 
to six curved mirrors, reducing the size of the image 
and focusing the image onto the resist-coated silicon 
wafer. The entire process takes place in a vacuum 
because at these short wavelengths even air absorbs 
the light.
With respect to EUVL reflectivity, it is well known 
that most materials have very low reflectivity for 
near-normal incidences at those short wavelengths; 
therefore, multilayer Bragg reflectors with multiple 
reflecting coatings are used, as illustrated in Figure 
2.6. The concave and convex mirrors in EUVL, 
including the mask, are coated with multiple lay-
ers (e.g., 80 of them) of molybdenum and silicon 
(another pair of material used is Mo-Be) with dis-
similar EUVL optical constants, providing a resonant 
reflectivity when the period of the layers is close to 
λ/2. With magnetron-sputtered Mo-Si-based reflec-
tors, peak reflectivities of up to 70% at 13.4 nm 

[Page 96]
96   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
have been achieved (the other 30% is absorbed by 
the mirror). Without the coating, the light would be 
almost totally absorbed before reaching the wafer. 
The mirror surfaces have to be nearly perfect; even 
small defects in coatings can destroy the shape of 
the optics and distort the printed circuit pattern.10
The multilayer stacks in EUVL masks today have 
a demonstrated defect level of ∼1014 defects/cm2, still 
two orders of magnitude above target. Prototype 
EUVL cameras designed for 13.4-nm radiation have 
an numerical aperture (NA) = 0.1 and a four- mirror 
set with multilayer Mo-Si-reflecting coatings.10 
These step-and-scan 4× cameras have a resolution 
better than 100 nm with a ring field of 26 × 1.5 mm. 
In the step-and-scan system, the mask and wafer 
are simultaneously scanned in opposite directions, 
with the mask moving four times faster than the 
wafer. The camera wave-front error at 13.4 nm needs 
to be less than 1 nm so that the surface figure (that 
is, the basic shape of each of the mirrors) will be 
accurate to 0.25 nm rms or better. Achieving these 
accuracies will also require improved metrology 
techniques because current ones cannot confirm 
the accuracies required. The fact that EUVL masks 
are reflective has advantages and disadvantages. 
Advantages are that no thin and brittle membranes 
are needed as required in the case of x-ray lithogra-
phy—just a solid substrate (e.g., a Si wafer) coated 
with the required reflective coatings and a patterned 
EUVL absorber; because of the 4:1 reduction, mask 
making is also easier than with x-rays. A major dis-
advantage is that the defect density in the reflective 
coating needs to be made so small that there are few 
techniques available yet to accomplish such defect-
free films. Current resists absorb all the EUVL pho-
tons within less than 100 nm. Approaches for EUVL 
resists include silylated single-layer resist, refractory 
bilayer resists, and trilayer resists.
The Extreme Ultraviolet LLC (EUV LLC) was 
created to spearhead the research involved in 
bringing EUVL to the marketplace. The consortium 
includes Intel Corporation, Motorola Corporation, 
Advanced Micro Devices Corporation, IBM, Infineon, 
Micron Technology, and the Sandia and Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratories (http://www.sandia.
gov/media/NewsRel/NR2001/euvlight.htm). Intel  is 
leading this consortium, and an introduction of EUVL 
is planned for 2009. For the past couple of years there 
has been a growing realization that the resolution 
capabilities of the EUVL wavelength are being 
FIGURE 2.6 Two schematic representations of EUVL 
reflective masks. In EUVL, only reflective optics will work 
(see text).
Vacuum isolation:
Projection optics/
illuminator
Illuminator optics
EUV-generating
plasma
6-Mirror
projection optics
(NA=0.25)
Reﬂective
mask
EUV source
collector
300 mm wafer
Separate projection
optics and wafer
vacuum environments
Separate mask and
projection optics
vacuum environments
Vacuum isolation:
FIGURE 2.5 Schematic of an EUVL lithography setup. (From SEMATECH’s Next Generation Lithography Workshop 
brochure.)

[Page 97]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   97
countered by the effects of electrons released after 
absorption, and it is feared that a 13.4-nm resolution 
might be impossible. On the other hand, on May 30, 
2007, NEDO announced, that using EUVL, it had 
drawn circuit patterns with just 26-nm line widths 
(isolated and dense lines) using EUVL (http://www.
nedo.go.jp/english/archives/190820/190820.html).
X-Ray Lithography
Introduction
X-ray lithography uses a shadow printing method 
similar to optical proximity printing. The x-ray wave-
length (4–50 Å) is much shorter than that of UV 
light (2,000–4,000 Å) (Table 2.2). Hence diffrac-
tion effects are reduced and higher resolution can be 
attained. For example, for an x-ray wavelength of 5 Å 
and a gap of 40 µm, R is equal to 0.2 µm. In contrast 
with electron lithography and ion-beam lithography, 
no charged particles are directly involved in x-ray 
exposures, which makes the need for vacuum less 
stringent (see Figure 2.7).13 Like with all high-energy 
radiation (see EUVL), a vacuum is preferred to avoid 
absorption of photons by gas molecules, formation 
of ozone, and corrosive reactions with the expo-
sure station’s hardware. Another advantage of x-rays 
is that one can use flood exposure of resist-coated 
wafers, ensuring higher throughput than when writ-
ing with a thin electron or ion beam. The method is 
also referred to as deep x-ray lithography (DXRL).
The three main classes of sources for x-ray lithog-
raphy are electron impact tubes, laser-based plasmas, 
and synchrotrons (Figure 2.8). In miniaturization 
science, we are mainly concerned with synchrotron 
radiation. For reasons that are explained below, 
in the case of ICs, less-expensive alternative x-ray 
sources might suffice.
TABLE 2.2 Light Sources for Various Types of 
Lithography
Wavelength 
(nm)
Source
Range
436
Hg arc lamp
g-line
405
Hg arc lamp
h-line
365
Hg arc lamp
i-line
248
Hg/Xe arc lamp, 
KrF excimer laser
Deep UV (DUV)
193
ArF excimer laser
DUV
157
F2 laser
Vacuum UV (VUV)
~10
Laser produces 
plasma sources
Extreme UV (EUV)
~1
x-ray tube, 
synchrotron
x-ray
FIGURE 2.7 A comparison of (a) photolithography, (b) electron-beam, (c) x-ray lithography, and (d) ion-beam. (Based on 
Brodie, I., and J.J. Muray. 1982. The Physics of Microfabrication. New York: Plenum Press. With permission.13)

[Page 98]
98   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Major Features of X-Ray Lithography
X-ray lithography is superior to optical lithogra-
phy because of its use of shorter wavelengths and 
its very large DOF, as well as because exposure time 
and development conditions are not as stringent. 
Reproducibility is high because results are indepen-
dent of substrate type, surface reflections, and wafer 
topography. Another important benefit is that x-ray 
lithography is immune to low atomic number (Z) 
particle contamination (dust). With an x-ray wave-
length on the order of 10 Å or less, diffraction effects 
generally are negligible, and proximity masking can 
be used, increasing the lifetime of the mask. With 
a standard 50-µm proximity gap and using syn-
chrotron x-rays, 0.25-µm patterns can be printed; 
by decreasing the proximity gap to 25 µm, patterns 
of 0.15 µm can be resolved.14 The obtainable aspect 
ratio, defined as the structural height or depth to 
the minimum lateral dimension, reaches more 
than 100. With UV photolithography, under special 
conditions, an aspect ratio of about 25 is possible 
at most (see SU-8 in Chapter 1). An aspect ratio of 
100 corresponds to the aspect ratio attainable by wet 
chemical anisotropic etching of monocrystalline Si 
(see Chapter 4).
In x-ray lithography, there are essentially no 
optics involved, and although this sounds like an 
advantage, it also presents one major disadvantage 
because one can only work with 1:1 shadow print-
ing. No image reduction is possible, so the mask fab-
rication process is very complicated. In the United 
States, IBM remains the only major champion of 
x-ray lithography for NGL.15 At the end of 1999, IBM 
fabricated several PowerPC 604e microprocessor 
batches to demonstrate the viability of the method.16 
In Japan, there are still many players involved, such 
as NTT, Toshiba, Mitsubishi, and NEC.17
LIGA
The LIGA technique (a German acronym for Litho-
graphie, Galvanoformung, Abformung) was invented 
about 25 years ago.18 LIGA exploits all of the 
advantages of x-ray lithography listed above, and 
the process is schematically illustrated in Figure 2.9. 
The LIGA process involves a thick layer of resist 
(from micrometers to centimeters), high-energy 
x-ray radiation, and resist development to make a 
resist mold. By applying galvanizing techniques, 
the mold is filled with a metal. The resist structure 
is removed, and metal products result. Alternatively, 
the metal part can serve as a mold itself for precision 
plastic injection molding. Several types of plastic 
molding processes have been tested, including 
reaction injection molding, thermoplastic injection 
molding, and hot embossing. The so-formed plastic 
part, just like the original resist structure, may also 
serve as a mold for fast and cheap mass production 
because one does not rely on a new x-ray exposure. 
LIGA enables new building materials and a wider 
dynamic range of dimensions and possible shapes. A 
showpiece structure for LIGA technology is pictured 
in Figure 2.10, in which an ant holds a Ni gear. 
Of particular interest to miniaturization science 
is the possibility of creating 3D shapes with slanted 
FIGURE 2.8 (a) Schematic of a synchrotron. (b) Grenoble synchrotron (http://www.esrf.eu).

[Page 99]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   99
sidewalls (see Figure 2.11)19 and step-like struc-
tures. Two German companies, IMM (http://www.
imm-dueck.de) and Jenoptik Mikrotechnik GmbH 
(http://www.jo-mikrotechnik.com), have  developed 
an x-ray scanner that allows for continuous tilt 
angles of the mask/substrate assembly with respect 
to the x-ray beam, rotation of the mask/ substrate, 
and that contains an internal mask alignment sys-
tem for different masks for multiple exposures. 
The unprecedented precision attainable with LIGA 
makes this technique stand out against other 3D 
lithography methods such as DUV with SU-8 (see 
Chapter 1). Using the IMM/Jenoptik scanner, a verti-
cal resist wall with a precision better than 0.05 µm 
was demonstrated, and even resist walls inclined at a 
45° angle were made with an accuracy of 1 µm over 
a height of up to 500 µm.18 LIGA is further discussed 
in Chapter 10.
X-Ray Resists
An x-ray resist should have high sensitivity to x-rays, 
high resolution and resistance to chemical, ion, and/
or plasma etching, thermal stability of >140°C, and 
a matrix or resin absorption of less than 0.35 µm–1 
at the wavelength of interest. No presently available 
resist meets all those requirements. One material 
predominantly used in x-ray lithography is positive 
poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA), a material better 
known by its trade names PlexiglasTM and LuciteTM. 
Another name commonly used for polymers based 
on PMMA is acrylics. Clear sheets of the material are 
FIGURE 2.9 The LIGA process.
FIGURE 2.10 Ant with gear. (From Forschungszentrum 
Karlsruhe, Program Microsystem Technologies. With 
permission.)

[Page 100]
100   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
used to fabricate “unbreakable” windows, inexpen-
sive lenses, machine guards, and clear lacquers on 
decorative parts. At a wavelength of 8.34 Å, the 
lithographic sensitivity of PMMA  typically hovers 
about 2–6.5 J/cm2, a rather low sensitivity implying 
a small throughput. A possible approach to make 
PMMA more x-ray sensitive is the incorporation of 
x-ray-absorbing high atomic number atoms. Ano-
ther approach, discussed in Chapter 1, involves the 
use of chemically amplified photoresists. Other 
x-ray resists explored for LIGA applications are 
poly(lactides)20 and some SU-8 epoxy resin modifi-
cations.21 These resists show a considerably enhanced 
sensitivity and reduced stress corrosion compared 
with PMMA.19
Negative x-ray resists exhibit inherently higher 
sensitivities compared with positive x-ray resists, 
although their resolution capability is limited by 
swelling. Poly(glycidyl methacrylate-co-ethyl acry-
late) (PGMA), a negative e-beam resist, has been 
used in x-ray lithography. In general, resist materi-
als sensitive to e-beam exposure are also sensitive to 
x-rays and function in the same way; that is, materials 
that are positive in tone for electron-beam radiation 
typically also are positive in tone for x-ray radiation. 
A strong correlation exists between the resist sensi-
tivities observed with these two radiation sources, 
suggesting that the reaction mechanisms might be 
similar for both types of irradiation.22
The IC industry requires a typical resist layer 
not more than 1–2 µm thick. Thicker layers, between 
10 and 1,000 µm, are dictated by the need for 
high- aspect-ratio micromachines. The technology 
of app lying thicker layers of photoresist remains 
challenging. Spin coating of multiple resist lay-
ers (for relatively thin coats), resist casting with in 
situ polymerization of mildly cross-linked PMMA 
(for layers >500 µm), and plasma polymerization 
of PMMA with a possibility of subsequent dia-
mond grinding of the resulting layers are some of 
the techniques currently in use (see also Chapters 1 
and 10).
In the case of exposures with very high energy 
x-rays (hard x-rays), the associated wavelength is 
measured in angstroms, not in nanometers. At those 
energies, almost every type of polymer becomes a 
“resist,” and even “resistless” lithography becomes 
possible as thin films can be etched, vaporized, or 
ion-implanted directly.
X-Ray Masks
Another challenge in x-ray lithography, besides 
the low sensitivity of the resists and the high cost 
of sufficiently bright x-ray sources, is the mask 
making—already complex for producing DRAMs, 
but even more complex for 3D structures with 
high aspect ratios. In Table 2.3, the procedure 
for making an optical mask is compared with 
the procedure involved in making an x-ray mask. 
Technologies developed for manufacturing masks 
for submicrometer circuitry with x-ray lithography 
do not directly transfer to the fabrication of x-ray 
FIGURE 2.11 LIGA structures obtained at IMM using an x-ray scanner enabling continuous tilt angles of the mask/ 
substrate assembly. (Ehrfeld, W., and A. Schmidt. 1998. Recent developments in deep x-ray lithography. J Vac Sci 
Technol B16:3526–34.19) (Courtesy IMM.)

[Page 101]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   101
masks for building micromachines. An x-ray mask 
basically consists of a pattern of x-ray-absorbing 
material (a material with a high atomic number, 
Z, such as gold, tungsten, or tantalum silicide) on 
a membrane substrate transparent to x-rays (a low 
Z material, e.g., Ti, Si, SiC, Si3N4, BN, Be) (see 
Figure 2.12). The membrane must have windows 
or other features in certain areas for alignment 
purposes. Additionally, the material also needs 
to be thermomechanically stable to a few parts 
in 10.23 Mechanical stress in the absorber pattern 
can cause in-plane distortion of the supporting 
thin membrane, requiring a high Young’s modulus 
material. Also, humidity or the x-ray exposure itself 
might distort the membrane.
A fabrication sequence for an x-ray mask is shown 
in Figure 2.13. In this case, the x-ray absorber pat-
tern is ion beam-etched in a Au-film after the pat-
tern first has been written in a 300 Å PMMA layer 
with an e-beam. The absorber film typically consists 
of two metal layers: a thin layer of chromium for 
adhesion to the substrate, topped by a thicker layer 
of gold. The higher the required aspect ratio of the 
exposed resist, the thicker the gold layer of the mask 
absorber pattern must be to maintain a good con-
trast. The x-ray mask shown in Figure 2.13 only has 
a 400-Å-thick gold layer, which adequately covers 
DRAM manufacture but not high-aspect- ratio 3D 
structures, where 5–15 µm of gold absorber might be 
required for a 500-µm-thick resist and up to 50 µm 
for 10-cm-thick resists. A proximity x-ray mask, as 
shown in Figure 2.13, is placed close to the substrate, 
and its pattern is reproduced by exposure to x-rays. 
Various other schemes to make LIGA x-ray masks 
are explored in Chapter 10.
TABLE 2.3 Optical versus X-Ray Mask
Optical Mask
X-Ray Mask
Mask design: CAD
Mask design: CAD
Substrate preparation:
Substrate preparation:
Quartz
Thin membrane 
substrate (Si, Be, Ti)
Thin metal film 
deposition
Deposit plating base 
(50 Å Cr then 300 Å Au)
Pattern delineation:
Pattern delineation:
Coat substrate with resist
Coat with resist
Expose pattern 
(optical, e-beam)
Expose pattern 
(optical, e-beam)
Develop pattern etch 
Cr layer
Develop pattern
Strip resist
Absorber definition:
Electroplate 
Au (~15 µm for hard 
x-rays)
Strip resist
Cost: $1–3K
Cost: $4–12K
Duration: 3 days
Duration: 10 days
FIGURE 2.12 X-ray mask structure: Ta patterns on SiC or 
SiN membrane. The absorber Ta is 300 nm thick (stress ~ 0 
MPa). Membrane SiC or SiN is 2 m thick (stress = 100 MPa ~ 
200 MPa), 20 ~ 30 mm square. The minimum pattern width 
is 50 nm. Pattern position accuracy: 3σ < 30 nm (http://
www.ntt-at.com/products_e/x-ray_masks/index.html).
FIGURE 2.13 Fabrication of a silicon membrane-based 
x-ray mask with a gold absorber pattern. For use in high-
aspect-ratio micromachining, the gold absorber layer 
must be between 5 and 15 µm. (Based on Brodie, I., and 
J.J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrication. 
New York: Plenum Press. With permission.13)

[Page 102]
102   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Why Use a Synchrotron to Generate X-Rays?
The full power of x-ray lithography for minia-
turization science only materializes when using 
hard, collimated synchrotron radiation. To appre-
ciate this, we will explore the procedure using a 
less intense, less collimated beam from an electron-
beam bombardment source. A schematic diagram 
of an x-ray exposure system using an electron-
beam bombardment-based x-ray source is shown in 
Figure 2.14. 
The mask is typically offset above the wafer by 
about 10 µm after alignment. A proximity scheme, 
rather than a contact mask, is a useful feature, given 
the fact that an x-ray mask can cost up to $13,000. 
Because the x-ray source is finite in size and sepa-
rated by a distance, D, the edge of the mask does not 
cast a sharp shadow but rather has a blurry region 
associated with it, known as penumbral blur, d. 
Image blurring limits the ultimate resolution power 
of an x-ray exposure system, as shown in Figure 2.14. 
As diffraction effects can be ignored, simple geomet-
ric considerations can be used for relating the image 
to the pattern on the mask. From Figure 2.14, we 
estimate that the blurring, δ, at the resist plane is 
given by:
 
δ = s
d
D
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(2.1)
where s = mask-to-wafer gap
d = the source diameter
D = source-to-substrate distance
In a high-resolution system, δ can be controlled 
to within 0.1 µm. Spacing, s, should allow the 
accommodation of large-diameter masks while 
avoiding the high risk of contacting the resist and 
greatly increasing the occurrence of defects. The 
x-ray source must be sufficiently collimated. In prac-
tice, this translates into a small source diameter 
d (e.g., a few millimeters) and a large source-to-
mask distance (D). All these factors contribute to 
mini mizing penumbral blurring. Conventional 
e-beam-generated x-ray sources have sizes of a 
few millimeters and are about 40 cm away from 
the mask. Unfortunately, a large distance required 
for adequate collimation results in prohibitively 
long exposure times (e.g., hours) as a result of the 
weak intensity of these sources. With synchrotron 
radiation, on the other hand, penumbral blurring 
does not limit the spatial resolution. Because of 
the high collimation of synchrotron radiation, 
rather large distances between the mask and the 
wafer can be tolerated (about 1 mm for 1-µm line 
width patterns). In the electron storage ring or 
synchrotron, a magnetic field constrains electrons 
to follow a circular orbit, and the radial acceleration 
of the electrons causes electromagnetic radiation to 
be emitted forward. Thus, the radiation is strongly 
collimated in the forward direction and can be 
assumed to be parallel for lithographic applications. 
Because of the much higher flux of usable collimated 
x-rays, shorter exposure times become possible. 
The Advanced Light Source (ALS) synchrotron in 
Berkeley, for example, can deliver a flux of 0.4 W/
cm2 at 30 m for 3–9-keV radiation (http://www.als.
lbl.gov). Especially if one wants to generate a highly 
collimated photon flux in the spectral range required 
for precise deep-etch x-ray lithography in thick resist 
layers, synchrotron radiation comes close to being 
the ideal source because of its intensity, tunability, 
small source size, and small divergence.24
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the IC industry today 
favors improved photolithography over x-rays. Des-
pite huge efforts, until recently, x-ray lithography 
FIGURE 2.14 X-ray lithography with an electron-beam 
x-ray source. Inset, extent of penumbral effect calculated 
from geometric considerations. (Based on Brodie, I., and 
J.J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrication. New 
York: Plenum Press. With permission.13)

[Page 103]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   103
seemed abandoned as a candidate for NGL. The pro-
hibitive cost of introducing a new type of industrial 
lithography remains a strong deterrent, pushing 
existing photolithography to its absolute resolution 
limit. For example, by using UV phase-shifting mask 
lithography, planar IC features approaching x-ray 
lithography resolution have been made. Even in the 
micromachining field, there are continued attempts 
to squeeze more out of classical photolithography. 
Using techniques such as DUV lithography and deep 
dry etching with dense plasmas, LIGA-like, high-
aspect-ratio features have been produced, hemming 
in the potential for broader use of x-ray lithography 
even for building 3D miniaturized machines. But 
x-ray lithography might well make a comeback.25 
At recent lithography conferences, four in five NGL 
presentations were on x-rays. Highlights are there 
is no need for a synchrotron anymore as new types 
of light sources have been developed (e.g., from a 
laser); x-ray masks are cheaper than EUV masks; and 
15-nm resolution has been established.17
Charged-Particle Beam Lithography 
Introduction
In this section, we introduce lithographies based 
on charged-particle beams. Charged-particle versus 
non–charged-particle approaches were compared 
earlier in Figure 2.7. Both narrow-beam direct writ-
ing and flood exposure projection systems with 
electrons and ions will be considered. The mask fab-
rication process is significantly simpler in the case 
of narrow-beam lithography compared with flood 
exposure-based lithography.
In direct write systems, the computer-stored pat-
tern is directly converted to address the writing 
charged particle beam, enabling the pattern to be 
exposed sequentially, point by point, over the whole 
wafer. In other words, the mask is a software mask. 
Electron-beam (e-beam) and ion-beam (i-beam) 
lithographies involve high current density in narrow 
electron or ion beams. The smaller the beam sizes, 
the better the resolution, but more time is spent 
writing the pattern. This sequential (scanning)-type 
system exposes one pattern element or pixel at a 
time. Within that area, the charged-particle beam 
delivers maximum current (i), which is limited pri-
marily by the source brightness and column design. 
The experimental setup imposes a limit on the speed 
at which the writing beam can be moved and modu-
lated, resulting in a “flash” time in seconds (t). The 
maximum dose (in coulombs/cm2) deliverable by a 
particular beam is given by:
 
Dmax = it/A 
(2.2)
with A the pixel area in square centimeters. It will 
then be necessary to work with resists that react suf-
ficiently fast at Dmax to produce a lithographically 
useful, 3D image (latent or direct image). The e-beam 
method displays a large DOF, as active focusing over 
various topographies is possible. The continued 
development of better charged- particle beam sources 
keeps widening the possibilities for nanoscale engi-
neering through direct write lithography, etching, 
depositing, analyzing, and modifying a wide range 
of materials, well beyond the capability of classical 
photolithography. Table 2.4 lists some i-beam and 
e-beam applications.
Flood exposure of a mask in a projection system 
(that is, parallel exposure of all pattern elements at the 
same time, as we saw in DUV) is possible with ions 
and electrons as well. In principle, these methods can 
take advantage of the excellent resolution of charged-
particle beams while providing the throughput levels 
necessary for IC manufacture. Exposure masks are 
fabricated from heavy metals on semitransparent 
organic or inorganic membranes. We will learn how 
SCALPEL and IPL have the potential of making 
e-beam and i-beam high throughput. The high cost 
TABLE 2.4 Electron- and Ion-Beam Applications
Electron-Beam Applications
Ion-Beam Applications
Nanoscale lithography
Micromachining and ion 
milling
Low-voltage scanning 
electron microscopy
Microdeposition of metals
Critical dimension 
measurements
Maskless ion implantation
Electron beam-induced 
metal deposition
Microstructure failure 
analysis
Reflection high-energy 
electron diffraction 
(RHEED)
Secondary ion mass 
spectroscopy
Scanning auger microscopy

[Page 104]
104   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
of mask fabrication and the instability of the mask 
as a result of heating have postponed commercial 
acceptance of these high-energy exposure systems. 
Moreover, with i- and e-beams, flood exposure is 
limited to chip-size fields because of difficulties 
in obtaining broad, collimated, charged-particle 
beams. The most prevalent use of charged-particle 
beams remains the narrow-beam scanning mode.
Electron-Beam Lithography
Overview Electron beam lithography (EBL) refers 
to a lithographic process that uses a focused beam 
of electrons to form the circuit patterns needed for 
material deposition on (or removal from) a substrate. 
In contrast with optical lithography, which uses light 
for the same purpose, electron lithography offers 
higher patterning resolution than optical lithogra-
phy because of the shorter wavelength associated 
with the 10–50-keV electrons that it uses. Electrons 
are easily generated and can be used to either directly 
write the desired structure to the resist in electron-
beam direct write or in electron projection lithogra-
phy (EPL) flood exposure where a much wider beam 
is used (such as in SCALPEL). We also analyze the 
status of micromachined electron emission sources 
and electron emission source arrays.
Direct Write e-Beam Lithography Direct write EBL 
is a high-resolution patterning technique in which 
high-energy electrons (10–100-keV) are focused 
into a narrow beam and used to expose electron-
sensitive resists. There are two basic ways to scan an 
electron beam. In raster scanning, the patterns are 
written by an electron beam that moves through a 
regular pattern. The beam scans sequentially over 
the entire area and is blanked off where no expo-
sure is required. On the contrary, in vector scanning, 
the electron beam is directed only to the requested 
pattern features and hops from features to features. 
Therefore, time is saved in a vector scan system. The 
direct write technique was first developed in the 
1960s using existing scanning electron microscope 
(SEM) technology. A typical setup involves 30-keV 
electrons from a Hitachi HL-700F EBL. As a research 
solution, several groups are still “Rube Goldberging” 
their standard SEM to create customized e-beam 
writing systems. For example, Rosolen25 modified 
a Hitachi S2500 with a purpose-built pattern gen-
erator and alignment system (see also Figure 6.14 in 
Volume III for a schematic of an SEM and a photo 
of a commercial SEM machine). The instrument did 
not require alignment marks on the sample and was 
able to compensate for positional errors caused by the 
 sample stage and mask tolerances. The EBL method, 
like x-ray lithography, does not limit the obtainable 
feature resolution by diffraction because the quan-
tum mechanical wavelengths of high-energy elec-
trons are exceedingly small. EBL exhibits some other 
attractive attributes compared with photolitho-
graphy. These include:
 
1. Precise control of the energy and dose delivered 
to a resist-coated wafer
 
2. Deflection and modulation of electron beams 
with speed and precision by electrostatic or 
magnetic fields
 
3. Imaging of electrons to form a small point of 
<100 Å, as opposed to a spot of 5000 Å for 
light
 
4. No need for a physical mask; only a software 
mask is required
 
5. The ability to register accurately over small 
areas of a wafer 
 
6. Lower defect densities
 
7. Large DOF because of continuous focusing over 
varying topography; at 30 keV, electrons will 
travel on average >14 µm deep into a PMMA 
resist layer
Some of the disadvantages of EBL include:
 
1. Electrons scatter quickly in solids, limiting 
practical resolution to dimensions >10 nm 
 
2. Electrons, being charged particles, need to be 
held in a vacuum, making the apparatus more 
complex than for photolithography
 
3. The slow exposure speed: an electron beam 
must be scanned across the entire wafer (for 
a 4-in. wafer with a high feature density this 
requires ∼1 hour)
 
4. High system cost
The resolution of EBL tools is not simply the 
spot size of the focused beam; it also is affected 

[Page 105]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   105
by forward scattering of the e-beam inside the 
resist and substrate (at relatively smaller angles) 
and by backscattering from the substrate exposing 
the resist over a greater area than the beam spot 
size (Figure 2.15). This phenomenon is called the 
“proximity effect,” and hence the developed pat-
tern is wider than the scanned pattern due to the 
interactions of the primary beam electrons with the 
resist and the substrate, as illustrated in Figure 2.16. 
Line width variations caused by local feature den-
sity are an immediate result. Proximity correction 
algorithms are used to achieve more uniform resist 
exposure with EBL. Such corrections are computer 
intensive and time consuming, however, and make 
a slow technique even slower.
The biggest disadvantage of direct write electron 
lithography is its low throughput (approximately 
5 wafers/hour at less than 0.1-µm resolution). As a 
result, the use of EBL has been limited to mask mak-
ing and direct writing on wafers for specialized appli-
cations, for example, small batches of custom ICs.
Writing with an e-beam can be additive or sub-
tractive. In lithography the technique is subtractive; 
as an example of additive e-beam writing, e-beam-
induced metal deposition from a metal organic gas 
[e.g., W deposition from W(CO)6] has been used for 
the formation of microstructures of various geom-
etries (see Figure 9.29). These devices are made one 
by one rather than in a large batch. Usually, this type 
of slow, expensive fabrication technique prohibits 
commercial acceptance. Some microstructures, espe-
cially intricate microsystems, might be worth the 
bigger price tag. In that case, serial microfabrication 
techniques may not be as prohibitive as they would 
be in the case of ICs. 
Electron Emission Sources Three types of electron 
emission (field, thermionic, and photoemission) 
(Figure 2.17) underwrite the principle for electron 
emission source construction.26 Schottky emission 
(SE) and cold field emission (CFE) have been in 
common use, especially for nanometer-sized beams 
for ele ctron focusing systems. Emission of electrons 
from a metal under the influence of a field occurs 
in both SE and CFE. During SE, a blunt tungsten 
emitter tip coated with a low work function mate-
rial (ZrO) is heated to 1800 K, and thermionic emis-
sion takes place; that is, heat thermally excites the 
electrons enough to bring them out of the material. 
In other words, the field emission is helped along 
by thermal excitation of the electrons (the current 
in this case is given by the Richardson-Dushman 
equation).27 During CFE, a much smaller tungsten 
wire (radius of <0.1 µm) is used, and a very high 
field causes electrons to tunnel out of the material. In 
CFE sources, electrons tunnel from various energies 
below the Fermi level. With SE cathodes, thermally 
excited electrons (nontunneling electrons) escape 
over a field-lowered potential energy barrier (the 
current in this case is given by the Fowler-Nordheim 
equation).27 Both SE and CFE sources display simi-
lar energy spreads, but their energy distributions are 
mirror images (Figure 2.18).26
With photo emitters, energy is transferred to 
electrons by incident photons, and photoelectrons 
generated close to the surface are able to escape.
FIGURE 2.15 Scattering of the e-beam inside the resist and substrate and backscattering from the substrate exposing the 
resist over a greater area than the beam spot size.

[Page 106]
106   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Attaining high current levels in a submicrom-
eter electron beam at low voltages (500 eV–1 keV) 
is of interest for EBL and SEM (see also Chapter 6 in 
Volume III). When sensitive biological samples or 
electron beam-sensitive resists are involved, SEM 
pictures must be made at voltages less than 1 keV. 
At these low voltages, high currents are required 
to attain the needed detail and to minimize edge 
effects. Traditional SEM cathodes using tungsten 
hairpin filaments are very limited at low voltages; 
they cannot supply enough current in submicro-
meter beams at the low-voltage end. The high bright-
ness SE and CFE sources, including LaB6 and CeB6, 
can do the job (Table 2.5). SEM instruments with 
beam diameters of 1 nm have been made using such 
cathodes. For further reading about EBL, refer to 
Brewer.28
Electron-Beam 
Resists Numerous 
commercial 
e-beam resists are produced for mask making and 
direct write applications. Bombardment of polymers 
by electrons causes bond breakage; thus, in princi-
ple, any polymer material can function as a resist. 
However, the important considerations include 
sensitivity, tone, resolution, and etching resistance. 
PMMA exemplifies an inexpensive positive e-beam 
resist with a high-resolution capability and a mod-
erate glass transition temperature Tg (114°C). Micro-
posit  SAL601 (Shipley) is an often-used negative 
e-beam resist. SAL601, being novolak based, has much 
better dry etch resistance than PMMA resists. The 
same materials act as x-ray resists as well. This is not 
coincidental, as there is a strong relation between 
x-ray and e-beam sensitivity. A copolymer of glyci-
dyl methacrylate and ethyl acrylate (COP) is another 
frequently used negative resist in mask manufac-
ture. This material, although exhibiting good ther-
mal stability, has (as is typical for acrylates) poor 
plasma-etching resistance. The measured G value 
(see Chapter 1) of representative polymers in the 
COP family is about 10. Whelan et al.29 developed 
a low-energy electron beam top surface imaging 
chemically amplified (AXT) resist. This AXT posi-
tive-mode resist incorporates a poly(hydroxystyrene) 
base resin, achieves sub-100-nm resolution with 
2-keV electrons, and features a sensitivity less than 
1 µC/cm2.
Electron beam
Direction of scan
Desired line
Substrate
Real
resist
image
Resist
FIGURE 2.16 Proximity effect in direct write e-beam 
lithography.
FIGURE 2.18 SE and CFE energy distributions.
FIGURE 2.17 Photoemission, thermionic emission, and 
field emission.

[Page 107]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   107
Streblenchenko et al.30 patterned FeF2 and CoF2 
with 100-keV electrons from a scanning transmis-
sion electron microscope using a 0.5-nm diameter 
electron probe. The fluoride resist films are pre-
pared by thermal evaporation on thin carbon films. 
During electron bombardment, fluorine escapes 
and the transition metal coalesces. The resolution 
in a 20-nm-thick, very small-grained CoF2 film is 
about 5 nm. An electron dose of 1000 C/cm2 at 100 
keV removes 90% of all the fluorine in the 20-nm-
thick CoF2 film. Arbitrarily shaped nanometer-scale 
magnetic structures have been written in such CoF2 
films.
For further reading, see Handbook of Microlitho-
graphy Micromachining and Microfab rication, edited by 
P. Rai-Choudhury (published by SPIE Press), and Joe 
Nabity’s web site (http://www.jcnabity.com) describ-
ing the Nanometer Pattern Generation System. This 
system is the top-selling SEM lithography system at 
research institutions in North America, and its use 
is becoming widespread worldwide.
Electron Projection Lithography: Scattering with 
Angular Limitation Projection Electron Beam 
Lithography Electron projection lithography (EPL) 
is electron beam lithography (EBL) with a wide 
electron beam, using a mask for high through-
put. Scattering with angular limitation projection 
lithography or SCALPEL, a projection electron 
beam technique, using a 4× reduction and a step-
and-scan writing strategy, is the most prominent 
EPL technique. The aspect of SCALPEL (1995, 
Bell Laboratories and Lucent Technologies) that 
differentiates it from previous attempts at projection 
EBL is the use of a mask as illustrated in Figure 2.19. 
As in the case of x-ray lithography, the mask consists 
of a low atomic number membrane covered with a 
layer of a high atomic number material: the pattern is 
delineated in the latter. Although the mask is almost 
completely electron-transparent at the energies used 
(100 keV), using the difference in electron-scattering 
characteristics between the membrane and the 
patterned material generates contrast. The mem-
brane scatters electrons weakly and to small angles, 
whereas the patterned layer scatters them strongly 
and to high angles. An aperture in the back-focal 
(pupil) plane of the projection optics blocks the 
strongly scattered electrons, forming a high-contrast 
aerial image at the wafer plane.
TABLE 2.5 Comparisons of Electron Sources
Electron Source
Field Emission
Working
Principle
Electron emission
at high
temperature
Electron
tunneling in
high ﬁeld
Gun
Vacuum (torr)
10–5–10–6
10–7–10–8 
<10–9
Brightness (B)
(A/cm2 Sr)
~105
105–1010
~106
Gun
Material
LaB6
W
W
Filament
Temperature
~ 3000 K
2000_3000 K
Room
Energy
Width (eV)
2–3
2–3
0.2–0.5
Thermionic Emission
FIGURE 2.19 Scattering with angular limitation projec-
tion lithography or SCALPEL, a projection electron beam 
technique.

[Page 108]
108   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The mask is a continuous thin membrane (∼100 
nm) made of a low atomic number material like sili-
con nitride, patterned with a 25–50-nm-thick layer 
of a high atomic material such as tungsten (Figure 
2.20). To minimize image distortion, thick silicon 
struts support the thin silicon nitride membrane. A 
broad beam (2–3 mm in  diameter) of high-energy 
electrons (∼100 keV) passes through both mem-
brane and W pattern with minimal energy loss, 
leading to minimal heating effects. In SCALPEL, the 
aperture, rather than the mask, absorbs unwanted 
energy. Thus, the functions of contrast generation 
and energy  absorption are divided between the 
mask and the aperture. This means that very little 
of the incident energy is absorbed by the mask, 
minimizing thermal instabilities in the mask. It 
should be noted that, although the membrane 
scatters electrons weakly compared with the scat-
terer, a significant fraction of the electrons passing 
through the membrane are scattered sufficiently to 
be stopped by the SCALPEL aperture. Image field is 
still limited today to 1 × 1 mm at the mask level. 
The small images at the wafer are assembled (also 
stitched together) from the individual portions on 
the mask through a combination of interferometri-
cally monitored mechanical motions of the mask 
and wafer stages and electronic deflections of the 
beam (see Figure 2.21). The relatively low cost masks 
in SCALPEL [$27,000 vs. $40,000 for a phase shift 
mask (PMS), $40,000–59,000 for an EUV mask, 
and $5,000–10,000 for standard binary masks] may 
make this technique a cost-effective solution for 
lithography at 130 nm and less.31,32
In 1999, IBM introduced Projection Reduction 
Exposure with Variable Axis Immersion Lenses 
(PREVAIL).33 In this system, the optical axis of 
the  electron system is shifted, so aberrations are 
reduced, enabling larger scan fields.  The lens sys-
tem shifts the electron optical axis along a preset 
curvature and precisely deflects the electron beam 
to follow the variable axis curvature. The SCALPEL 
FIGURE 2.20 SCALPEL mask.
FIGURE 2.21 SCALPEL writing strategy involves step-and-scan writing.

[Page 109]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   109
proof-of-concept system was the first system to 
implement sequential illumination of the mask in 
an e-beam reduction projection system by mechan-
ical scanning of reticle and wafer at a 4:1 speed 
ratio underneath a stationary beam. PREVAIL car-
ries this concept further by combining electronic 
beam scanning with continuous stage motions.34 
This approach provides a significantly larger effec-
tive field size needed to achieve commercially viable 
throughput levels. 
Micromachined Electron Emission Sources There 
have been many attempts at decreasing the accel-
erating voltage in direct write EBL because lower 
energy electrons have a more confined lateral back-
scattering range. Moreover, it was found that low-
energy EBL leads to higher sensitivity—that is, for a 
given resist, a lower exposure dose is required than 
with higher energy electrons.35 Low-energy e-beams 
require thinner resist layers, as the penetration depth 
falls off very quickly (e.g., in a typical resist, 2 keV 
will penetrate more than 120 nm). Micromachining 
is ideally suited to deliver these low-energy electron 
writing tools. We only present some examples here 
of micromachined e-beam tools. A first example 
involves the work by Zlatkin et al.,36 who developed 
an elegant array of focused electron writing beams 
operating at 300 eV or less. The emitters used are 
cold field emission (CFE) sharpened tungsten tips, 
although thermionic or Schottky emitters would be 
feasible as well (for a description of different types 
of emission sources see above). The emitters are 
positioned several millimeters above the microma-
chined extraction holes of a lens array fashioned in 
a single crystal Si substrate. Because of the relatively 
large distance between the emitter and the extrac-
tion anode (a 1-µm aperture), no precise alignment 
is necessary. The setup and a detail of the lens sys-
tem are shown in Figure 2.22.
Each lens has a total area of 1 × 1 cm on a 500-
µm-thick silicon wafer and is generally built up from 
two 0.5-µm thin Si layers. The two thin Si layers are 
separated from each other and the Si substrate by 
insulating silicon oxide. An anisotropic etch into the 
single crystal Si side opposite the thin layered sand-
wich structure exposes the oxide/Si/oxide/Si/oxide 
thin layered structure. A short isotropic etch of the 
exposed oxide is followed by a 1-µm dry-etch bore 
in the first thin Si layer (first aperture, 1-µm diam-
eter). The small aperture is used to extract electrons 
from the emitter and to spatially confine the initial 
electron beam. Another isotropic etch through the 
second oxide is followed by the larger dry etched 
aperture (50 µm) in the second thin Si layer. This 
Electron emitters
Array of lenses
integrated on
a single wafer
Writing
beams
(a)
Electron emitter
at 300V
Substrate
(grounded)
Oxide
insulation
Extraction
membrane
(around zero V)
Focusing 
membrane
(0.–250 V)
Electrostatic
beam
reﬂection
Focused
spot
Linear sample
motion (piezo)
Sample grid and
support stage
1 µm
aperture
400 µm
Microlens
Deﬂection
electrodes
Focusing and
extraction
electrodes
1 cm
1 cm
(b)
Substrate with resist layer
FIGURE 2.22 Array of focused electron writing beams operating at 300 eV or less. Setup (a) and detail of the lens 
 system (b). (Redrawn from Zlatkin, A., and N. Garcia. 1999. Functional scanning electron microscope of low beam 
energy with integrated electron optical system for nanolithography. Microelectron Eng 46:213–17.36) 

[Page 110]
110   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
second aperture is used to focus the electron tra-
jectories and is well aligned with the first aperture. 
Changing the voltage on the extraction and focus-
ing electrodes on the thin Si membranes can change 
the focal length. To deflect the electron beam for 
scanning, a set of four electrodes symmetrically 
placed around the extraction and focus apertures is 
energized. The four electrodes are placed on top of 
another insulator layer on the focusing membrane. 
Applying potentials to opposite pairs of deflection 
quadrants deflects the electron beam laterally, and 
the focused spot can be swept over an area either to 
create an SEM image or to pattern a design in EBL 
mode. The aim is to eventually be able to image 
and write in the sub-100-nm range. Imaging in the 
30-nm range was demonstrated already, but writing 
is still inadequate (limited to >200 nm).
Micromachining presents other potential solu-
tions to make “nanolithography” a cost-effective 
and adequately fast proposition in the future. The 
next example addresses the issue of speed in writing 
with small e-beam systems by introducing massive 
parallelism. At Cornell’s National Nanofabrication 
Facility, a research group has been working on arrays 
of microfabricated, miniaturized electron lithogra-
phy systems based on STMs. In this STM aligned field 
emission (SAFE) system, the physical dimension of 
the electron beam column (length and diameter) 
are on the orders of millimeters. A field emission tip 
is mounted onto an STM; the STM feedback prin-
ciple is used for precision x, y, and z piezoelectric 
alignment of the tip to a miniaturized electron lens 
to form a focused probe of electrons as shown in 
Figure 2.23.37 Because many electron-optic aberra-
tions scale with size, microfabrication techniques 
enable lenses with negligible aberrations, resulting 
in exceptionally high brightness and resolution. 
STM controls also allow for stability of the emission 
by automatically adjusting the z-position via a piezo 
element. 
An array of these microcolumns, each with a field 
emission tip as the source with individual STM sen-
sors and controls, can generate patterns in parallel, 
one or more columns per chip (see Figure 2.23). 
The low voltage of operation of these tips obviates 
the need for proximity-effect corrections, as low-
voltage operations have proven to eliminate prox-
imity effects.37,38 For example, low-energy electrons 
(15–50 eV) from a SAFE system have been used to 
write patterns with 23-nm feature sizes, more than 
four times smaller than can be written on the same 
substrate and in the same resist with a tightly focused 
50-kV e-beam.38
Nanolithography with ultrasharp field emitters 
as discussed above needs to be distinguished from 
scanning probe lithography (SPL), discussed fur-
ther below. SAFE is based on an emission technol-
ogy, whereas tunneling is the mechanism in SPL. 
The key differences are the distance between tip and 
substrate (1 nm with SPL vs. 100 nm or more with 
sharp field emitter tips) and the electron generation 
mechanism (tunneling vs. emission).
FIGURE 2.23 A microcolumn based on STM aligned field emission (SAFE) and arrayed microcolumn lithography. (From 
Editorial. 1993. Novel electron-beam lithography system being explored at Cornell’s NNF. Solid State Technol 36:25–26. 
With permission.37) Acronyms are explained in the text.

[Page 111]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   111
Besides the application described above, micro-
machined emission sources are also used or are 
intended to be used for flat panel displays (see 
Spindt cathodes in Figure 2.42), high-temperature 
and high-radiation amplifiers, vacuum gauges, and 
radio frequency oscillators and amplifiers.39
Ion-Beam Lithography
Introduction In ion-beam lithography, resists are 
exposed to energetic ion bombardment in a vac-
uum. As in the case of e-beam systems, ion-beam 
lithography offers direct write and flood exposure 
fabrication opportunities. Direct write ion-beam 
lithography consists of point-by-point exposures 
with a narrow beam scanning source (e.g., 20 nm 
in diameter) of liquid gallium metal. In ion pro-
jection lithography (IPL), flood exposure, with a 
broad ion beam of H+, He2+, or Ar+ (e.g., 1–2 cm2 in 
size), of a stencil mask is used to pattern a substrate. 
Ion-beam lithography uses ions of a kinetic energy 
from a few keV up to several MeV. Ion lithography 
achieves higher resolution than optical, x-ray, or 
electron beam techniques because ions come with 
a smaller wavelength and therefore undergo almost 
no diffraction and scatter much less than electrons 
because the secondary electrons produced by an 
ion beam are of lower energy and have a short 
diffusion range. The total spread including for-
ward and backward scattering of the “stiffer” ion 
beams is typically less than 10 nm, and they only 
require about 1–10% of the electron dose to expose 
a resist. The resist can be an ordinary PMMA resist 
that absorbs most of the ions during exposure. 
Therefore, radiation damage to sensitive, underly-
ing structures is minimized and smaller compared 
with EBL and x-ray lithography. There is also the 
possibility of a resistless wafer process. However, 
the most important application of focused ion 
beams remains the repair of masks for optical or 
x-ray lithography, a task for which commercial sys-
tems are available.
Focused Ion-Beam and Deep Ion-Beam Lithography 
For ion-beam construction, liquid metal ion (LMI) 
sources are becoming the choice for producing high-
current-density submicrometer ion beams. With an 
LMI source, liquid metal (typically gallium) migrates 
along a needle substrate. By applying an electrical 
field, a jet-like protrusion of liquid metal forms at 
the source tip. The gallium-gallium bonds are bro-
ken under the influence of the extraction field and 
are uniformly ionized without droplet or cluster for-
mation. LMI sources hold extremely high brightness 
levels (106 A/cm2 sr) and a very small energy spread, 
making them ideal for producing high-current-
 density submicrometer ion beams. Beam diameters 
of less than 50 nm and current densities up to 8 A/
cm2 are the norm. In addition to Ga, other pure ele-
ment sources are available, such as indium and gold. 
By adopting alloy sources, the list expands to dopant 
materials such as boron, arsenic, phosphorus, sili-
con, and beryllium.
Compared with photons (x-rays and DUV light) 
or electrons, ions chemically react with the sub-
strate, allowing a greater variety of surface modifica-
tions such as patterned doping. The ion-beam spot 
size is the smallest possible—smaller than UV, x-ray, 
or electron-beam spots. The smallest focused ion-
beam (FIB) spots reached are about 4–8 nm, accom-
plished by using a two-lens microprobe system and 
a single-isotope gallium ion source.40, 41 Ion-beam 
lithography experiences the same drawbacks as an 
electron-beam system in that it requires a serially 
scanned beam and a vacuum.
FIBs can be used to perform maskless implan-
tation and metal patterning with submicrometer 
dimensions. FIB also has been applied to milling 
in IC repair, maskless implantation, circuit fault 
isolation, and failure analysis (see Table 2.4). In 
Figure 2.24, deposition, milling, and imaging are 
illustrated. Micromachining applications of ion-
beam technology are reviewed in more detail in 
Chapter 6 on mechanical energy-based removing 
(see Figure 6.32). As a machining tool, FIB is very 
slow. Except for research, it may take a long time 
to become an accepted “micromachining tool.” For 
additional reading on ion-beam lithography in gen-
eral refer to Selinger et al.42; for more specific read-
ing on FIB-induced deposition, see Brodie.13
Using high-energy (2 MeV) protons, deep ion-
beam lithography (DIBL) in PMMA produces 
submicrometer (300 nm) walls with an aspect 
ratio approaching 100. Three-dimensional complex 
microstructures with smooth walls and corners have 

[Page 112]
112   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
been produced this way. The range of 2-MeV protons 
in PMMA is 63 µm.43 Multiple exposures at different 
ion energies (e.g., 0.6 MeV and 2 MeV) allow produc-
tion of multilayer structures in single-layer resists 
such as SU-8.44
FIB systems have been produced commercially 
for approximately 20 years, primarily for large semi-
conductor manufacturers. FIB systems operate in a 
similar fashion to an SEM. When operated at low-
beam currents, the system can be used for imag-
ing, and when operated at high-beam currents, it 
can be used for site-specific sputtering or milling 
(see Figure 2.24).
Ion-Projection Lithography Ion projection lithog-
raphy (IPL), illustrated in Figure 2.25, is another 
of the candidates for high-throughput lithography 
dedicated to future 32-nm and sub-32-nm IC genera-
tions. In ion projection lithography, a stencil mask, 
consisting of an Si membrane with a fine pattern of 
holes, is illuminated with a uniform beam of hydro-
gen or helium ions at about 10 kV. The image of this 
mask is projected through an ion optical column 
and demagnified by 4× on the wafer. Ions are very 
efficient at exposing resists so that the exposure time 
per die is well under a second even for comparatively 
insensitive (1 μC/cm2) resists. Protons or helium 
ions are generated by a radio frequency-driven fila-
ment (ion source). An extraction system consists of 
an E × B mass separation unit and an electrostatic 
lens system.
The ion flood lithography mask typically con-
sists of a silicon membrane a few micrometers thin 
(3 µm) with pattern openings that allow protons 
to pass through.45 The mask fabrication process 
involves silicon-on-insulator (SOI) and dry etch-
ing.46 The holes are defined by EBL and reactive 
ion etching, whereby an oxide is used as a mask. 
Current IPL approaches, like SCALPEL, are 4× tech-
nologies. DOF is large and may reach up to 500 µm. 
The optics in IPL are all electromagnetic, and the 
FIGURE 2.24 FIB deposition can produce features 200 nm or less in thickness. FIB milling can produce even finer results. 
Approximately 30 minutes of FIB time was required to produce this structure (http://fibics.com/Micromachining.html).
Ion source
Extraction system
E × B mass
separation unit
Electrostatic
lens system
Parallel ion beam
Substrate
X-Y-stage
Stencil mask
Cold tube
Shutter
FIGURE 2.25 Ion projection lithography (IPL).

[Page 113]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   113
potential for a 50 × 50-mm exposure field exists. 
The membranes for this work typically consist of 
low-stress silicon nitride or Si. An example of a 
Si stencil mask created at the Cornell Nanoscale 
Science and Technology Facility for masked ion-
beam lithography is shown in the electron micro-
graph in Figure 2.26.
Ion-beam lithography has at least two advantages 
over EBL: 1) it has almost two orders of magnitude 
higher resist sensitivity, and 2) it has negligible ion 
scattering in the resist and very low backscattering 
from the substrate. A major problem is the potential 
for damage to sensitive electronic functions from 
the high energy ions.
Efforts in IPL are especially strong in Europe (e.g., 
at IMS, http://www.ims.co.at).
Imprint Lithography
Nanoimprint lithography (NIL) and step-and-flash 
imprint lithography (SFIL) are techniques that use 
hard molds instead of the soft molds used in soft 
lithography (see below). Stephen Chou at Princeton 
University invented NIL in 1994, with the aim of 
overcoming the diffraction-limited minimal feature 
sizes obtained in semiconductor manufacturing 
based on DUV lithography (http://www.princeton.
edu/∼chouweb). It is possible to break through the 
 diffraction-controlled size limit of  photolithography, 
for example, by using electron beam lithography 
(EBL). But the infrastructure of this approach, we 
know by now, costs billions of dollars. NIL pat-
terns a resist by deforming the resist shape through 
embossing (with a mold/stamp/template) rather 
than by  altering resist chemical structures through 
radiation (with particle beams). After imprinting 
the resist, a dry anisotropic etch is used to remove 
the residual resist layer in the compressed area to 
expose the substrate underneath. In NIL, a template 
(the mold/stamp/template) is made of a hard mate-
rial (usually Ni or Si) and is pressed against a layer of 
polymer. High temperature and pressure conditions 
mold and harden the polymer layer. As illustrated 
in Figure 2.27, the NIL technique is based on the 
craft of hot embossing, with an adaptation to mod-
ern semiconductor needs. In this example the tech-
nique is used to pattern a metal film via liftoff. The 
method relies on the excellent replication fidelity 
obtained with polymers and combines thermoplas-
tic molding with common pattern transfer methods. 
Once a solid stamp with a nanorelief on the surface 
is fabricated, it can be used for the replication of 
many identical surface patterns. The resolution of 
the NIL process is a direct function of the resolution 
of the original template/stamp fabrication process. 
FIGURE 2.26  IPL mask 80-nm feature sizes etched into 
a Si membrane mask. The patterns were defined using a 
Leica VB6 EBL. (From http://www.cnf.cornell.edu/image.)
FIGURE 2.27 Schematic illustration of the nano imprint lithography (NIL). The technique is used here to pattern a metal 
film via liftoff.

[Page 114]
114   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Electron beam writers that provide high resolution 
but lack the throughput required for mass produc-
tion are used to make them.
The University of Texas–Austin developed its own 
version of nanoimprint lithography, i.e., step-and-
flash imprint lithography (SFIL), in 1998.47 In 2001, 
the SFIL concept was licensed to Molecular Imprints, 
Inc., a company that  develops SFIL-capable tools 
(S-FIL ® systems) and related processes (http://www.
molecularimprints.com). The SFIL method is dis-
tinct from the original NIL in its use of UV-assisted 
nanoimprinting that molds photocurable liquids 
in a step-and-repeat, die-by-die fashion rather than 
by heat-assisted molding of full, polymer-coated 
wafers. As shown in Figure 2.28, in SFIL, a hard but 
transparent template/stamp/mold (fused silica) is 
used to mold a polymer photoresist layer. The fused 
silica surface of the stamp, coated with a release 
layer, is gently pressed into the thin layer of low vis-
cosity photoresist. The photoresist is subsequently 
exposed to UV light through the transparent tem-
plate to harden it. On separation of the fused silica 
template, one layer of the circuit pattern is left on 
the wafer surface. Molecular Imprints uses a fam-
ily of photocurable, low viscosity materials called 
MonoMatTM as its imprint resists. MonoMatTM is 
composed of an organic monomer that polymer-
izes in seconds using low-cost, broadband UV light 
sources. Whereas other imprint tools use spin-on 
imprint resist, S-FIL ® systems dispense low viscos-
ity imprint resist in very small droplets, one field 
at a time, immediately before the imprint step. 
Consequently, both the monomer dispenses and 
imprint functions happen in a step-and-repeat fash-
ion. A residual layer of polymer between features 
is eliminated by a dry etch process, and a perfect 
FIGURE 2.28 Schematic of step-and-flash imprint lithography (SFIL). (Colburn, M., S. Johnson, M. Stewart, S. Damie, 
T.C. Bailey, B. Choi, M. Wedlake, T. Michaelson, S.V. Sreenivasan, J. Ekerdt, and C.G. Wilson. 1999. Step and flash imprint 
lithography: a new approach to high-resolution patterning. Proc SPIE 3676:379–89.47)

[Page 115]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   115
replica of the pattern is ready to be used in semi-
conductor processing for etch or deposition. Only 
the template fabrication process, typically accom-
plished with an e-beam writer, limits the resolution 
of the features. It has been demonstrated that the 
mold templates do not deteriorate even after 1500 
imprints with sub-100-nm feature sizes. Although 
more progress is needed for widespread adoption of 
NIL and SFIL, sub-100-nm feature size devices can 
be reliably fabricated at a reasonable throughput. 
Implementing SFIL for high-volume manufacturing 
of the gate or contact level of transistors is not fea-
sible in the near term, but it is one of the few meth-
ods currently available for low-volume prototyping 
at the 32-nm node. Sub-20-nm features have been 
made already that exceed the present requirements 
of the ITRS. For example, using Molecular Imprints’ 
Imprio 250 system, Toshiba was able to print 18-nm 
isolated features and 24-nm dense features with 
<1-nm critical dimension uniformity and <2-nm line 
edge roughness.48 The Toshiba demonstrations also 
showed lower defectivity and improved results for 
imprint lithography. Defectivity levels of as low as 
<0.3 defects/cm2 are approaching those of immer-
sion lithography, and device overlay results were 
also within Toshiba’s required specifications. How-
ever, the approach faces alignment challenges, and 
critics say the cost of making the reticles will be 
high. Unlike conventional lithography, with mask 
patterns that are four times larger than the printed 
image, nanoimprint is a 1:1 template technology.
Others argue that imprinting processes are eco-
nomical because of the simplicity of the equip ment 
involved and the potential for high through put. 
As the rate of improvements in optical lithography 
decelerates and as the costs of manufacturing con-
tinue to escalate, there is an increased interest in 
printing and molding as alternative processes for 
microfabrication. As imprint lithography depends 
on another lithography technique (perhaps an NGL) 
to make the master, it does not really qualify as an 
NGL itself. Whereas it may initially have targeted 
semiconductor applications, the SFIL process is now 
being explored for manufacturing of several emerg-
ing technologies, such as photonic crystals, micro/
nano-optical components, and nanopatterned 
mag netic media for future hard disk drives. 
Progress in these new areas has been such that SFIL 
is likely to find its first commercial manufacturing 
applica tion in one of these emerging technologies 
well before it would be required for high-volume, 
sub-50-nm semiconductor lithography. A notable 
feature of nanoimprint technologies is their 
relatively low cost, which allows researchers 
to explore applications of nanopatterning that 
would never be economically feasible given the 
extraordinary cost associated with EUV lithography 
or even current-generation 193-nm steppers. This 
is very similar to the current applications of soft 
lithography (see below) with this difference that 
using a hard stamp renders NIL and SFIL more 
industrial manufacturing capable.
Thermal NIL using thermoplastic polymer films 
is focused on applications such as biochips, life sci-
ences, storage media, and optical devices, whereas 
SFIL is focused on LSI and magnetic storage applica-
tions, as summarized in Figure 2.29. Hitachi, with 
NEDO support, has also developed a sheet or roll-
to-roll prototype NIL machine and demonstrated 
the capability to process 15-m sheets.49 The goal is 
to create a continuous imprinting process by using 
belt molding (nickel-plated molds) and polysty-
rene sheets for large geometry applications, such 
as membranes for fuel cells, batteries, and possibly 
for displays. Currently the prototype tool does not 
Optical components
Energy devices
Bio-medical
applications
LSI
Magnetic
storage media
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
Pattern size (µm)
Tolerance (µm)
Termal-
nanoimprint
Photo-cure
nanoimprint
FIGURE 2.29 Usage domains of photocure (SFIL) and ther-
mal nanoimprinting (NIL). (Based on a figure by Hitachi.)

[Page 116]
116   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
offer the desired throughput, but the concept has 
been demonstrated, with future efforts focused on 
throughput, reliability, and repeatability.
Lithography Techniques in the 
Research and Development Stage
Introduction
In this section we cover the more futuristic litho-
graphy methods, some of which could cause a 
paradigm shift in the improvement of CD printing 
capability by perhaps a factor of 10. These might 
eventually enable devices that are a few nanometers 
in size and have switching speeds in the terahertz 
range. We review lithography with ultrathin resist 
layers and block copolymers, zone plate array lithog-
raphy (ZPAL), proximal probe-based lithographies 
such as atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning 
tunneling microscopy (STM), dip-pen lithogra-
phy (DPL), quantum lithography (two-photon 3D 
lithography), near-field scanning optical micros-
copy (NSOM), apertureless near-field scanning opti-
cal microscopy (ANSOM), holographic lithography, 
plasmonic lithography, and lithography with super-
lenses. In terms of an important lithography method 
that is capable of patterning resist on nonplanar sub-
strates (e.g., patterning a resist on the surface of a 
cylinder), we detail soft lithography, in which a soft 
mask can be bent around nonplanar substrates.
Very Thin Resist Layers
Introduction
Radiation scattering during exposure of a resist lim-
its resolution to no better than the resist thickness. 
Using ever thinner resist layers further improves 
the resolution and renders a low DOF—associated 
with  high NA lenses and short wavelength litho-
graphy—less critical. It is in this context that physis-
orbed Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) resists, self-assembled 
chemisorbed monolayer (SAM) resists, and ultra-
thin film (UTF) resists are explored.
Langmuir-Blodgett Resists
LB resist films were considered for some time 
for the finest lithography applications such as 
ultraresolution nanolithography. In this method, 
LB resist films are prepared by transferring organic 
monolayers floating on a water surface onto solid 
substrates. The procedure is explained in Chapter 8 
on chemical, photochemical, and electrochemical-
based forming (see Figure 8.13). Multilayer films of 
PMMA deposited by the LB technique, for example, 
have been investigated as a potential e-beam resist 
for nanolithography. The range of backscattered 
electrons limits the resolution of e-beam resists 
through the proximity effect, and nanometer-thick 
layers minimize this effect. Despite extensive work 
in the early 1980s to automate LB resist deposi-
tion systems, the technology is not envisioned as 
a viable manufacturing option because of its low 
mechanical and chemical stability.50,51 Other major 
problems concerning LB films need to be addressed 
before the method can become viable, and research 
in this area focuses on speeding up the coating pro-
cess, simplifying surface cleaning procedures, and 
improving etching resistance. Because the bonding 
of an LB film with the substrate is based on phys-
isorption, the adhesion is weak, and chemisorbed 
SAMs have become much more popular (see 
next section).
Self-Assembled Monolayers 
Molecular self-assembly is a chemical process in which 
molecules spontaneously organize to form larger 
ordered structures. Self-assembly is one aspect of 
supramolecular chemistry, i.e., chemistry beyond 
the molecule or the chemistry of the intermolecular 
bond.52 Self-assembly is studied extensively with 
an eye toward mimicking nature’s spectacular 
use of this bottom-up, automated manufacturing 
approach (see Volume III, Chapter 4 on packaging, 
assembly, and self-assembly). In one special type of 
self-assembly, self-assembling precursor molecules, 
from a solution or the vapor phase, react at interfaces 
to produce layers of monomolecular thickness that 
are chemically bonded to solid surfaces. Such layers 
belong to a class of materials known as self-assembled 
monolayers. The thermodynamically favorable bond 
formation involves chemisorption, which results in 
monolayers that are more stable than those possible 
with physisorbed LB films (see above). Therefore, 
SAMs potentially make for better resist candidates. 

[Page 117]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   117
Homogeneous and densely packed molecular layers 
incorporate reactive groups that form bonds with 
the substrate on one side, whereas an organic group 
(e.g., an alkyl group, R) on the other side imparts 
the desired chemical functionality to the surface 
modified with the thin film. Changing even one 
atom at the end group of self-assembling molecules 
is sufficient to dramatically alter macroscopic 
properties such as wettability, biocompatibility, and 
adhesion. For example, fluorinated SAM precursors 
form monolayers ∼1-nm thick with the same low 
wettability and resistance to adhesion typical of 
thick samples of TeflonTM.53 Many SAM films can 
be molecularly engineered to be patterned by 
various types of energetic radiation, including DUV, 
soft x-rays, ion beam, and low-energy electrons.54 
Scratching and microcontact printing (see below) 
can also be used to pattern SAMs. Structures less 
than 20 nm have been obtained by exposure with 
STMs and conventional EBL systems.55 SAMs have 
successfully been deposited on metals like gold, 
aluminum, titanium, zirconium, silver, copper, 
and platinum, as well as on SiO2, GaAs, and other 
surfaces.53 The quality of the films depends strongly 
on surface pretreatment. Pinhole density on a Au 
surface of less than 5/mm2 has been reported (see 
Müller and references therein55). Alkane-thiols and 
dialkyldisulfides are typical precursor materials 
for SAMs on gold, the most extensively studied 
substrate. The formation of long chain ω-substituted 
dialkyldisulfides on gold was first demonstrated in 
1983.56 Films of better quality are formed by the 
adsorption of alkylthiols.57 Alkanethiols and dialkyl-
disulfides are lipid-like organic molecules having 
the general formula HS-(CH2)n-X and X-(CH2)-SS-
(CH2)m-Y, respectively, where n and m indicate alkyl 
chain length and X,Y the end groups (e.g., -CH3, 
-azobenzene, -OH).58 Organosilanes are often used 
to form SAMs on Si. These molecules form a Si-O-
substrate siloxane bond on the Si surface, and the 
alkyl group R is responsible for the ordered nature 
of the film. For n > 6 (n is number of carbon groups 
in the R chain), SAMs have substantial crystalline 
order at the air/monolayer interface.53, 58
Microcontact printing, discussed below, also 
takes advantage of SAMs, and so does DNA and 
protein patterning, discussed in Chapter 8. 
Microcontact printing can be considered a merg-
ing of top-down manufacturing techniques (i.e., 
traditional lithography used to make the elasto-
meric stamp) with bottom-up manufacturing (i.e., 
proteins used to ink the stamp as building blocks). 
Protein and DNA patterning has evolved into an 
important research application for lithography. 
It is easy to imagine arrays with several different 
enzymes, antibodies, or DNA probes immobilized 
precisely onto a small transducer surface as a diag-
nostic panel for clinical applications. Different 
approaches for patterning organic materials are 
reviewed in Chapter 8.
Ultrathin Film Resist Layers
Polarity changes are at the heart of the newest 
ultrathin film (UTF) resist strategies. UTF resists 
represent the next evolutionary step in surface 
imaging technologies (see Chapter 1). In UTF, only 
the top monolayer of the resist changes, opening up 
the potential for further resolution improvement. 
Calvert et al.59 use a few monolayers (<10 Å) of 
organosilanes, which are chemisorbed onto a 
substrate. These chemisorbed films are easier to 
prepare and more robust than the physisorbed LB 
films (see above). DUV irradiation of these films 
cleaves organofunctional groups from the  film 
and produces an extremely hydrophilic surface 
(water contact angle < 10°) to which colloi dal Pd/
Sn catalyst does not adhere. Subsequent electroless 
deposition occurs only on those surface regions that 
were not irradiated. Thus, patterns of electroless Ni, 
Co, and Cu are produced on a variety of substrates, 
including silicon, quartz, alumina, metals, and 
polymers. These metal patterns serve as an efficient 
plasma-etching mask for pattern transfer. Fabri-
cation of 0.3-µm line widths has been demonstrated 
in this way.50, 59
Block Copolymer Lithography
Block Copolymers Background
Self-assembly of block copolymers is widely investi-
gated as a simple, inexpensive means for patterning 
high-density arrays of nanoscale features.60 Block 
copolymers comprise two or more different mono-
mer units, strung together in long sequences, which 

[Page 118]
118   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
can self-assemble into highly ordered lattices with 
unit cell dimensions of 10–100 nm. This length 
scale reaches well below the limits of conventional 
optical lithography. The simplest block copolymer 
architecture is the diblock. In diblock copolymers, 
two different types of polymer chains are connected 
at one end with a covalent bond (in a triblock copo-
lymer, three different polymer chains are involved, 
etc.). The immiscibility between the unlike segments 
drives them to self-assemble into periodic domains, 
a process termed “microphase separation.” This self-
assembly process is driven by an unfavorable mix-
ing enthalpy and a small mixing entropy while the 
covalent bond between the two blocks prevents 
macrophase separation. The size and shape of the 
periodic domains are dependent on the molecular 
weight and composition of the copolymer and typi-
cally assume morphologies of spheres, cylinders, and 
lamellae. These morphologies that represent differ-
ent phases are dictated by the Flory-Huggins inter-
action parameter χ, the degree of polymerization N 
(i.e., number of monomers per chain, proportional 
to the polymer molecular weight), and the volume 
fraction f of the blocks.61 The Flory-Huggins inter-
action parameter χ is a dimensionless parameter, 
which expresses, in units of kT, the energy change 
when one takes a molecule of pure A from an envi-
ronment of pure A and puts it in an environment 
of pure B; it is inversely proportional to tempera-
ture and reflects the interaction energy between 
the different segments of the polymer chains. As 
χ increases, phase separation becomes more likely, 
and as N increases, phase separation becomes less 
so. From Figure 2.30, we glean that if the volume 
fractions of the blocks are close to equal, a layered 
morphology is observed. When moving toward less 
equal block ratios, the observed morphologies go 
through a bicontinuous gyroid structure, hexago-
nally packed cylinders, and finally body-centered 
cubic-packed spherical domains. Thus, microphase 
separation leads to a wonderful variety of exotic 
ordered phases, increasing rapidly with the number 
FIGURE 2.30 Schematic diblock copolymer phase diagram: f = volume fraction of A in B, χ = Flory-Huggins interac-
tion parameter, N = diblock degree of polymerization. Known equili brium mesophases are spheres, cylinders, gyroid, 
and lamellae, as well as the disordered (homogeneous) state at small interblock segregation strength (χN). (Diagram 
adapted from Matsen, M.W., and F.S. Bates. 1996. Unifying weak- and strong-segregation block copolymer theories. 
Macromolecules 29:1091–98.62)

[Page 119]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   119
of blocks (with a triblock copolymer, a veritable 
“zoo” of structures results).
Block Copolymers Lithography
The previous section applied to bulk block 
copolymers. What about applying thin layers of 
block copolymers to surfaces? On surfaces, the 
microphase separation also results in nanoscale 
structures (domains) with sub-100-nm length 
scales, unless the surface has too strong an 
interaction with the polymer blocks that it 
prevents them from assembling. Block copolymer 
lithography refers to the use of block copolymers 
in the form of thin films, in which the domain 
structure provides a template for additive or 
subtractive pattern transfer operations, as illustrated 
in Figure 2.31. The idea of using block copolymer 
thin films as lithographic masks, as shown here, 
was first proposed in 1995 by Mansky et al.63 In 
Figure 2.31, we compare traditional lithography 
with block copolymer lithography. The material 
chosen for the block copolymer lithography demo 
is from IBM work, where a diblock copolymer, in 
which polystyrene and PMMA are tied together in 
one chain (referred to as PS-b-PMMA, with total 
molecular weight in the range of 60,000 g/mol), 
is used.64 When spun onto the surface of a silicon 
wafer, the two polymers separate, and although 
the molecules stretch out, the chemical bonds 
keep them attached. Subsequent heat treatment 
above the polymer glass transition temperature 
completes the microphase separation. Typical 
annealing conditions are 200°C (in a vacuum or 
N2) for times ranging between 30 minutes and 24 
hours, depending on the application. In the end, 
PMMA ends up concentrated in small cylinders 
surrounded on all sides by polystyrene. Thus, the 
diblock copolymer forms on its own into a nearly 
FIGURE 2.31 Traditional lithography compared with block copolymer lithography. Conventional lithography exposes a 
photoresist to ultraviolet light. A solvent etchant then removes the exposed part of the photoresist (for a positive type 
photoresist). Self-assembly patterning occurs when a diblock copolymer is heated, thereby separating the two polymers 
in the material into PMMA and polystyrene domains. The PMMA can then be selectively etched away, and the template 
of cylindrical holes can be transferred into the silicon dioxide. (Adapted from Stix, G. 2004. Nano patterning: IBM brings 
closer to reality chips that put themselves together. http://www.fractal.org/Fractal-Research-and-Products/Nano-
patterning.htm.65)

[Page 120]
120   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
perfect honeycomb-like template without the need 
of UV exposure or a mask.
Finally, the IBM team created an array of 20-nm-
wide pores in the polystyrene matrix by removing 
the PMMA using an organic etching solvent (ace-
tic acid). The same team used the thus-obtained 
perforated polystyrene structure to create the flash 
memory cells illustrated in Figure 2.32.64 After the 
PMMA etch, a subsequent etching step was used to 
transfer the same honeycomb pattern into an under-
lying layer of silicon dioxide. Next the polystyrene 
template is removed, and subsequently,  nanocrystal 
formation is accomplished by conformal a-Si (amor-
phous or nanocrystalline Si)* deposition over the 
whole wafer, and a dry anisotropic a-Si etch is used 
to remove all the deposited silicon except for that 
deposited in the holes in the oxide matrix. All that 
is left in the end are nanocrystalline cylinders sur-
rounded by silicon dioxide. The final steps place 
an insulating layer of silicon  dioxide (7-nm-thick 
con trol  or program oxide) over the top of the Si 
nano crystal islands and a polysilicon control gate 
is defined on top of the control oxide using con-
ventional lithography. These flash devices are pro-
grammed by injecting charge into the nanocrystals 
(through the program oxide) and erased by expel-
ling charge from the nanocrystals.
* Nanocrystalline silicon (nc-Si) is an allotropic form of silicon that 
is similar to amorphous silicon (a-Si), in that it has an amorphous 
phase. However, nc-Si has small grains of crystalline silicon embed-
ded within the amorphous phase. This is in contrast to polycrys-
talline silicon (poly-Si), which consists solely of crystalline silicon 
grains, separated by grain boundaries. The term nanocrystalline sili-
con refers to a range of materials around the transition region from 
the amorphous to the microcrystalline phase in a silicon thin film.
Creating closely spaced holes for a flash memory 
as demonstrated here is exceedingly difficult to 
accomplish with ordinary lithographic and deposi-
tion methods. Forming nanocrystalline silicon using 
these conventional techniques creates elements of 
different sizes. In contrast, the self- assembled nano-
crystals are evenly spaced and of uniform size, 
improving their durability and their capacity to 
retain a charge while allowing the cylinders to shrink 
to dimensions even smaller than 20 nm.
For most lithography applications, we must also be 
able to control the orientation of the self- assembled 
pattern with respect to the underlying substrate 
surface. Whereas the self-assembly process itself is 
driven by microphase separation of the constituent 
copolymer blocks, the ultimate pattern orientation 
is determined by the relative strength of the surface 
affinity for each block. Control of block copolymer 
film thickness plays a critical role in determining 
 vertical and lateral ordering and alignment of the 
nanostructures. A variety of approaches for con-
trolled domain orientations have been attempted, 
including topographic prepatterns and/or chemi-
cal prepatterns, an external electric field, thermal 
field, and several other methods as reviewed by 
Segalman,66 Hawker and Rusell,67 Black et al.,64 
Stoykovich and Nealy,68 and Hamley.60
In Figure 2.33, the patterned wettability (polar 
vs. nonpolar stripes) of the surface is used to align 
the nanodomains. Substrates are often preferen-
tially wetted by one of the blocks of the copoly-
mer, and the domains, e.g., lamellae or cylinders, 
tend to orient parallel to the substrate (see Figure 
2.33a and b, where all the lamellae align parallel to 
Silicon gate
Silicon substrate
Silicon
nanocrystals
Silicon dioxide
insulating layers
 
FIGURE 2.32 Flash memory: a layer of self-assembled silicon nanocrystals is inserted into an otherwise standard device 
as part of a novel IBM manufacturing process. (Based on Stix, G. 2004. Nano patterning: IBM brings closer to reality 
chips that put themselves together. http://www.fractal.org/Fractal-Research-and-Products/Nano-patterning.htm; and 
Black, C.T., R. Ruiz, G. Breyta, J.Y. Cheng, M.E. Colburn, K.W. Guarini, H.-C. Kim, and Y. Zhang. 2007. Polymer self assembly 
in semiconductor microelectronics. IBM J Res Dev 51: 605–33.65,64)

[Page 121]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   121
the substrate). Chemical modification can be used 
to neutralize or overcome surface and interfacial 
forces that tend to drive the domains to form paral-
lel to the plane of the film. Controlling the interac-
tions at the interfaces and scaling of the prepatterns 
can achieve parallel and perpendicular align-
ments of the lamellae achieved as shown in Figure 
2.33c and d: the polar PMMA block aligns over the 
polar stripes and the nonpolar polystyrene blocks 
over the nonpolar stripes. The block copolymers on 
the surface arranged themselves into the underly-
ing pattern without imperfections. In Figure 2.33e 
we show a finished structure after etching away the 
PMMA.
In a significant accomplishment, Kramer’s group69 
(University of California, Santa Barbara) has pat-
terned single crystals of 10-nm block copolymer 
spheres across an entire 2-in.-diameter silicon wafer. 
The silicon wafer was first patterned with photoli-
thography to produce 12-µm-wide hexagonal wells. 
A single layer of block copolymer spheres was then 
self-assembled inside those wells. Assessing the 
quality of the self-assembly of the block copoly-
mer in perfect crystal patterns is very  challenging 
because of the small feature size. Whereas high-
resolution microscopy can resolve individual block 
copolymer domains, this technique is limited to 
extremely small sampling areas (∼10−6 mm2). The 
Santa Barbara team used grazing-incidence small-
angle x-ray scattering (GISAXS) to check for the 
crystal quality over macroscopic areas (∼2 mm2), 
and they established it as nearly perfect, demon-
strating that single crystals resulted in each well. 
These results clarify why copolymers constitute a 
viable avenue toward building photonic crystals.
Summary/Applications
The obvious interest in using block copolymers for 
patterning is derived from the fact that they can self-
assemble to form dense arrays of nanostructures 
with dimensions and spacings that are difficult or 
even impossible to create by other means or are pro-
hibitively expensive to fabricate using conventional 
lithographic materials and processes. Polymer self-
assembly can define only a limited set of pattern 
geometries. However, within these constraints the 
materials provide a straightforward means for achiev-
ing feature sizes (<20 nm), pitches (<40 nm), and 
densities (∼1011/cm2) that are currently not achiev-
able by optical lithography.
The use of block copolymer films to pattern 
dense arrays of features is more than a decade old, 
and other reviews have covered this topic in more 
detail (for example, see Segalman,66 Hawker and 
Rusell,67 Stoykovich and Nealy,68 and Hamley60). 
These review articles reveal that patterns of dense 
periodic arrays fabricated with block copolymer 
templates have been demonstrated, and in some 
cases are being commercialized for the fabrication 
of quantum dots, magnetic storage media, flash 
memory devices (see Figure 2.32), semiconduc-
tor capacitors, nanowires, photonic crystals, and 
FIGURE 2.33 Patterned wettability of the surface causes the alignment of the nanodomains of a block copolymer. 
PMMA, polymethylmetacrylate; PS, polystyrene.

[Page 122]
122   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
nanopores. At IBM, a polymer self-assembly pro-
cess was successfully integrated into a 200-mm 
semiconductor fabrication facility at the IBM 
Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown 
Heights, New York.64
Zone Plate Array Lithography
Fresnel Zone Plate
Before getting into the details of zone plate array 
lithography (ZPAL), we take a look at the building 
blocks of a ZPAL, i.e., Fresnel zone plates. A Fresnel 
zone plate, invented by the French physicist 
Augustin-Jean Fresnel, is a single plate consisting 
of alternating opaque and transparent circular 
zones as illustrated in Figure 2.34. Zone plates use 
constructive interference of light rays from adjacent 
zones (Fresnel zones) to form a focus. The zones 
are spaced so that diffracted light constructively 
interferes at the desired focus. The Fresnel zone plate 
is a relative of the pinhole camera in that it does 
not use mirrors or lenses for its imaging properties. 
Because a diffraction lens can be manufactured 
using planar technologies, it is easier to make 
than a traditional refractive lens. The zone plate is 
especially useful in the UV and x-ray regions of the 
spectrum, for which other imaging devices are hard 
to find. Self-supporting gold zone plates have been 
manufactured for these spectral regions. Moreover, 
it comes with a higher refractive index, allowing for 
better contrast at the image plane. Unfortunately, 
the zone plate has low efficiency and suffers from 
veiling glare because most of the light incident on 
the zone plate passes through it undiffracted and 
falls onto the image plane.
The focal length f of a zone plate with many zones 
is a function of the radius of the outermost zone, rn, 
and its width, Δrn, where n is the number of zones 
and depends also on the wavelength λ (see Figure 
2.34), or:
 
f
2r
r
n
n
=
λ
Δ
 
(2.3)
To get constructive interference at the focus, the 
zone boundaries in a zone plate should switch from 
opaque to transparent at radii where:
 
r
n f
n
n
2
2
=
λ
λ
+
2
4
 
(2.4)
 
r
n f
n
n
2
=
λ +
λ2
4
 
(2.5)
and simplifying when the zone plate is small com-
pared to the focal length: 
 
r
n f
n =
λ  
(2.6)
where n is a positive integer, rn is the radius of the 
nth zone, f is the primary focal length, and λ is the 
wavelength of the illumination source. A Fresnel 
zone plate functions very much like an optical lens. 
Its optical properties do not depend on the material 
used, though, but are determined at the design time. 
For example, the diffraction limited resolution for 
FIGURE 2.34 A Fresnel lens. (From http://xradia.com.)

[Page 123]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   123
coherent light Rescoh of a zone plate is governed by 
the Rayleigh principle as:
 
Res
0.61NA and with
NA
2 r
we obtain:
coh
n
=
λ
=
λ
Δ
Res
r
coh
n
= 1 22
.
Δ
 
(2.7)
The resolution depends only on Δrn, the outer most 
zone width. NIL and EBL can be used for the fabri-
cation of large arrays of high NA diffractive Fresnel 
lens arrays.
In optical lithography, further increasing the 
NA of a lens is difficult and costly (see Figure 1.80 
where a maximum NA of around 0.9 is projected). 
In diffractive optics, making a high NA lens is not 
significantly different than making a low NA lens. 
At MIT, Fresnel lenses with an NA of 0.7–0.9 have 
been achieved.70
Zone Plate Array Lithography Detailed
Zone plate array lithography (ZPAL) requires no 
masks but rather uses arrays of individually targeta-
ble optical beams as shown in Figure 2.35. Beamlets 
of photons, which can be rapidly turned on and off, 
Spatial-light
modulator
Telescope
Zone-plate array
Collimating
lens
Spatial
ﬁlter
Laser
(b)
Scanning stage
Substrate
FIGURE 2.35 (a) Lumarray (http://www.lumarray.com) has demonstrated fully multiplexed ZPAL writing. (b) A laser beam 
is passed through a spatial filter and a collimating lens onto a digitally controlled programmable spatial light modulator 
(SLM), which replaces the photomask.70,71

[Page 124]
124   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
are projected through diffractive Fresnel zone plate 
lenses (see above), allowing myriad complex shapes 
to be fabricated. The zone plates are made using 
lithography techniques, and the shutters for each 
beamlet are micromechanical movable mirrors. 
ZPAL was originally developed at MIT’s nanostruc-
tures laboratory in the mid to late 1990s.70 As shown 
in Figure 2.35a, each zone plate is responsible for 
one unit cell of photoresist exposure corresponding 
to the diameter of one individual zone plate. The 
writing with the shutters on and off results in dot-
matrix-type lines, and moving the wafer in a serpen-
tine fashion under the focused beamlets results in a 
full pattern.
ZPAL is an example of maskless optical projec-
tion lithography (MOPL, see Chapter 1); a laser 
beam is passed through a spatial filter and a 
collimating lens onto a digitally controlled pro-
grammable spatial light modulator (SLM), which 
replaces the photomask (see Figure 2.35b). In one 
of the MOPL systems described in Chapter 1, the 
SLM used is the Texas Instrument micromirror 
array (see DMD™, Example 7.10). In operation, a 
desired pattern is fed into the SLM, and the mov-
able mirrors create the desired image. This image 
is demagnified and focused by a single reduction 
lens on the wafer to expose the photoresist. The 
use of refractive optics prevents the extension of 
this type of MOPL to wavelengths much shorter 
than 157 nm.
In the ZPAL system, the MIT team uses the Grat-
ing Light Valve™ (GLV)* from Silicon Light Machines 
(http://www.siliconlight.com) as the light modu-
lator. In contrast to MOPL, not a single refractive 
reduction lens is used. Instead, an array of (high 
NA) diffractive Fresnel lenses (“the zone plates”) 
is used to focus the incident light onto an array of 
spots on the photoresist-coated substrate. The light 
source in the ZPAL system preferably is a continuous 
wave laser (a pulsed laser source, as used in MOPL, 
severely limits system throughput). Light from the 
laser is passed through a collimating lens to create 
a uniform beam incident on the SLM, and the SLM 
* The Grating Light Valve™ (GLV) technology comprises a series of 
microscopic ribbons on the surface of a silicon chip; the GLV device 
is a diffractive MEMS that acts a dynamic, tunable grating that can 
switch, attenuate, and modulate laser light.
breaks that beam up into individually controllable 
beamlets. A telescope is placed such that each beam-
let is normally incident on one zone plate in the 
array. A Fourier filter within the telescope ensures 
that there is sufficient contrast between the on and 
off states. Each zone plate behaves like a microscopic 
lens focusing the light into a tight on-axis spot in 
its focal plane. The diffractive Fresnel lens optics in 
ZPAL allow the technique to scale to much shorter 
wavelengths than what is possible with MOPL (even 
x-rays are feasible).
In Chapter 1 we used a dimensionless constant k1 
to define the practical limiting resolution R in pro-
jection printing as:
 
R
k NA
1
=
λ
 
(1.16)
where k1 depends on resist parameters, process condi-
tions, mask aligner optics, and so on. The MIT team 
and a startup company called Lumarray (http://
www.lumarray.com) have demonstrated fully mul-
tiplexed ZPAL writing, multilevel alignment, and 
resolution corresponding to k1 < 0.3 [this is without 
any resolution-enhancing technology (RET) applied 
to it].71 In theory, ZPAL could use 193-nm optical 
lithography to inexpensively produce 45-nm chips. 
Moreover, this technology should theoretically work 
with 157-nm lithography and EUVL to create 20-nm 
ICs. ZPAL’s main competition at this point is regu-
lar 193-nm lithography enhanced with immersion 
lithography, a combination that could etch 45-nm 
features (see Chapter 1). ZPAL, however, might be a 
less-expensive and an easier solution. As in optical 
projection lithography, to increase NA, immersion 
lithography can also be applied to ZPAL; in experi-
ments at MIT, a resolution improvement of 1.36 was 
achieved this way.71
Quantum Lithography
Background
In optical projection lithography, a reduced-size 
image of complicated patterns is reproduced onto 
a photoresist. If light always followed the law of 
geometrical optics, there would be a  point- to-point 

[Page 125]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   125
relationship between the object (mask) and the 
image planes (resist). But, as we saw in Volume I, 
Chapter 5, light is a wave, and resolution is limited 
to a finite spot size, defined by the “point-spread 
function”. This point-spread function determines 
the spatial resolution of the imaging setup and 
limits the ability to produce demagnified images 
(see Rayleigh limit of 0.6 λ/NA, Volume I, Chapter 
5). It has been demonstrated that quantum lithog-
raphy with entangled N-photon states beats this 
Rayleigh diffraction limit by a factor of N; thus, in 
two-photon lithography the resolution is improved 
by a factor of two (as if one used a classical source 
with wavelength λ/2).72,73 Einstein, Poldosky, and 
Rosen (EPR) described the entangled two-particle 
state according to the principle of quantum super-
position in 1935, and they pointed out a surpris-
ing consequence: the momentum ΔPx (position 
∆x) for neither photon is known (see Heisenberg 
uncertainty principle, Volume I, Chapter 3); how-
ever, if one particle is measured to have a certain 
momentum (position), the momentum (position) 
of its “twin” is known with certainty, despite the 
distance between them (this is known as the EPR 
paradox).74 The entangled photon pairs come out 
from a point of the object plane, undergo two-pho-
ton diffraction, and result in twice-narrower point-
spread function on the image plane as shown in 
Figure 2.36.
Two-Photon 3D Lithography
Two-photon lithography is an intrinsic 3D lithog-
raphy technique that enables the fabrication of 
structures difficult to produce by conventional sin-
gle-photon processes and with far greater spatial 
resolution than most other 3D microfabrication tech-
niques. As we discuss in Chapter 8 in the section on 
stereolithography, the use of laser rapid proto typing 
by polymerizing a resin point by point enables the 
computer-aided manufacture (CAM) of 3D polymer 
MEMS structures. Linear absorption of laser light by 
a monomer for cross-linking typically limits the reso-
lution to the wavelength of the laser that is used. 
Moreover, deep penetration of the photons into 
the resin bulk is impossible because of the strong 
absorption of the light, so that the process is carried 
out necessarily thin layer by thin layer (see Figure 
8.30). Using two-photon excitation changes all this 
as it enhances the resolution and can penetrate deep 
into the bulk of the resin. When high- intensity light 
shines on a material, the probability for two-photon 
absorption is proportional to the square of the field 
intensity (see Volume III, Chapter 6 for an illustra-
tion of this effect), and thus is greatest at the cen-
ter of a Gaussian laser spot. Using a high NA lens, 
the laser spot can be made less than 1 µm in diam-
eter, and significantly narrower structures can be 
obtained because polymerization starts as soon as a 
certain threshold of intensity has been reached.
hω
Diﬀraction of a pair
Classical diﬀraction
∆x . ∆px = h
∆x
∆x
∆x . ∆px  < h
hω
hω
FIGURE 2.36 The entangled photon pair comes out from a point of the object plane, undergoes two-photon diffraction, 
and results in twice narrower point spread function on the image plane.

[Page 126]
126   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Therefore, by tightly focusing a femtosecond laser 
beam into a resin, subsequent photo-induced reac-
tions such as polymerization occur only in the close 
vicinity of the focal point, allowing the fabrication of 
subwavelength lithography and 3D polymer struc-
tures. Importantly, because the energy required to 
initiate polymerization is twice that of the incoming 
radiation, it is possible to excite deep into the mono-
mer as the material is transparent to one-photon 
excitation, whereas at the focus, where the intensity 
is high, two-photon excitation occurs.
Parthenopoulos and Rentzepis75 first demon-
strated the 3D microfabrication capability possible 
through two-photon polymerization in optical 
memory in 1989, and Wu et al.76 pioneered the tech-
nique’s utility for lithography in 1992. In two- photon 
lithography one often works with epoxy resins and 
urethane acrylates. Several two-photon photoinitia-
tors with very large two-photon absorption cross-
sections to be added to base polymers have been 
developed.77 In these photoinitiator molecules the 
photon energy that is absorbed is emitted as pho-
tons of a higher energy (up-converted fluorescence). 
The up-converted fluorescence is then used to induce 
various photochemical reactions such as photo-
polymerization and photodissociation of the base 
resin. Two-photon photolithography experiments 
using this idea recently have achieved 120-nm spa-
tial resolution using femtosecond laser pulses with 
a 780-nm central wavelength.78 Below we will see 
that using two-photon lithography combined with 
apertureless near-field scanning optical microscopy 
(ANSOM), a resolution nearly a factor of 2 better 
than the resolution achieved in far-field two-photon 
lithography experiments can be achieved. We will 
also learn that combining a metallic ANSOM tip 
and femtosecond laser pulses, lithographic pattern-
ing with resolution of 70 nm in a SU-8 photoresist 
can be obtained.
As we clarified above, energy transferred to the 
photosensitive resin material by two photons of 
wavelength λ corresponds to that transferred by a 
single photon of wavelength λ/2. At the same time 
one takes advantage of long-wavelength exciting 
light with larger penetration depth, which enables 
3D patterning of bulk material. Scanning the focus 
within the material allows one to produce micro-
scale and submicroscale structures. Subwavelength 
structures can be produced because the absorption 
profile for the two-photon process is narrower than 
the beam profile. Some examples of 3D two-photon 
lithography are shown in Figure 2.37. The two-
photon 3D lithography has also been used to make 
photonic crystals. In Chapter 8 on photochemical 
forming, we will come back to this two-photon 3D 
lithography process and its use in stereolithography 
or microphotoforming.
Quantum lithography is in its infancy, and many 
experimental challenges remain. The main prob-
lem is how to generate N-state entangled photons 
FIGURE 2.37 Two-photon 3D lithography. (a) Microspider array, the body of the spider is above the substrate; it is sup-
ported by eight 1-µm thick legs (http://www.laser-zentrum-hannover.de). (b) Venus micromodels on a human hair (http://
www.laser-zentrum-hannover.de). 

[Page 127]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   127
in a reasonable way. The next problem is how to 
develop an N-photon-sensitive photoresist. Third, 
the exposed field is very small. However, if we 
could overcome all three problems, we can beat the 
Rayleigh limit and approach the Heisenberg limit 
instead, thus approaching a resolution on the order 
of the atomic size.
Plasmon Lithography
Atwater and coworkers from Caltech introduced 
plasmon lithography in 2002. Plasmon lithography 
is based on plasmon resonance occurring in nano-
sized metallic structures, allowing for the replication 
of patterns with a resolution limit considerably below 
the diffraction limit.77 As we discovered in Volume I, 
Chapter 5 on photonics, when metallic nanoparti-
cles are excited in an electromagnetic field, they can 
exhibit collective electron oscillations known as 
surface plasmon oscillations. With the diameter of 
the particle much smaller than the wavelength of 
the incoming light, the oscillating charges produce 
an oscillating dipole field around the metal particles. 
At resonance, i.e., when the excitation frequency 
coincides with the natural relaxation frequency 
of the nanoparticles (ωp), this results in a strongly 
enhanced local electrical field. One can choose the 
nanoparticles such that their resonance frequency 
falls within the sensitivity range of an underlying 
photoresist. The field enhancement at the interface 
of the particle and the resist is then used to locally 
expose the resist, as schematically illustrated in 
Figure 2.38. A transparent mask with a configuration 
of metal nanoparticles deposited on it is brought 
into intimate contact with a thin layer of photo-
resist.  Kik et al.79 used spray deposition to obtain 
 ∼41-nm-diameter silver nanoparticles. To ensure that 
the local field intensity is enhanced directly below 
the metal particles, the illumination beam should 
be at a glancing angle to the resist (p-polarized 
light). Although the whole resist film is illuminated, 
development of the resist only affects the areas that 
received locally enhanced exposure. In this way an 
image of the mask pattern is transferred onto the 
resist layer. The choice of nanoparticle material and 
size depends on the required wavelength; as stated 
earlier,79 the resonance wavelength should fall 
within the resist sensitivity window. For example, 
to be able to use standard g-line photoresist, the 
resonance wavelength should lie between 300 nm 
and 460 nm. Additionally, to obtain high-field 
enhancement, long electron scattering times (τ) 
are desirable. Silver is a good candidate, with long 
reported electron scattering times up to 10 fs and 
a resonance occurring at a wavelength of ∼360 nm 
in air. The particles should also be small enough 
(< 40 m) to attain confined dipolar enhanced fields 
at the resist interface. Particles that are too large 
develop multipolar oscillations as we detailed in 
Volume I, Chapter 5.
From Volume I, Chapter 5 we know that the 
resonance frequency of the metal nanoparticles 
is not a fixed quantity. For a spherical particle, for 
example, the surface plasmon resonance occurs at 
the wavelength λ for which ε’ (dielectric constant 
of the particle) = −2εd (dielectric constant of the 
medium). Consequently, the wavelength at which 
resonance occurs can also be tuned by changing 
the refractive index of the surrounding medium. 
Using this method Kik et al.79 have shown that the 
local field enhancement occurring around metal 
nanoparticles when they are excited at the surface 
plasmon resonance frequency can be used to print 
nanoscale features in thin resist layers. Feature sizes 
less than λ/10 were generated in a parallel fashion 
using visible illumination and standard g-line 
photoresist. Further below we analyze ANSOM 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.38 Schematic representation of plasmon printing showing glancing angle illumination using polarized visible 
light, producing enhanced resist exposure directly below the metal nanostructures in the mask layer (a), and the result-
ing pattern in the resist layer after development (b).

[Page 128]
128   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
lithography, where a scanning metal tip is used 
to generate plasmons for exposing the underlying 
resist.
In Volume I, Chapter 5, we discussed how Pendry 
had the amazing insight that a superlens could be 
made from a flat slab of a negative refractive index 
material, which not only would bring incident rays 
to a focus but also has the capacity to amplify the 
near-field radiation so that it could contribute to 
image formation, thus removing the wavelength 
limitation completely. Thus, a superlens would pre-
vent image degradation and beat the diffraction 
limit established by Abbe! We also discussed the 
development of a poor man’s near-field superlens 
(ε < 0 and µ = 1) in 2003 by Zhang’s group at the 
University of California, Berkeley, who showed that 
optical evanescent waves can be enhanced as they 
pass through a silver superlens.80 This team imaged 
objects as small as 40 nm across with their super-
lens, which itself is just 35-nm thick.81 In contrast, 
current optical microscopes can only resolve objects 
down to around 400 nm. With the superlens, using 
365-nm illumination, features of a few tens of 10 
nm were imaged, clearly breaking Abbe’s diffraction 
limit.
Scanning Proximal Probe Lithography 
Introduction
Proximal probe techniques rely on the use of 
nanoscale probes, positioned and scanned in the 
immediate vicinity of a material surface. Their 
development is often viewed as a first step toward 
nanotechnology because they demonstrate the fea-
sibility of building purposeful structures one atom 
or one (macro) molecule at a time. Proximal probes 
used in lithography might involve electrical meth-
ods where a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) 
tip generates a local field/current that modifies the 
region directly under the tip (e.g., SiH → Si). A sec-
ond approach involves mechanical methods where 
a scanning force microscope (SFM/AFM) tip scrapes, 
thermally deforms, or transfers material at the 
surface; the latter material transfer method corre-
sponds to dip-pen lithography (DPL). Third, it may 
involve a near-field scanning optical microscope 
(NSOM) tip or apertureless near-field scanning 
optical microscopy (ANSOM) that exposes photo-
resist under the tip only.
The use of single proximal probe tips for lithogra-
phy poses a serious drawback in terms of processing 
speed. To use these techniques in the manufacture of 
ICs and data storage devices, it is necessary to devise 
a scheme for parallel processing by making arrays of 
these proximal probes.82
STM/AFM Background
The scanning tunneling microscope (STM) images 
the surface of conducting materials with atomic-
 scale detail (see Volume III, Chapter Six). STM was 
invented by Gerd Binnig and Heinrich  Rohrer of 
IBM’s Zurich Laboratory in 1981 (they received the 
1986 Nobel Prize for their invention).83 In general, 
STM works by bringing a small conducting probe tip 
up to a conducting  surface. When the probe is very 
close to the surface (<10 Å) and operating voltages 
in the ±10-V range are applied, very small currents 
are produced because the electrons in the probe and 
the surface have wave functions extending beyond 
the physical surface boundaries. To the extent that 
these spillover wave functions overlap, a measurable 
current results. The interesting part about this cur-
rent is that it depends exponentially on the spacing 
between the two  conductors (as well as the voltage) 
(see Volume I, Chapter 3 in the section on tunnel-
ing). A piezoelectric transducer accomplishes the 
z-axis distance variation between tip and sample. By 
changing the distance over 1 Å, the current changes 
by a factor of 10. In practice, the current is kept con-
stant through a feedback mechanism, and the probe 
moves up and down over the surface following the 
atomic contours it “sees.” The images produced by 
the STM come from the electronic structure and 
from the geometry of the sample. Up to 100 times 
more powerful than SEMs, STMs measure objects in 
the angstrom range.
Over time, many proximal probe were developed, 
and STM belongs now to a large new family of very 
local, proximal probes, such as atomic force micro-
scopes (AFMs), scanning electrochemical micro-
scopes (SECMS), scanning thermal microscopes, 
scanning capacitance microscopes, magnetic force 
microscopes, and scanning pH probes, enabling 
microscopy of almost any type of material and 

[Page 129]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   129
property (for more details see Volume III, Chapter 6 
on metrology). The common feature of these instru-
ments is that their resolution is not determined by 
visible light used for the interaction with the probed 
object, as in conventional microscopy.84
Besides their use for imaging and characteriza-
tion of surfaces, proximal probes can also be used 
to modify solid surfaces. Below we introduce some 
examples of this type of proximal lithography.
Scanning Probe Lithography 
Introduction In lithography, STM can produce 
nanostructures at higher resolution but at lower 
speed, whereas AFM can operate at higher scan-
ning speeds but offers lower resolution. AFM can 
be used to image and pattern any kind of material, 
making AFM the more widely used technique. AFM/
STM lithography can be classified as force assisted 
(including thermomechanical), bias assisted, and 
material transfer assisted.
Scratch Lithography—Mechanical Effect The sim-
plest (and perhaps the crudest method) to pattern 
a surface with a proximal probe is by scratching in 
scratch lithography (see inset in the heading of this 
chapter: copy of Pablo Picasso’s “Don Quixote” in 
polycarbonate patterned with scratch lithography). 
In this mechanical process, simply drawing an AFM 
tip across a surface with enough force may cut a 
trench, or the piezomechanism driving the AFM 
cantilever may be modulated in the z-direction to 
tap the tip on the surface as it is drawn over it. Cuts 
as narrow as 20 nm and 2 nm deep have been made 
in III–V semiconductor surfaces.85 One difficulty 
with the scratching approach has been that probe 
tips often break following direct collision with a 
solid surface. As a possible solution, carbon nano-
tubes have been mounted on the tip of silicon can-
tilevers, enabling lines as narrow as 10 nm (Figure 
2.39). Carbon nanotubes constitute the strongest 
material known along the axial direction and yet are 
highly elastic and flexible along the radial direction 
(see also Volume III, Chapter 3).86
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) worked 
with proximal probes to pattern thin films of chem-
ically amplified negative e-beam resist (SAL601 
from Shipley). Resist films of 30–70-nm thick were 
patterned with typical tip-sample voltages from –15 
to  –35 V, resulting in minimum feature sizes of 
23 nm.54 Using SAMs as resists (see above), it was 
shown that the lower the exposure threshold energy of 
the film, the better the lithographic resolution. There 
are indications that, with these low voltages (∼4 V), 
SAM resists will eventually yield sub-10-nm CDs.
In a variation on scratch lithography, a resistively 
heated AFM probe writes a data bit by scanning over 
a polymer surface. The combined heat and mechani-
cal force of the tip causes the polymer to soften and 
flow, thus facilitating the writing of data bits in a 
storage medium (see the millipede chip developed 
by IBM for thermal writing in a polymer for mem-
ory; Figure 2.4b).
Electrical Field-Induced Chemical Modification—
Electrochemical Effect In an alternative approach, 
surface oxides were induced on Si and GaAs by 
slightly increased tip voltages on samples held in a 
wet nitrogen atmosphere.38 In this method, the water 
meniscus formed at the tip-sample gap is dissociated 
by the negative tip bias, and the O− and OH− oxida-
tive ions react with the substrate to form localized 
oxide nanostructures. Because the molecular volume 
of the oxides is usually larger than that of the sub-
strate materials, raised nanopatterns are formed after 
the oxidation reaction. These thin oxides, although 
only a few monolayers thick, are sufficiently robust 
to act as a mask for subsequent reactive ion etching of 
FIGURE 2.39 Nanotube mounted on the micromachined 
tip of a Si cantilever is used as a nanopencil for lithogra-
phy of 20–10-nm lines (courtesy of Dr. M. Meyyappan, 
NASA Ames). SEM picture of nanotube mounted on tip of 
Si cantilever (http://cnst.rice.edu/pics.html).

[Page 130]
130   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
the substrate.54 The oxidation process is fairly general 
and may also be applied to Ti and Cr. At NRL, oxide 
features with lateral dimensions as small as 10 nm 
have been achieved.54 Multilayer resist films for 
nanopatterning with SPL have also been developed. 
Sugimura et al.87 work with a three-layer resist to pat-
tern insulating substrates such as thermally grown 
SiO2 with current injection from a scanning probe 
tip. The process sequence is sketched in Figure 2.40.
The bottom layer of the three-layer resist consists 
of 20 nm of amorphous Si (a-Si) and is prepared by 
ion-beam sputtering; a second layer consists of an 
intermediate 2-nm-thick Si oxide and is prepared by 
photo-oxidation of the top layer of the a-Si. The top 
resist layer is 2-nm thick and consists of an octade-
cylsilyl self-assembled monolayer (ODS-SAM). To 
pattern the resist on top of the insulating SiO2, a 
bias voltage is applied between the AFM probe and 
the conductive a-Si layer, which is made positive. 
When a scanning probe is operated in the presence 
of atmospheric water vapor, the probe and sample 
are automatically connected via a tiny water column 
created by capillary forces of the adsorbed water. This 
assembly serves as a minute electrochemical cell. As 
a result of the electrochemical anodization reaction, 
the monolayer resist becomes degraded in the region 
where the probe has passed, and the underlying 
photo oxide grows thicker. A subsequent etch in 0.5 
wt% HF removes the exposed oxide, and that pat-
tern is then transferred to the underlying a-Si by an 
etch of the a-Si in an aqueous solution of 25 wt% 
tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH). The lat-
ter solution etches Si but not SiO2. The a-Si is etched, 
and the etch stops when the underlying insulator is 
reached. The underlying thermal oxide can now be 
etched in HF and the resist stripped. Minimum fea-
ture sizes reached so far are about 50 nm.
Electron Scanning Probe Lithography-Bias Effect 
Lithography using electrons from a scanning micro-
probe offers several potential advantages over writ ing 
with a traditional e-beam source.84,88 One impor-
tant benefit is that the low energy of electrons in 
SPL (<50 eV) compared with those in EBL (10–100 
keV) avoids the detrimental effects of electron back-
scattering, thereby virtually eliminating proximity 
effects and thus producing enhanced resolution and 
superior pattern fidelity.54 Moreover, SPL using an 
STM can be operated in air, whereas EBL relies on a 
vacuum. Because of the small tip-to-sample distance, 
FIGURE 2.40 Schematic of AFM lithography on SiO2 using a multilayered resist system. (a) Cross-section. (b) Exposure 
by drawing patterns into the ODS-SAM layer by current injection from an AFM probe. (c) First development step by HF 
etching to remove the SiO2 just formed. (d) Second development step by TMAH etching to remove the a-Si in the exposed 
area. (e) Pattern transfer with HF to remove the thermal oxide in the exposed area. (f) Resist removal, i.e., removal of all 
the remaining a-Si in TMAH etch. (Based on Sugimura, H., O. Takai, and N. Nakagiri. 1999. Multilayer resist films appli-
cable to nanopatterning of insulating substrates based on current-injecting scanning probe lithography. J Vac Sci Technol 
B17:1605–08.87)

[Page 131]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   131
extremely small spot sizes are achievable so that the 
exposure dose may be confined to a beam diameter 
of less than 10 nm. The method enables wider expo-
sure latitude than EBL, a fact demonstrated in Figure 
2.41.89 In this figure, line width is plotted versus dose 
for SAL601 resist using both EBL and SPL lithogra-
phy systems. From the lower slope of the SPL curve, 
one deduces that SPL has higher dose latitude than 
EBL—in other words, SPL is less sensitive to dose 
variations. On the other hand, SPL is less sensitive 
and requires a higher dose to write the same feature 
size. The mechanism of electron bombardment in 
SPL is very different from that in EBL. In EBL, the 
mean free path of the bombarding electrons is long 
compared with the resist thickness. In contrast, low-
energy electrons in SPL have a mean free path less 
than 2 nm and travel through the resist under the 
influence of an electrical field, undergoing a num-
ber of scattering events before reaching the resist/
substrate interface.89 The latter makes it clear why a 
thinner resist will result in a better resolution. The 
influence of secondary electrons (i.e., all electrons 
emanating from the resist/substrate) in proximal 
probe lithography was investigated, for example, by 
Völkel et al.90
Writing speeds of an SPL tool of 0.1–100 µm/s are 
typical, and several thousands of micrometers per 
second have been demonstrated.91 However, very 
fast scanning will remain limited because the close 
tip-to-substrate distance (typically 1 nm with STM) 
is prone to cause tip crashes. 
With an ultrasharp tip (radius < 10 nm) in the 
emission mode rather than the tunneling mode, one 
may stay as far as 100 nm away from the surface. 
This approach not only enables faster writing (lim-
ited by the response of the piezoelectric material 
only) without fear of crashing the tip as frequently, 
but the high beam current also contributes to the 
possibility for exposure of large area patterns. Even 
at a distance of ∼100 nm, the beam diameter remains 
small at ∼30 nm.55 Structures of lateral dimension of 
∼20 nm have been created in SAMs using ultrasharp 
field emitters.92 The use of arrays of micromachined 
electron emission sources to improve throughput 
was covered earlier (see Figures 2.22 and 2.23) as a 
type of lower energy EBL with less lateral backscat-
tering. In this context a useful array of field emit-
ters for EBL is the so-called Spindt cathode array93 
shown in Figure 2.42. The use of such an array in a 
field emission display is shown in Chapter 7 (Figure 
7.90a). The cathode tips in Figure 2.42 are molybde-
num, and electrons are extracted from the tip at gate 
voltages as low as 20 V (70–100 V is more typical). 
In the newest embodiments of Spindt arrays, the 
molybdenum tip is replaced with carbon nanotubes. 
The use of nanotubes as field emitters was first pro-
posed by Walt de Heer, André Chatelain, and Daniel 
Urgate in 1995.94 Carbon nanotubes are excellent 
field emitters because of their chemical, structural, 
and electronic properties, which afford important 
aspects of robustness that have been lacking in the 
conventional metal and silicon field emitter arrays.
Material Transfer Methods: Atom Lithography or 
Mechanosynthesis and Dip Pen Nanolithography
Atom Lithography or Mechanosynthesis As we 
just learned, proximal probe equipment locally 
modifies surfaces95 and is used to expose resists and 
to oxidize and mechanically scribe surfaces. Also, 
a variety of direct atomic manipulations have been 
demonstrated with proximal probes.95 The electric 
field strength in the vicinity of a probe tip is very 
strong and inhomogeneous (e.g., a field of 2 V Å–1 
concentrated around the probe tip). This field can 
manipulate atoms, including sliding of atoms over 
EBL
SPL
0.1
1
10
100
1000
250
200
150
100
50
0
Line dose (nC/cm)
Line width (nm)
FIGURE 2.41 Line width versus dose for SAL601 resist 
using both EBL and SPL lithography systems. (Wilder, K., 
C.F. Quate, B. Singh, and D.F. Kyser. 1998. Electron beam 
and scanning probe lithography: a comparison. J Vac Sci 
Technol B16:3864–73.89)

[Page 132]
132   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
surfaces and transferring atoms by pick (erase) and 
place (write). Drexel calls this type of machining 
mechanosynthesis.96 Although both positive and 
negative voltages have been used for the deposi-
tion, a tip with a negative polarity is usually more 
stable with higher transfer probability. These atomic 
manipulation processes may be classified in parallel 
processes and perpendicular processes. In parallel 
processes, an adsorbed atom or molecule is induced 
to move along the surface (sliding); in perpendicu-
lar processes, the atom or molecule is transferred 
from the surface to the tip of a proximal probe or 
vice versa. Patterning surfaces at the atomic level 
is demonstrated in Figure 2.43a where a 60 × 48-Å 
image of four Pt adatoms is shown. The four atoms 
were herded into a linear array.95 Figure 2.43b shows 
seven Pt atoms compacted together. The theoretical 
resolution of a lithography technique based on these 
atomic probes is a single atom. Even with “only” a 
100-Å resolution, a single memory bit could be 
stored in an area that measures 100 Å on a side. This 
will enable bit storage of 1012 bits/cm2 as compared 
with 109 bits/cm2 with conventional technology.
In Figure 2.44 we show linear Au chains 2–20 
atoms  long, written by Ho et al.97 from the 
University of California at Irvine on a NiAl (110) 
surface via the manipulation of single atoms with 
an STM. Diff erential conductance (dI/dV) images of 
these gold chains reveal 1D electronic density oscil-
lations at energies 1.0–2.5 eV above the Fermi energy. 
Thus, Ho et al. were able to make a direct correlation 
between the geometric structure and the electronic 
properties of the Au chains, where the former is 
precisely known and the latter is directly measured. 
The same team, again using STM, also connected 
Au chains to a copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) mol-
ecule.98 A typical artificial molecule assembly is 
CuPc@2Au3, consisting of a CuPc molecule and two 
Au3 (three Au atoms in each chain) chains. When 
the separation between the Au chains is six lattice 
constants [of the underlying NiAl (100) substrate] 
FIGURE 2.42 Spindt field emitter array. For its fabrication see Chapter 7, and for its application in a field emission display 
see Volume III, Chapter 10.
FIGURE 2.43 Atom manipulation for nanomatching. 
(a) A 60 × 48 Å STM image of four Pt adatoms assembled 
into a linear array on a Pt (111) surface. Pt atoms were 
herded four unit cells apart along a close-packed direc-
tion of the Pt (111) surface. (b) A 40 × 40 Å STM image of 
a compact array of seven Pt adatoms. (From Stroscio, J.A., 
and D.M. Eigler. 1991. Atomic and molecular manipula-
tion with the scanning tunneling microscope. Science 
254:1319–26. With permission.95) For more pictures of 
STM atom manipulation, visit http://www. almaden.ibm.
com:80/vis/stm/gallery.html.

[Page 133]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   133
or more, a Pc molecule is unable to bridge the gap 
between the chains. With five lattice constants, the 
gap is small enough for a Pc molecule to fill it, and 
the molecule adsorbs symmetrically with two oppo-
site benzene rings attached to the Au chains (see 
the schematic in Figure 2.45j).
This work by Ho’s team is contributing to the 
detailed understanding of the electron transport 
through a molecule that bridges the gap between 
two metal electrodes. Electron transport through 
single-molecule junctions is determined by the local 
electronic structure of the nanoscale region that 
includes the molecule and a number of metal atoms 
in proximity to the molecule-metal contacts. As we 
will detail in Volume III, Chapter 3, a detailed under-
standing of the contact between metal- contacting 
electrodes and molecules is essential for the under-
standing of molecular electronics.
One major drawback to bear in mind with atom 
placing or removing techniques for micromachin-
ing is the time involved in generating even the sim-
plest of features. If one wanted to deposit a metal 
line 10 µm long, 1 µm wide, and 0.5 µm high, 1016 
atoms would need to be manipulated. Even at a 
deposition rate of 109 atoms/s, this would take more 
than 100 days. In the late 1980s, it took an IBM team 
1 week to spell out the IBM logo with an STM, put-
ting Xe atoms in place on a Ni surface. Only use of 
massive parallelism can help this cause.
Dip Pen Lithography AFMs suffer from an annoy-
ing problem: water from the air tends to attach 
itself to the tip, and the greater the relative humid-
ity, the more water that collects. This water menis-
cus  interferes with high-resolution AFM imaging. 
In 1999, Chad Mirkin, a Northwestern University 
researcher, realized that this meniscus could be 
turned into an asset. Because water is always mov-
ing from the tip to the substrate surface or vice versa, 
he decided to use it to float ink molecules onto the 
substrate. The principle of dip pen nanolithography 
(DPN) is shown in Figure 2.46.99 DPN is named 
after the 4000-year-old dip pen, with an AFM tip for 
a sharp point.
A reservoir of “ink” is stored on the cantilever 
holding the scanning probe tip, which is manipu-
lated across the surface, leaving lines and patterns 
behind. Lines as thin as 15 nm have been drawn. 
The attainable resolution depends strongly on the 
substrate roughness, the writing speed, and the 
 relative humidity. Smooth surfaces, fast scan rates 
(and thus shorter pen/paper contact), and lower 
 relative humidity (narrower water meniscus) all 
make for higher-resolution DPN. Thus far, most 
of the work has been carried out with a sulfur-
 containing compound called 1-octadecanethiol on 
gold surfaces. However, many inks and many differ-
ent types of surfaces can be written on, making this 
an interesting nanolithography option. A review 
of different ink/substrate combinations in DPN 
was listed by Ginger et al.100 An additional attrac-
tive feature of DPN lies in the fact that the same 
AFM can be used to write and image the results. 
The downside is that DPN is slow, but to offset this 
negative aspect, arrays of dip pens, similar to the 
millipede chip developed by IBM (see Figure 2.4b), 
can parallelize and speed up the technique: the 
newest array from Chad Mirkin’s group has 55,000 
pens.101 Much needed now is the development of 
an automated ink-coating system for inking indi-
vidual tips with its own ink; perhaps such a system 
FIGURE 2.44 STM topographic images from a single Au 
atom to a linear chain of 20 atoms, arranged in single-
atom increments from left to right. The images are cut 
from 20 separate scans, each taken with a sample bias 
voltage between 2.0 and 2.5 V and a tunneling current 
between 1.0 and 1.5 nA. Each chain has an apparent 
height between 2.4 and 2.7 Å. The chains between 12 
and 20 atoms long were constructed and imaged with a 
tip different than the tip used to construct and image the 
other chains. (Wallis, T.M., N. Nilius, and W. Ho. Electronic 
density oscillations in gold atomic chains assembled atom 
by atom. Phys Rev Lett 89:236802-1–2-4.97)

[Page 134]
134   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
can be achieved through the integration of micro-
fluidic technology. Besides its use in nanolithogra-
phy one can envision the use of DPN for placing of 
molecules on a surface precisely where one wants 
them as in protein and DNA arrays and to build 
3D nanostructures. Mirkin et al.102 have shown that 
through the use of DPN, protein nanoarrays can 
be constructed with high fidelity of specific protein 
binding to proper sites on a Si substrate. NanoInk 
(http://www.nanoink.net) is a start-up company com-
mercializing the DPN technology.
(j)
Low
Au
Au
High
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
FIGURE 2.45 Assembly sequence and schematic for a structure consisting of a CuPc molecule and two Au3 chains (2Au3). 
All images were taken with Vbias = 1 V, I = 1 nA. (a) CuPc molecule (appears as a protruding four-lobe structure) on the NiAl 
surface together with seven Au atoms, which appear as round protrusions. Four of the atoms have been aligned along 
the same Ni trough. Image size is 74 Å by 74 Å. (b) One of the atoms has been manipulated along the Ni trough to create 
a Au2 chain. (c) First Au3 is created; another atom is positioned five Ni-Ni lattice sites (5 × 2.89 Å) away from Au3, marking 
the starting position for another Au3 chain. (d) A second Au2 chain is created. (e) Assembly of the second Au3 chain and the 
2Au3 junction is completed. (f) Zoom-in image of the 2Au3 and CuPc molecule; the area of image is 47 Å × 47 Å. The image 
was taken with a tip modified by a CuPc molecule adsorbed on it. (g) The CuPc molecule has been moved into the junction 
between the two Au3 chains. As is clear from the image, the molecule is adsorbed only on one of the chains. (h) The posi-
tion of the molecule was adjusted by manipulating the leftmost lobe of the molecule in (g) toward the lower Au3 chain. 
The molecule is adsorbed symmetrically between the two chains, forming CuPc@2Au3. (The tip still has a CuPc molecule 
adsorbed on the apex.) (i) Image of same structure taken after removing the molecule adsorbed on the tip. The area cor-
responds to that of (e). (j) Schematic showing the relation between the internal molecular structure, adsorption geometry, 
and STM image. Black circles represent the Au atoms comprising the two Au3 chains. (From Nazin, G.V., X.H. Qiu, and W. 
Ho. 2003. Visualization and spectroscopy of a metal-molecule-metal bridge. Science 302:77–81.98)
FIGURE 2.46 Dip pen nanolithography: transport of 
molecules to the surface via water meniscus (http://chem-
groups.northwestern.edu/mirkingroup/dpn.htm).

[Page 135]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   135
In Figure 2.47, we illustrate an extension of DPN, 
a writing method dubbed “thermal dip pen nano-
lithography.” In conventional DPN, the probe tip 
is coated with a liquid ink, which then flows onto 
the surface to make patterns wherever the tip makes 
contact. This approach has been hampered by an 
inability to turn the ink flow on and off. A thermal-
DPN (tDPN) method developed by Georgia Tech’s 
William King and NRL’s Lloyd Whitman solves this 
specific problem by using easily melted solid inks 
and special AFM probes with built-in heaters that 
allow writing to be turned on and off at will.103,104 
Moreover, conventional DPN cannot be used in a 
vacuum because liquid inks evaporate, whereas the 
solid materials used in the thermal process bond to 
surfaces, allowing them to be used in vacuum envi-
ronments that are part of conventional semicon-
ductor manufacturing. The thermal materials also 
provide sharper features because they do not spread 
out like liquid inks.
In Figure 2.49 a topographic image of a surface 
scanned with a heated AFM cantilever tip for 256 
sec in each of four 500-nm squares is shown. The 
cantilever temperature is shown for each of the four 
scans. No writing is observed from the two low-
temperature scans. The scan at 98°C resulted in 
light deposition. Robust deposition occurred during 
the final scan when the cantilever temperature was 
increased to 122°C.
Combining thousands of individually controlled 
AFM pens into arrays could allow writing of faster 
and more complex semiconductor patterns. One of 
the first inks used in thermal writing was octade-
cylphosphonic acid, which melts at about 100°C. 
But the tDPN technique has been used also to apply 
other materials, including solders and polymers.
Near-Field 
Optical 
Scanning 
Microscope 
and 
Apertureless Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscopy
Introduction: Breaking the Diffraction Limit To 
obtain a resolution better than Abbe’s optical micro-
scopy limit (Δ ∼
λ
∼200 
x
2NA
nm, based on Volume I, 
Equation 5.1), complicated and costly electron 
microscopy (with resolution of a few nanometers) 
or STMs (with atomic resolution) are required. 
Unfortunately, these techniques sacrifice many of 
the advantages associated with traditional optical 
microscopes (including nondestructiveness, low 
cost, high speed, reliability, versatility, accessibility, 
ease of use, informative contrast, spectroscopy, and 
FIGURE 2.47 Diagram illustrating thermal dip pen nanolithography. When the cantilever is cold (a), no ink is deposited. 
When the cantilever is heated (b), the ink melts and is deposited onto the surface. (Image courtesy of Naval Research 
Laboratory, http://gtresearchnews.gatech.edu/newsrelease/tdpn.htm.)
FIGURE 2.48 A topographic image of a surface scanned 
with a heated AFM cantilever tip for 256 s in each of four 
500-nm squares. The cantilever temperature is shown for 
each of the four scans. No deposited material is observed 
from the two low-temperature scans. The scan at 98°C 
resulted in light deposition. Robust deposition occurred 
during the final scan when the cantilever temperature was 
122°C. (Courtesy of Naval Research Laboratory.) 

[Page 136]
136   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
real time). As seen in Volume I, Chapter 5 on pho-
tonics, combining a scanning proximal probe tech-
nique with optical microscopy in so-called scanning 
near-field optical microscopy, NSOM provides an 
attractive solution to this dilemma. In NSOM, the 
sample is illuminated by a nanoscopic light source 
located close to the surface (10 nm), and the resolu-
tion is  dictated by the source diameter a, or Δx ∼ a ≤ 
100 nm. This is achieved by using nanoscale aper-
tures in NSOM or by using apertureless techniques 
(e.g., a scattering metal tip) in ANSOM or scattering 
scanning near-field optical microscopy. A typical 
NSOM probe is a commercial single-mode optical 
fiber, tapered and coated by a thin CrAl film with 
an aperture of ∼100 nm. In ANSOM, light interac-
tion over nanoscale dimensions is enhanced with 
the use of scattering nanoscale tips, nanospheres, 
and so on. The conceptual idea of near-field optics 
and near-field microscopy came from the semi-
nal proposal of E. H. Synge. It was Synge (in 1928) 
who proposed that if source or detector is scanned 
close to a surface, resolution is dependent on probe 
size and probe-sample distance instead of the Abbe 
limit.105 Synge corresponded about his idea with 
Einstein, who accepted the concept but was doubt-
ful that it could be reduced to practice. But Einstein 
was wrong; today NSOM is an important tool for 
nanotechnologists. NSOM constitutes a form of len-
sless optics with subwavelength resolution, indepen-
dent of the wavelength of the light being used! The 
light coming from an imaged object in the near field 
contains a considerable amount of nonpropagat-
ing, evanescent waves containing high lateral spatial 
resolution, information that decays exponentially 
within a distance comparable to a wavelength. It is 
this evanescent wave information, the information-
rich light, we capture in NSOM and ANSOM, thus 
enhancing the resolution. Several NSOM implemen-
tations using apertures and SNSOM were illustrated 
in Volume I, Chapter 5.
Aperture-based probes are the best developed and 
come with a typical resolution of 50–100 nm. Tip fab-
rication involves heating and pulling and  chemical 
etching of glass optical fibers. Apertureless probes 
enhance local scattering and feature a 1–20-nm reso-
lution. NSOM and SNSOM microscopy are reviewed 
in Volume III, Chapter 6.
NSOM and ANSOM Lithography Besides their utility 
for imaging applications, NSOM and ANSOM may 
also be used for direct write optical nanolithogra-
phy.106 From the above, near-field scanning optical 
microscopy refers to the interaction of light with a 
sample close to a metal aperture (NSOM) or a solid 
metal tip (ANSOM). The light source is held in place 
in a manner similar to those used for other scanning 
proximal probe microscopes. To write patterns into a 
photoresist, one uses aperture NSOM in illumination 
mode or ANSOM in plasmon mode. The first NSOM 
lithography results obtained in several labs dealt with 
nanometric tips on standard positive photoresist and 
on self-assembled monolayers of alkanethiols and 
using laser sources visible up to the UV range. The 
NSOM approach to improved spatial resolution in 
lithography unfortunately is limited because of the 
very small apertures, through which only a very small 
fraction of the light can be transmitted. ANSOM 
overcomes this problem by using sharp metallic 
tips instead of fiber apertures to achieve nanometer-
scale resolution. In ANSOM, light is polarized along 
the sharp axis of the metallic tip, and this induces a 
high concentration of surface plasmons that results 
in strong enhancement of the electromagnetic field 
in the local vicinity of the tip—typically more than a 
few tens of nanometers (see plasmonic printing with 
metal nanoparticles discussed above)! Yin et al.107 
demonstrated near-field two-photon optical lithogra-
phy by using 120-fs laser pulses at 790 nm in an aper-
tureless near-field optical microscope and produced 
lithographic features, even without optimization, of 
70 nm in a commercial SU-8 resist. Thus, combining 
ANSOM with two-photon absorption can provide a 
spatial resolution as high as l/10 λ, nearly a factor of 
two better than the resolution achieved in previous 
far-field two-photon lithography experiments.
Limitations of NSOM and ANSOM lithography 
include very low working distances, very shallow 
depth of field, and very long scan times for pattern-
ing large surfaces with a high-resolution image.
Holographic Lithography
Holography Background
As this section concerns holographic lithography, 
a short reminder about what holography is, is in 

[Page 137]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   137
order. Holography comes from the Greek words for 
whole (holo) and graphy (or graphic, image), stand-
ing for “the entire image.” The Hungarian physi-
cist Dennis Gabor invented holography in 1948 
and received the 1971 Nobel Prize for Physics for 
it. However, the field of holography only took off 
after 1962 with the invention of the laser, provid-
ing the coherent light needed to make a hologram. 
In holography two laser beams are used, a reference 
and an object beam, to snap pictures of an object. If 
these two beams are coherent, optical interference 
between the reference beam and the object beam, as 
a result of the superposition of the light waves, pro-
duces a series of fringes on standard photographic 
film. These fringes form a type of diffraction grating 
on the film, which is called a hologram. To recon-
struct the image in the imaging medium one can go 
about it two different ways. First, on using the same 
reference light that was used to record the hologram, 
one obtains a virtual image of the object. Second, if 
one uses the phase conjugate light of the reference 
light to shine through the recording medium, the 
image of the object is reproduced.
Holographic Lithography or 
Interference Lithography
As mentioned above, a hologram is a complex 
interference pattern that can recreate a 3D image. 
In Figure 2.49 we show how a generic hologram 
is recorded. The “partially silvered” mirror in this 
figure reflects and transmits fractions of the inci-
dent light. This is useful because the reflected and 
transmitted beams are coherent (i.e., have a defi-
nite common phase) even when the incident light 
has a time-varying random phase. From Volume I, 
Chapter 5 we indeed recall that reflection from a sur-
face produces a “phase-flip” of 180º in the reflected 
light. This is true for a 180º reflection. However, 
when light is reflected at an angle other than 180º, 
the phase change in the reflected light is the same as 
the reflection angle. Thus, light reflected at 90º has a 
90º change in phase. In holographic lithography the 
specific object is the mask.
In holographic or interference lithography (Figure 
2.50), a holographically constructed photomask 
re places the standard photomask.108,109 In the holo-
graphic recording or construction phase of the holo-
gram (Figure 2.49), one uses the interference of two 
mutually coherent beams. A well-collimated flood 
laser (object beam) passes through the photomask 
and is diffracted by the mask features. This signal 
beam contains the amplitude and phase informa-
tion of the photomask. When this diffracted object 
beam passes through the holographic recording 
layer, it interacts with the reference beam to create 
the interference pattern. The reference beam con-
verts the amplitude and phase information into 
intensity information, which is stored in the photo-
sensitive holographic medium (Figure 2.50a). The 
light- sensitive recording layer stores the holographic 
image data as variations in the refractive index of 
the photopolymer. Pattern printing or image recon-
struction is accomplished by scanning a collimated 
laser illumination beam—the phase conjugate of the 
reference beam—to create the hologram. By interac-
tion with the recorded hologram, the latter beam gen-
erates an image of the original photomask at precisely 
its original position in space (Figure 2.50b). When a 
FIGURE 2.49 Recording a hologram. (From John G. Cramer.)

[Page 138]
138   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
photoresist-coated substrate resides in this plane, a 
copy of the original mask can be printed. The image 
is diffraction limited, but because the holographic 
mask and the wafer can lie very close, a high NA and 
thus a very good resolution are possible (0.3 µm has 
been reported). Only the size of the photomask itself 
restricts the image field size. The holographic image 
of the original mask exactly overlays the wafer sur-
face with a full field (large area recording).
Holographic lithography may also use the inter-
ference pattern of multiple coherent lasers. Simple 
grating patterns, 2D dot arrays, and 3D lattice pat-
terns can be fabricated using two-, three-, and four-
beam interference, respectively.
Holographic lithography is readily extendible 
to electrons. Spacings of a few nanometers to even 
less than 1 nm have been reported using electron 
holograms.110 This is because the wavelength of 
an electron is always shorter than for a photon of 
the same energy. Atom lithography is also possible: 
the momentum of an atom is even larger than for 
electrons or photons, allowing even smaller wave-
lengths, per the de Broglie relation.
A benefit of using interference lithography is the 
quick generation of dense features over a wide area 
without loss of focus. A major drawback of interfer-
ence lithography is that it is, in general, limited to 
patterning arrayed features. Recently, holographic 
lithography has emerged as a very promising tech-
nique for the inexpensive fabrication of high- quality 
3D photonic crystals. Together with direct laser writ-
ing approaches, holographic lithography offers the 
attractive possibility of controlled incorporation of 
functional elements using direct laser writing in a 
second step.
Soft Lithography 
Introduction
Soft lithography refers to a series of methods that 
use a patterned elastomer as a stamp, mold, or mask 
to generate micropatterns and microstructures 
instead of using a rigid photomask. Soft lithography 
has become an important tool in the nanofabrica-
tion arsenal.111 Today the name is a collective term 
for a set of new techniques: microcontact printing 
(µ-CP), microtransfer molding (µ-TM), micromold-
ing in capillaries (MIMIC), and microreplica mold-
ing.112 The method is a very exciting research tool 
and may offer advantages over conventional meth-
ods for patterning of nonplanar substrates, unusual 
materials, and large areas.
In soft lithography, a master mold is first made by 
lithographic techniques, and an elastomeric stamp 
[e.g., polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS); see Figure 2.51] 
is cast from this master mold. A simple example 
procedure for making a PDMS (Sylgard 184, Dow 
Corning, http://www.dowcorning.com) stamp from a 
photolithographically patterned resist layer as master 
mold is outlined in Figure 2.52. A thin layer of SU-8 
photoresist [SU-8 (50) from MicroChem, Newton, 
100 µm 
100 µm 
Object beam
Recording layer
1 photomask
Reference beam
Illumination beam
Hologram
Wafer
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 2.50 Basic arrangement for holographic lithog-
raphy. (a) The photomask pattern forms a hologram in 
the polymer recording layer. (b) Using the illumination 
beam, the high-resolution holographic mask image is 
reconstructed into a printable masking layer in the resist-
coated substrate. (From Brook, J., and R. Dandliker. 1989. 
Submicrometer holographic photolithography. Solid State 
Technol 32:91–94; and Omar, B., S. Clube, F. Hamidi, M.D. 
Struchen, and S. Gray. 1991. Advances in holographic 
lithography. Solid State Technol September:89–94.108,109)
Low cost
Easy fabrication
Elastomeric/soft
Moldable
Surface chemistry
Bonding
Biocompatible
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Si
Si
Si
O
O
n
FIGURE 2.51 Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). (Sylgard 184, 
Dow Corning, http://www.dowcorning.com.)

[Page 139]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   139
MA] is coated on a Si wafer. The resist is patterned 
by UV lithography. To make things really fast (<24 h) 
and inexpensive (<$20), the contact mask for the 
UV lithography may be a transparency on which—
using drawing software such as Freehand—a design 
is printed with a high- resolution printer (>3300 dpi). 
After development, the photoresist is treated with (tri-
decafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl)-1-trichlorosilane 
(Hüls Chemicals, http://www.degussa.com) vapor to 
facilitate PDMS removal once cured. A 10:1 ratio of a 
PDMS mix is cast on the photoresist film and cured 
for 1 hour at 60°C in an oven.111
PDMS has many properties that make it suitable 
as a stamp material. It 1) provides a surface that 
has a low interfacial free energy (∼21.6 dyn/cm), 
2) is chemically inert, 3) is nonhygroscopic (does 
not swell with humidity), 4) passes gas easily (don’t 
start laughing now), 5) has good thermal stability 
(∼186°C in air), 6) is optically transparent down to 
∼300 nm, 7) is isotropic and homogeneous, 8) is 
durable (stamps may be used > 50 times over several 
months without degradation), and 9) has interfacial 
properties that are easy to modify.114
Many PDMS stamps can be generated, and each 
one may be used many times. The rubber stamp can 
be used in a number of different ways. Some differ-
ent soft lithography processes are outlined below. 
For further reading on soft lithography, consult 
Xia et al.113,114 and visit the soft lithography hom-
epage at University of Washington/Washington 
Technology Center (http://www.ee.washington.edu/
research/microtech/cam/CAMsoftlithhome.html). 
Another excellent site to follow the experimen-
tal steps involved in soft lithography is on JoVE 
(http://www.jove.com), the “YouTube” for experi-
mental procedures.
Microcontact Printing
In microcontact printing (µ-CP), the PDMS rubber 
stamp is coated with an ink of the molecules (e.g., 
alkylthiols or a protein) that one wants to print 
in selected patterns on a solid substrate. During 
stamping, only the raised parts of the stamp collect 
the “ink.” The inking of the substrate consists of 
self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on the solid 
surface formed by covalent chemical reaction. The 
inked areas are self-passivating and exhibit very 
low interfacial tension that repels additional mole-
cular layers; therefore, SAM forms only in areas of 
conformal contact between polymer and substrate. 
STM studies of the transferred SAMs reveal an 
achievable monolayer order indistinguishable from 
that found for SAMs prepared from solution.53 The 
SAM pattern acts as a highly localized and efficient 
barrier to some wet etches. This lithogra phic tech-
ni que—once the master is made—is not subject to 
diffraction or DOF limitations. The deformability 
of the elastomeric stamp allows it to accommodate 
rough surfaces. The method even works on rounded 
substrates (such as optical fibers or lenses) with 
radii of curvature of less than 10 µm. PDMS-based 
elastomers do not adhere to novolak or PMMA-
based polymers, allowing convenient replication 
of masters formed by EBL.53 The technique has 
been used, for example, to build an antibody grat-
ing on a Si wafer by inking the rubber stamp with 
an antibody solution.115 The antibody grating alone 
produces insignificant diffraction, but on immuno-
capture of cells the optical phase change produces 
diffraction.
In Figure 2.53 we illustrate a generalized scheme 
for microcontact printing of proteins.
FIGURE 2.52 Making a PDMS mold. (Based on Xia, Y., and 
G.M. Whitesides. 1998. Soft lithography. Angew Chem Int 
Ed 37:550–75; and Xia, Y., and G.M. Whitesides. 1998. Soft 
lithography. Ann Rev Mater Sci 28:153–84.113,114)

[Page 140]
140   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Microtransfer Molding
In microtransfer molding (µ-TM), illustrated in 
Figure 2.54, the rubber mold is filled with a polymer 
precursor, and the rubber stamp is pushed up against 
a substrate (e.g., a Si wafer or another flat sheet of 
PDMS).116 The polymer in the rubber stamp relief is 
cured and transferred to the substrate, and the stamp 
is peeled off. Schueller et al.111 used this technique to 
make curved glassy carbon microgrids. In this case, 
a photoresist was used as polymer precursor and 
cured while sandwiched between a patterned PDMS 
rubber stamp and a planar PDMS sheet. To obtain 
the curved carbon grid, the PDMS sandwich was 
deformed against a curved cylinder during curing. 
After removing the two thin strips of PDMS, the free-
standing and curved photoresist grid was pyrolized 
(carbonized, see Volume III, Chapter 5) at high tem-
perature in an argon atmosphere (Figure 2.55).
Pouring liquid prepolymer
onto a fabricated master
Curing/hardening
Releasing replica formed
from the master
Covering the stamp with
solution of protein 
Using the stamp to transfer
the protein
FIGURE 2.53 Microcontact printing of protein.
Liquid prepolymer
Residual polymer ﬁlm
Remove excess
prepolymer 
Place on the support
Cure, remove mold
FIGURE 2.54 Schematic description of microtransfer mold-
ing (µ-TM). (Based on Xia, Y., and G.M. Whitesides. 1998. 
Soft lithography. Angew Chem Int Ed 37:550–75; and Xia, 
Y., and G.M. Whitesides. 1998. Soft lithography. Ann Rev 
Mater Sci 28:153–84.113,114) PU is prepolymer (polyurethane).
FIGURE 2.55 Curved glassy carbon structure. (Schueller, 
O.J.A., S.T. Brittain, and G.M. Whitesides. 1999. Fabrication 
of glassy carbon microstructures by soft lithography. 
Sensors Actuators A A72:125–39.111 Courtesy of Dr. G.M. 
Whitesides, Harvard University.)

[Page 141]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   141
Micromolding in Capillaries
In micromolding in capillaries (MIMIC), illustrated 
in Figure 2.56, the rubber stamp is pushed up against 
a substrate, and liquid is applied to access holes in 
the mold. The liquid wicks into the cavities formed 
by the rubber mold against the substrate. Sometimes 
this process is pressure, electro-osmosis, or vacuum 
assisted.117 The polymer is cured, and the stamp is 
removed. MIMIC has been used to fabricate poly-
meric transistors.118 
Microreplica Molding
In microreplica molding, the master mold is repli-
cated in PDMS by casting and curing the PDMS pre-
polymer (polyurethane, PU); this negative replica is 
then oxidized in an oxygen plasma for 1 minute and 
exposed to fluorinated silane for 2 hours to provide a 
surface with low adhesion to PDMS. PDMS is then cast 
against this negative replica, cured, and peeled away 
to reveal a positive replica of the original master.109
Soft Lithography Summary
Soft lithography is capable of generating structures 
as small as 30 nm and is especially attractive as a 
potential method for fabricating devices on nonplanar 
substrates. The major advantage of soft lithography 
is its short turnaround time. It is possible to go from 
design to production of replicated structures in less 
than 24 hours. The method is low cost, and, unlike 
photolithography, soft lithography is applicable to 
almost all polymers and thus to many materials 
(e.g., carbon, glasses) that can be prepared from 
polymeric precursors.
Some of the disadvantages of PDMS-based soft 
lithography include 1) shrinkage during curing 
(∼1%), 2) swelling by nonpolar solvents such as tolu-
ene and hexane, 3) thermal expansion, 4) level of 
defects in printing SAMs, 5) softness of the mate-
rial limits the achievable aspect ratio through sag-
ging, and 6) deformation of the soft elastomeric 
stamps. These factors limit the accuracy in registra-
tion across a large area and may limit the practical 
utility in nanofabrication and multilayer devices.114 
Because soft materials are used, deformation of the 
stamp/mold, low reproducibility (because of distor-
tion), and defects (yield) are problems that prevent 
this technology from being a viable manufacturing 
technique. The technique constitutes a very handy 
research tool but most likely will not reach the com-
mercial manufacturing stage.
Soft lithography technology inspired new ap -
proaches to fabricate nanodevices that do not have 
commercial potential, i.e., NIL and SFIL (see above). 
For example, Krauss et al.115 used NIL to fabricate a 
400-Gb/in.2 storage device containing sub-10-nm 
minimum features. As we saw earlier, in NIL the mas-
ter mold may be an electron beam and RIE-patterned 
SiO2 layer (e.g., 10-nm-wide features with 40-nm 
period and 75-nm tall). This mold is then imprinted 
into a 90-nm-thick PMMA film on a Si disk. During 
the hot embossing, the mold and resist-coated disk are 
heated to 175°C and pressed together at 4.4 MPa for 
10 minutes. After cooling to room temperature, the 
mold is separated from the disk, resulting in replication 
PDMS mold
Substrate
Place a drop of 
prepolymer
at one end
Fill channels by
capillary action
Cure, remove mold
FIGURE 2.56 Schematic description of micromold-
ing in capillaries (MIMIC). (Based on Xia, Y., and G.M. 
Whitesides. 1998. Soft lithography. Angew Chem Int Ed 
37:550–75; and Xia, Y., and G.M. Whitesides. 1998. Soft 
lithography. Ann Rev Mater Sci 28:153–84.113,114)

[Page 142]
142   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
of the nano-CD pattern in the PMMA film. Surface 
Logix, Inc. is the first commercial entity based entirely 
on the exploitation of soft lithography.
Questions
Most of the questions by Mr. Chuan Zhang, UC Irvine.
 2.1: Extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUVL) is 
one of the most promising future lithography 
techniques. Explain why EUVL increases the 
resolution dramatically. The high cost is the 
major obstacle for the commercialization of 
this technology; list the major reasons for the 
high cost of EUVL.
 2.2: Compare the differences between traditional 
projection photolithography and extreme 
ultraviolet lithography. Why do reflective 
optics have to be used in an EUVL system?
 2.3: Why does x-ray lithography have a high depth 
of focus? LIGA is less promising as a future 
MEMS technique due to the requirement of a 
synchrotron source. List the competing tech-
nologies and explain why they might replace 
LIGA.
 2.4: Is the resolution of e-beam lithography given 
by the spot size of the focused beam? Explain 
why or why not. What are proximity effects, 
and how can one minimize their impact on 
the resolution?
 2.5: What are the differences between thermionic 
emission (also called Schottky emission or 
SE) and cold field emission (CFE)? What are 
the advantages of low-energy electron beam 
lithography?
 2.6: What is the difference between direct write 
e-beam lithography and electron projection 
lithography? Describe the working principle 
of SCALPEL (scattering with angular limita-
tion projection electron beam lithography).
 2.7: Describe the major procedures in nanoim-
print lithography.
 2.8: How can a diblock copolymer be used in 
lithography? List some of the merits of block 
copolymer lithography.
 2.9: How does a Fresnel zone plate work? What 
are the major merits of Fresnel zone plates 
over diffractive optics lenses? Can they be 
applied in lithography?
2.10: What is the definition of scanning proxi-
mal probe lithography? Which technologies 
can be counted as scanning proximal probe 
lithography? 
2.11: How does near-field optics break Abbe’s dif-
fraction limit? What is the difference between 
NSOM and ANSOM lithography?
2.12: What are the major steps in soft lithography? 
Explain the reasons why they have not been 
widely used in industry.
2.13: How would you make a conical shaped 
PMMA structure that is 150 µm tall and fea-
tures a top angle of 45°?
2.14: Design a miniaturized device incorporating 
both a lift-off process and a self-aligned mask 
step in its manufacture.
2.15: Why can only proximity masking be used 
in the case of x-ray lithography? What about 
projection printing with x-rays? Sketch 
the process for fabricating an x-ray mask. 
What are some of the positive attributes of 
x-ray lithography? What are the negative 
attributes?
2.16: Compare UV, x-ray, ion-beam, and electron-
beam lithography. Summarize in a compari-
son Table. Which techniques are used mostly 
in the IC industry today? How are the photons 
or charged particles created in each case?
2.17: Most lithographies provide projected shapes. 
A truly 3D shape (e.g., a contact lens) is harder 
to make. Which lithographies are capable of 
providing 3D shapes?
2.18: How could one make scanning tunneling 
microscopy (STM) into a mass production 
ready lithography technique? What type of 
resists would you use?
2.19: Compare masks for the next-generation 
lithography. Consider the need for vacuum, 
materials, feature size, cost, etc.
2.20: What are the advantages and disadvantages 
of using e-beam lithography compared to 
typical photolithography?
2.21: What difficulties do you expect in try-
ing to im plement immersion lithography 
commercially?

[Page 143]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   143
References
 
1. Gibbs, W. W. 1997. Gordon E. Moore: Parts 1–3: The birth 
of the microprocessor. Scientific American (September 22, 
1997); see also Moore, G. E. 1999. A pioneer looks back at 
semiconductors. IEEE Design & Test of Computers 16:8–14.
 
2. Semiconductor Industry Association. 1997. The National 
technology roadmap for semiconductors: technology needs. 
http://www.rennes.supelec.fr/ren/perso/gtourneu/ensei-
gnement/roadmap97.pdf
 
3. Singh, R. N., A. E. Rosenbluth, G. L.-T. Chiu, and J. S. 
Wilczynski. 1997. High-numerical aperture optical designs. 
IBM J Res Dev 41:39–48.
 
4. Kurzweil, R. 1999. The age of the spiritual machine. New 
York: Penguin Group.
 
5. Romankiw, L. T. 1993. Think small: one day it may be 
worth a billion. Interface Summer:17–57.
 
6. King, W. P., T. W. Kenny, K. E. Goodson, G. L. W. Cross, 
M. Despont, U. Düürig, H. Rothuizen, G. K. Binnig, and 
P. Vettiger. 2002. Design of atomic force microscope canti-
levers for combined thermomechanical writing and ready 
in array operation. Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 
11: 765–74.
 
7. Terris, B. D., H. J. Mamin, M. E. Best, J. A. Logan, D. Rugar, 
and S. A. Rishton. 1996. Nanoscale replication for scan-
ning probe data storage. Appl Phys Lett 69:4262–64.
 
8. Kraus, P. R., and S. Y. Chou. 1997. Nano-compact disks 
with 400 Gbit/in2 storage density fabricated using nanoim-
print lithography and read with proximal probes. Appl Phys 
Lett 71:3174–76.
 
9. Kurzweil, R. 2005. The singularity is near. New York: Viking.
 10. Bjorkholm, J. E. 1998. EUV lithography: the successor to 
optical lithography. Intel Technol J Q3:1–8.
 11. Wu, B. and A. Kumar. 2009. Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography. 
Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill.
 12. Bakshi, V., ed. 2009. EUV Sources for Lithography. SPIE press 
monograph. Bellingham, WA: SPIE Publications.
 13. Brodie, I., and J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrica-
tion. New York: Plenum Press.
 14. Arden, W., and K. H. Muller. 1989. Light vs. x-rays: how fine 
can we get? Semicond Int 12:128–31; see also Vora, K. D., 
B. Y. Shew, E. C. Harvey, J. P. Hayes, and A. G. Peele. 2008. 
Sidewall slopes of SU-8 HARMST using deep x-ray lithog-
raphy. J Micromech Microeng 18:1–7.
 15. Cataldo, A. 1999. IBM uses x-ray lithography to 
build prototypes. EE Times. http://www.eet.com/story/
OEG19990414S0031
 16. Dejule, R. 1999. Next-generation lithography tools: The 
choices narrow. Semiconductor International. http://www.
semiconductor.net/article/197958-Next_Generation_
Lithography_Tools_The_Choices_Narrow.php
 17. Bourdillon, A., and Y. Vladimirsky. 2006. X-ray lithogra-
phy—On the sweet spot. San Jose, CA: UHRL. 
 18. Ehrfield, W., P. Hagmann, A. Maner, and D. Münchmeyer. 
1986. Fabrication of microstructures with high aspect 
ratios and great structural heights by synchrotron radiation 
lithography galvanoforming and plastic moulding (LIGA 
process). Microelectronic Engineering 4:35–56.
 19. Ehrfeld, W. and A. Schmidt. 1998. Recent developments in 
deep x-ray lithography. J Vac Sci Technol B16:3526–34; see 
also Vora, K. D., B. Y. Shew, E. C. Harvey, J. P. Hayes, and 
A. G. Peele. 2008. Sidewall slopes of SU-8 HARMST using 
deep x-ray lithography. J Micromech Microeng 18:1–7.
 20. Wollersheim, O., H. Zumaque, J. Hormes, J. Langen, P. 
Hoessel, L. Haussling, and G. Hoffman. 1994. Radiation 
chemistry of poly(lactides) as new polymer resists for the 
LIGA process. J Micromech Microeng 4:84–93.
 21. Kouba, J., R. Engelke, M. Bednarzik, G. Ahrens, H. U. 
Scheunemann, G. Gruetzner, B. Loechel, H.  Miller, and 
D. Haase. 2007. SU-8: Promising resist for advanced 
direct LIGA applications for high aspect ratio mechanical 
microparts. Microsystem Technologies 13:311–17.
 22. O’Brien, M. J., and D. S. Soane. 1989. Microelectronics pro-
cessing. Eds. D. W. Hess, and K. F. Jensen. Washington, DC: 
American Chemical Society. 
 23. Bley, P., W. Menz, W. Bacher, K. Feit, M. Harmening, H. 
Hein, J. Mohr, W. K. Schomburg, and W.  Stark. 1991. 
Three-dimensional mechanical microstructures. The 4th 
International Symposium on Microprocess Conference, pp. 
384–391, Kanazawa, Japan.
 24. Levinson, H. J. 2005. Principles of Lithography (2nd edition). 
Bellingham, WA: SPIE Publications.
 25. Rosolen, G. C. 1999. Automatically aligned electron 
beam lithography on the nanometer scale. Appl Surface Sci 
144–45:467–71.
 26. Lindquist, J., D. Ratkey, and P. Fischer. 1990. Do you have 
the right beam for the job? Res Dev June:91–98.
 27. Wolf, B. 1995. Handbook of Ion Sources. New York: CRC 
Press.
 28. Brewer, G., ed. 1980. Electron-beam technology in microelec-
tronic fabrication. New York: Academic Press.
 29. Whelan, C. S., D. M. Tanenbaum, D. C. La Tulipe, 
M. Isaacson, and H. G. Craighead. 1997. Low energy 
electron beam top surface image processing using 
chemically amplified AXT resist. J Vac Sci Technol B15: 
2555–60.
 30. Streblechenko, D., and M. R. Scheinfein. 1998. Magnetic 
nanostructures produced by electron beam patterning of 
direct write transition metal fluoride resists. J Vac Sci Technol 
A16:1374–79.
 31. Farrow, R. C., J. A. Liddle, S. D. Berger, H. A. Huggins, J. 
S. Kraus, R. M. Camarda, R. G. Tarascon, C. W. Jurgensen, 
R. R. Kola, and L. Fetter. 1992. Alignment and registra-
tion schemes for projection electron lithography. J Vac Sci 
Technol B10:2780–83.
 32. Harriott, L. R. 2001. Limits of lithography. Proceedings of 
IEEE 89:366–74; see also Harriott, L. R. 1997. Scattering 
with angular limitation projection electron beam lithog-
raphy for sub-optical lithography. J Vac Sci Technol 
B15:2130.
 33. Pfeiffer, H. C. PREVAIL: IBM’s e-beam technology for next 
generation lithography. IBM Micronews 6:41–44.
 34. Bindra, A. E-beam projection prevails in nanometer lithog-
raphy. 
Electronic 
Design. 
http://electronicdesign.com/
Articles/Index.cfm?AD=1&ArticleID=1345
 35. Lee, Y.-H., R. Browning, and R. F. W. Pease. 1992. E-beam 
lithography at low voltages. Proc SPIE 1671:155–165.
 36. Zlatkin, A., and N. Garcia. 1999. Functional scanning elec-
tron microscope of low beam energy with integrated elec-
tron optical system for nanolithography. Microelectron Eng 
46:213–17.
 37. Editorial. 1993. Novel electron-beam lithography sys-
tem being explored at Cornell’s NNF. Solid State Technol 
36:25–26.
 38. Marrian, C. R. K., and E. A. Dobisz. 1992. Scanning tunnel-
ing microscope lithography: a viable lithographic technol-
ogy? SPIE 1671:166–75.

[Page 144]
144   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 39. Temple, D., W. D. Palmer, L. N. Yadon, J. E. Mancusi, D. 
Vellenga, and G. E. McGuire. 1998. Si fi eld emitter cath-
Si field emitter cath-
odes: fabrication, performance, and applications. J Vac Sci 
Technol A16:1980–90.
 40. Editorial. 1991. Ion beam focused to 8-nm width. Res Dev 
September: 23.
 41. Langford, R. M., P. M. Nellen, J. Gierak, and Y. Fu. 2007. 
Focused ion beam micro- and nanoengineering, pp. 
417–23, in Focused Ion Beam Microscopy and Micromachining, 
Volkert, C. A., and A. M. Minor, eds. MRS Bulletin. Special 
issue.
 42. Seliger, R. L., J. W. Ward, V. Wang, and R. L. Kubena. 1979. 
A high-intensity scanning ion probe with submicrometer 
spot size. Appl Phys Lett 34:310–12.
 43. Sanchez, J. L., J. A. van Kan, T. Osipowicz, S. V. Springham, 
and F. Watt. 1998. A high resolution beam scanning system 
for deep ion beam lithography. Nucl Instruments Methods 
Phys Res B136–38:385–89.
 44. van Kan, J. A., J. L. Sanchez, B. Xu, T. Osipowicz, and F. 
Watt. 1999. Micromachining using focused high energy 
ion beams: deep ion beam lithography. Nucl Instruments 
Methods Phys Res B148:1085–98.
 45. Seidel, P., J. Canning, S. MacKay, and W. Trybula. 1998. 
Next generation lithography. Semiconductor Fabtech 
7:147.
 46. Tejeda, R., G. Frisque, R. Engelstad, E. Lovell, E. Haugeneder, 
and H. Löschner. 1999. Finite element simulation of ion-
beam lithography mask fabrication. Microelectron Eng 
46:485–88.
 47. Colburn, M., S. Johnson, M. Stewart, S. Damie, T. C. Bailey, 
B. Choi, M. Wedlake, T. Michaelson, S. V. Sreenivasan, J. 
Ekerdt, and C. G. Wilson. 1999. Step and flash imprint 
lithography: a new approach to high-resolution patterning. 
Proc SPIE 3676:379–89.
 48. Mutschler, A. S. 2007. Toshiba validates 22-nm CMOS 
imprint litho. Electronic News. http://www.edn.com/article/
CA6491602.html
 49. http://www.hitachi.com/ICSFiles/afieldfile/2007/08/07/
r2007_technology_tp.pdf
 50. Calvert, J. M., C. S. Dulcey, M. C. Peckerar, J. M. Schnur, J. H. 
J. Georger, G. S. Calabrese, and P. Sricharo-Enchaikit. 1991. 
New surface imaging techniques for sub-0.5 micrometer 
optical lithography. Solid State Technol 34:77–82.
 51. Stroeve, P., and E. Franses, eds. 1987. Molecular engineering 
of ultrathin polymeric films. London: Elsevier.
 52. Lehn, J.-M. 1990. Perspectives in supramolecular chemis-
try: from molecular recognition towards molecular infor-
mation processing and self-organization. Angew Chem Int 
Ed Engl 29:1304–19.
 53. Biebuyck, H. A., N. B. Larsen, E. Delamarche, and B. Michel. 
1997. Lithography beyond light: microcontact printing 
with monolayer resists. IBM J Res Dev 41:159–70.
 54. Marrian, C. R. K., and E. S. Snow. 1996. Proximal probe 
lithography and surface modification. Microelectron Eng 
32:173–89.
 55. Müller, H. U., C. David, B. Völkel, and M. Grunze. 1995. 
Nanostructuring of alkanethiols with ultrasharp field emit-
ters. J Vac Sci Technol B13:2846–49.
 56. Nuzzo, R. G., and D. L. Allara. 1983. Adsorption of bifunc-
tional organic disulfides on gold surfaces. J Am Chem Soc 
105:4481–83.
 57. Bain, C. D., E. B. Troughton, Y. T. Tao, J. Evall, G. M. 
Whitesides, and R. G. Nuzzo. 1989. J Am Chem Soc 111: 
321.
 58. Delamarche, E., B. Michel, H. A. Biebuyck, and C. Gerber. 
1996. Golden interfaces: the surface of self-assembled 
monolayers. Adv Mater 8:719–29.
 59. Calvert, J. M., W. J. Dressick, C. S. Dulcey, M. S. Chen, J. H. 
Georger, D. A. Stenger, T. S. Koloski, and G. S. Calabrese. 
1994. Polymers for microelectronics: resists and diaelectrics. Eds. 
L. F. Thompson, C. G. Willson, and S. Tagawa. Washington, 
DC: American Chemical Society.
 60. Hamley, I. W., ed. 2004. Developments in block copolymer sci-
ence and technology. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
 61. Flory, P. J. 1941. Thermodynamics of high polymer solu-
tions. J Chem Phys 10:51–61.
 62. Matsen, M. W., and F. S. Bates. 1996. Unifying weak- and 
strong-segregation block copolymer theories. Macro mole-
cules 29:1091–98.
 63. Mansky, P., P. Chaikin, and E. L. Thomas. 1995. Monolayer 
films of diblock copolymer microdomains for nanolithog-
raphy applications. J Mater Sci 30:1987–92.
 64. Black, C. T., R. Ruiz, G. Breyta, J. Y. Cheng, M. E. Colburn, 
K. W. Guarini, H.-C. Kim, and Y. Zhang. 2007. Polymer self 
assembly in semiconductor microelectronics. IBM J Res Dev 
51:605–33.
 65. Stix, G. 2004. Nano patterning: IBM brings closer to reality 
chips that put themselves together. http://www.fractal.org/
Fractal-Research-and-Products/Nano-patterning.htm.
 66. Segalman, R. A. 2005. Patterning with block copolymer 
thin films. Mater Sci Eng 48:191–226.
 67. Hawker, C. J., and T. P. Russell. 2005. Block copolymer 
lithography: merging “bottom-up” with “top-down” pro-
cesses. MRS Bull 30:952–66.
 68. Stoykovich, M. P., and P. F. Nealey. 2006. Block copolymers 
and conventional lithography. Materials Today 9:20–29.
 69. Stein, G. E., E. J. Kramer, X. Li, and J. Wang. 2007. Single-
cystal diffraction from two-dimensional block copolymer 
arrays. Phys Rev Lett 98:086101.
 70. Smith, H. I. 1996. A proposal for maskless, zone-plate-ar-
ray nanolithography. J Vac Sci Technol B14:4318–22.
 71. Menon, R., A. Patel, D. Gil, and H. I. Smith. 2005. Maskless 
lithography. Mater Today 8:26–33.
 72. Angelo, M. D., M. V. Chekhova, and Y. H. Shih. 2001. Two-
photon diffraction and quantum lithography. Phys Rev Lett 
87:013602.
 73. Boto, A. N., P. Kok, D. S. Abrams, S. L. Braunstein, C. P. 
Williams, and J. P. Dowling. 2000. Quantum interferomet-
ric optical lithography: exploiting entanglement to beat the 
diffraction limit. Phys Rev Lett 85:2733–36.
 74. Einstein, A., B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen. 1935. Can quan-
tum-mechanical description of physical reality be consid-
ered complete? Phys Rev Lett 47:777–80.
 75. Parthenopoulos, D. A., and P. M. Rentzepis. 1989. Three-
dimensional optical storage memory. Science 245:843–45.
 76. Wu, E.-S., J. Strickler, R. Harrell, and W. W. Webb. 1992. 
Two-photon lithography for microelectronic application. 
SPIE Proc 1674:776–82.
 77. Prasad, P. N. 2004. Nanophotonics. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-
Interscience.
 78. Tanaka, T., H. B. Sun, and S. Kawata. 2002. Rapid sub-
diffraction limit laser micronanoprocessing in a threshold 
material system. Appl Phys Lett 80:312–14.
 79. Kik, P. G., S. A. Maier, and H. A. Atwater. 2002. Plasmon 
printing—a new approach to near-field lithography. Mat 
Res Soc Symp Proc 705:66–71.
 80. Fang, N., and X. Zhang. 2003. Imaging properties of a 
metamaterial superlens. Appl Phys Lett 82:161.

[Page 145]
Next-Generation Lithographies and Lithography Research   145
 81. Fang, N., H. Lee, C. Sun, and X. Zhang. 2005. Sub-
diffraction-limited optical imaging with a silver superlens. 
Science 308:524–37.
 82. Watanabe, F., M. Arita, T. Motooka, K. Okano, and T. 
Yamada. 1998. Diamond tip arrays for parallel lithography 
and data storage. Jpn J Appl Phys 37:L562–64.
 83. Behm, R. J., N. Garcia, and H. Rohrer. 1989. Proceedings: 
NATO ASI. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer.
 84. Stroscio, J., and W. Kaiser, eds. 1993. Scanning tunneling 
microscopy. Boston: Academic Press.
 85. Magno, R., and B. R. Bennett. 1997. Nanostructure patterns 
written in III-V semiconductors by an atomic force micro-
scope. Appl Phys Lett 70:1855–57.
 86. Wong, E. W., P. E. Sheehan, and C. M. Lieber. 1997. 
Nanobeam mechanics: elasticity, strength, and toughness 
of nanorods and nanotubes. Science 277:1971–75.
 87. Sugimura, H., O. Takai, and N. Nakagiri. 1999. Multilayer 
resist films applicable to nanopatterning of insulating sub-
strates based on current-injecting scanning probe lithogra-
phy. J Vac Sci Technol B17:1605–08.
 88. Soh, H. T., K. W. Guarinin, and C. F. Quate. 2001. Scanning 
probe lithography. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer.
 89. Wilder, K., C. F. Quate, B. Singh, and D. F. Kyser. 1998. 
Electron beam and scanning probe lithography: a compari-
son. J Vac Sci Technol B16:3864–73.
 90. Völkel, B., A. Gölzhäuser, H. U. Müller, C. David, and M. 
Grunze. 1997. Infl uence of secondary electrons in proxi-
Influence of secondary electrons in proxi-
mal probe lithography. J Vac Sci Technol B15:2877–81.
 91. Sugimura H., and N. Nakagiri. 1997. AFM lithography in 
constant current mode. Nanotechnology 8:A15–A18.
 92. Gölzäuser, A. 1999. Nanolithography and electron holog-
raphy with ultrasharp field emitters. Appl Surface Sci 
141:264–73.
 93. Spindt, C. A., I. Brodie, L. Humphrey, and E. R. Westerberg. 
1976. Physical properties of thin-film emission cathodes 
with molybdenum cones. J Appl Phys 5284.
 94. de Heer, W. A., A. Chatelain, and D. Ugarte. 1995. A car-
bon nanotube field-emission electron source. Science 
270:1179–80.
 95. Stroscio, J. A., and D. M. Eigler. 1991. Atomic and molecu-
lar manipulation with the scanning tunneling microscope. 
Science 254:1319–26.
 96. Drexler, K. E. 1992. Nanosystems: molecular machinery, man-
ufacturing, and computation. New York: Wiley.
 97. Wallis, T. M., N. Nilius, and W. Ho. 2002. Electronic den-
sity oscillations in gold atomic chains assembled atom by 
atom. Phys Rev Lett 89:236802-1–2-4.
 98. Nazin, G. V., X. H. Qiu, and W. Ho. 2003. Visualization 
and spectroscopy of a metal-molecule-metal bridge. Science 
302:77–81.
 99. Piner, R. D., J. Zhu, F. Xu, S. Hong, and C. A. Mirkin. 1999. 
Dip pen nanolithography. Science 283:661–63.
 100. Ginger, D. S., H. Zhang, and C. A. Mirkin. 2004. The evolu-
tion of dip-pen lithography. Angew Chem Int Ed 43:30–45.
 101. Salaita, K., Y. Wang, J. Fragala, R. A. Vega, C. Liu, and C. A. 
Mirkin. 2006. Massively parallel dip-pen nanolithography 
with 55000-pen two-dimensional arrays. Angew Chem Int 
Ed 45:7220–23.
 102. Lim, J. H., D. S. Ginger, K. B. Lee, J. Heo, J. M. Nam, and C. 
A. Mirkin. 2003. Direct-write dip-pen nanolithography of 
proteins on modified silicon oxide surfaces. Angew Chem 
Int Ed 42:2309–12.
 103. King, W. P., T. W. Kenny, K. E. Goodson, G. L. W. Cross, M. 
Despont, U. Durig, H. Rothuizen, G. Binnig, and P. Vettiger. 
2001. Atomic force microscope cantilevers for combined 
thermomechanical data writing and reading. Appl Phys Lett 
78:1300–02. 
 104. King, W. P., and K. E. Goodson. 2002. Thermal writing and 
nanoimaging with a heated atomic force microscope canti-
lever. J Heat Transfer 124:597.
 105. Synge, E. H. 1928. A suggested method for extending 
microscopic resolution into the ultra-microscopic region. 
Phil Mag 6:356–62.
 106. Likodimos, V., M. Labardi, L. Pardi, M. Allegrini, and M. 
Giordano. 2003. Optical nanowriting on azobenzene side-
chain polymethacrylate thin films by near-field scanning 
optical microscopy. Appl Phys Lett 18:3313–15.
 107. Yin, X., N. Fang, and X. Zhang. 2002. Near-field two-pho-
ton nanolithography using an apertureless optical probe. 
Appl Phys Lett 81:3663–65.
 108. Brook, J., and R. Dandliker. 1989. Submicrometer holo-
graphic photolithography. Solid State Technol 32:91–94.
 109. Omar, B., S. Clube, F. Hamidi, M. D. Struchen, and S. Gray. 
1991. Advances in holographic lithography. Solid State 
Technol September:89–94.
 110. Dunin-Borkowski, R. E., and T. Kasama. 2004. The prospect 
of three-dimensional induction mapping inside magnetic 
nanostructures by combining electron holography with 
electron tomography. Microsc Microanal 10:1010–11.
 111. Schueller, O. J. A., S. T. Brittain, and G. M. Whitesides. 
1999. Fabrication of glassy carbon microstructures by soft 
lithography. Sensors Actuators A A72:125–39.
 112. Xia, Y., J. A. Rogers, K. E. Paul, and G. M. Whitesides. 1999. 
Unconventional methods for fabricating and patterning 
nanostructures. Chem Rev 99:1823–48.
 113. Xia, Y., and G. M. Whitesides. 1998. Soft lithography. Angew 
Chem Int Ed 37:550–75.
 114. Xia, Y., and G. M. Whitesides. 1998. Soft lithography. Ann 
Rev Mater Sci 28:153–84.
 115. St. John, P. M., R. Davis, N. Cady, J. Czajka, C. A. Batt, and 
H. G. Craighead. 1998. Diffraction-based cell detection 
using a microcontact printed antibody grating. Anal Chem 
70:1108–11.
 116. Zhao, X.-M., Y. Xia, and G. M. Whitesides. 1996. Fabrication 
of three-dimensional micro-structures: microtransfer mold-
ing. Adv Mater 8:837–40.
 117. Jeon, N. L., I. S. Choi, B. Xu, and G. M. Whitesides. 1999. 
Large-area patterning by vacuum-assisted micromolding. 
Adv Mater 11:946–50.
 118. Rogers, J. A., Z. Bao, and V. R. Raju. 1998. Nonpho-
tolithographic fabrication of organic transistors with 
micron feature sizes. Appl Phys Lett 72:2716–18.
 119. Duffy, D. C., J. C. McDonald, O. J. A. Schueller, and G. 
M. Whitesides. 1998. Rapid prototyping of microflu-
idic systems in poly(dimethylsiloxane). Anal Chem 70: 
4974–84.

[Page 146]
[empty page]

[Page 147]
PART II
Pattern Transfer 
with Subtractive 
Techniques
Stretching across the Nazca plains—like a giant map or blueprint left by ancient 
astronauts lie the famous Nazca Lines of Peru. 
What subtractive, removing techniques were involved in drawing the mon-
key above?
Marc J. Madou

[Page 148]
148   Pattern Transfer with Subtractive Techniques
Introduction to Part II
Chapter 3 Dry Etching
 Chapter 4 Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk 
Micromachining: Pools as Tools 
Chapter 5 Thermal Energy-Based Removing 
Chapter 6 Mechanical Energy-Based Removing
Introduction to Part II
In manufacturing, removing and forming are the two 
primary processes. Removing processes destroy cohe-
sion among particles as exemplified in wet chemical 
etching, electrical discharge machining (EDM), tradi-
tional mechanical turning, and laser drilling. Forming 
creates an original shape from a molten mass, a gas-
eous state, a solution, a plasma, or solid particles. 
During forming processes, cohesion is created among 
individual particles; examples include plastic mold-
ing, thin film deposition by evaporation or sputtering, 
and electrochemical metal deposition. In this book, 
we are interested in forming and removing processes 
enabling the manufacture of precision miniature 
machines. Materials are either removed from (sub-
tracted) or added to (formed) a work piece or device 
under construction (usually in a selective manner).
Manufacturing techniques are often categorized 
according to the energy used at the work piece as 
mechanical, chemical, or thermal. Whereas mechan-
ical machining mostly involves material removal,* 
* An example of a mechanical additive technique is physical vapor depo-
sition (see Chapter 7) where material is deposited by direct line-of-sight 
impingement deposition. The depositing material might be generated 
through the application of thermal energy (e.g., thermal evaporation) 
or mechanical energy to the source material (e.g., sputter deposition). 
Mechanical machining: ultrasonic machining (S), abrasive jet-machining (S), and water-jet machining (S).
Thermal machining: electrical discharge machining (EDM) (S) and electrical discharge wire cutting (ED-WC) (S).
FIGURE II.1 Examples of manufacturing processes grouped according to the energy used at the work piece as mechan-
ical, chemical, and thermal. S = subtractive, A = additive.

[Page 149]
Pattern Transfer with Subtractive Techniques   149
chemical and thermal can be additive (A) or subtrac-
tive processes (S). In Part II of this book we deal with 
material removal processes only; additive technolo-
gies are the focus of Part III.
Some examples of subtractive techniques are illus-
trated in Figure II.1. In categorizing machining techni-
ques, some authors group e-beam, laser, and ion-beam 
machining under high-energy beam machining. 
Thermal machining: electron-beam machining (EBM) (S shown here but can also be A), laser-beam machining (LBM) 
(S shown here but can also be A); also called high-energy beam machining.
Chemical machining: electrochemical machining (ECM) 
(S shown here but can also be A). 
FIGURE II.1 (Continued)
Chemical machining: chemical milling (CM) (S).

[Page 150]
150   Pattern Transfer with Subtractive Techniques
Table II.1 lists the most important subtractive 
processes encountered in miniaturization science 
and includes wet and dry etching, laser machining, 
ultrasonic drilling, electrical discharge  machining 
(EDM), traditional precision machining, and 
focused ion-beam (FIB) milling. The manufactur-
ing category, applications (which often involve Si), 
typical material removal rates, relevant references, 
and a few remarks on the technique supplement 
the list. 
One of the most widely used subtractive techniques 
for integrated circuits (ICs) and micro- and nanoma-
chining listed in this table is etching. Etching can be 
described as pattern transfer by chemical/physical 
removal of a material from a substrate—often in a 
pattern defined by a protective masking layer such as 
a resist or an oxide. Etch parameters—dry or wet—
include (for more details see Table 3.5):
 
1. Etch rate: Rate at which material is removed 
from the substrate
 
2. Uniformity: Etch rate constancy across the 
substrate
 
3. Throughput: 
Amount 
of 
substrates/wafers 
etched during one process cycle
 
4. Directional control: Control of the horizontal 
and vertical etch rate—isotropic or anisotropic
 
5. Selectivity of etch: 
 
a. Controlled by etchant composition
 
b. Controlled by etch rate
From the etching processes listed in Table II.1, we 
review gas and vapor phase dry etching processes, 
including chemical, physical (purely mechanical), 
and chemical-physical (mostly chemical with some 
mechanical assist) in Chapter 3. 
Chapter 4 consists of two parts: one deals with wet 
chemical etching and the other with wet bulk micro-
machining, the latter also being chemical etching 
but optimized for the manufacture of ICs, nano-, 
and micromachines. Chemical etching techniques 
cover purely chemical processes as in chemical milling 
(CM), photochemical machining (PCM), electrochemical 
machining (ECM) (including µ-ECM), and combina-
tions thereof. Of these chemical etching techniques, 
chemical milling is the simplest: it only requires a 
liquid solution that selectively dissolves a specific 
material (pools as tools). 
Chapter 5 discusses thermal removing techniques 
where thermal energy, provided by a heat source, 
melts and/or vaporizes material from the work piece. 
Examples of thermal techniques covered in this chap-
ter are EDM (including µ-EDM), laser- and e-beam 
machining (LBM and EBM), and plasma arc cutting. 
In Chapter 6, we cover traditional and nontradi-
tional mechanical removing techniques. Traditional 
mechanical material removing technologies covered 
are mechanical precision machining and abrasive 
wheel machining. In nontraditional mechanical 
machining we deal with ultrasonic drilling, elec-
trolytic in-process dressing (ELID) grinding, water 
jet, abrasive water jet, abrasive jet machining, and 
focused ion beam (FIB) milling. In Chapter 6, we also 
highlight recent developments toward miniaturized 
mechanical manufacturing equipment: the  so-called 
desktop factories.

[Page 151]
Pattern Transfer with Subtractive Techniques   151
TABLE II.1 Subtractive Processes Important in ICs, Micro-, and Nanomachining
Category
Subtractive Technique
Applications
Typical Etch Rate
Remark
References
Chemical
Dry chemical etching
Resist stripping, isotropic features
Si etch rate: 0.1 µm/min (but with 
more recent high-density 
plasmas up to 6 µm/min)
Resolution better than 0.1 
µm, loading effects
1, 2 
Chapter 3
Physical/
Chemical etching
Very precise pattern transfer
Si etch rate: 0.1–1 µm/min (but 
with more recent high-density 
plasmas up to 6 µm/min)
Most important dry etching 
technique
2, 3
Chapter 3
Vapor phase etching 
with XeF2 (and other 
interhalogens)
Isotropic Si etching in presence of 
Al and SiO2
Si etch rate: 1–3 µm/min
Very selective, fast, and very 
simple
4
Chapter 3
Chemical machining 
(CM)
Shallow removal (up to 12 mm) 
on large flat or curved surfaces; 
blanking of thin sheets; in Si 
spheres, domes, grooves, etc.
General 0.025–0.1 mm/min; in 
case of Si polishing 50 µm/min 
with stirring (RT, acid)
Little control, simple; low 
tooling and equipment 
cost; suitable for low 
production cost
5
Chapter 4
Anisotropic wet 
chemical etching
Si angled mesas, nozzles, 
diaphragms, cantilevers, bridges
1 µm/min on (100) Si (90°C, 
alkaline)
With etch-stop more control, 
simple
5
Chapter 4
Wet photoetching
Etches p-type layers in p-n 
junctions
Etches p-Si up to 5 µm/min (acid)
No electrodes required
6
Chapter 4
Electrochemical
Electrochemical etching 
(ECM)
Complex shapes with deep 
cavities; etches p-Si and stops at 
n-Si in an p-n junction); etches 
n-Si of highest doping (in n/n+)
Highest rate of material removal. 
V: 5–25 dc; A: 1.5–8 A/mm2; 
2.5–12 mm/min, depending on 
current density; etches p-Si at 
1.25–1.75 µm/min [(100) plane]
Complex (requires 
contacts) expensive tooling 
and equipment; high-power 
requirement; medium to 
high production quantity
7, 8
Chapter 4
Electrochemical 
grinding (ECG)
Cutting off and sharpening of 
hard materials, such as tungsten-
carbide tools. Also used for 
honing
Higher removal rates than 
grinding; A: 1–3 A/mm2
9
Chapter 4
Photoelectrochemical 
etching
Etches n-Si in p-n junctions, 
production of porous Si
Si etch rate:
5 µm/min (acid)
Complex, requires 
electrodes and light
9
Chapter 4
Thermal
Laser machining
(with and without 
reactive gases) 
Cutting and hole making in thin 
materials; circuit repair, resistor 
trimming, hole drilling, labeling 
of Si wafers
Drilling a hole in Si with a 
Nd:YAG (400-W laser): 1 mm/s 
(3.5 mm deep and 0.25-mm 
diameter)
Expensive equipment, does 
not require vacuum, 
heat-affected zone; laser 
beams can focus to a 1-µm 
spot, etch with a resolution 
of 1 µm3 
10
Chapter 5
Electron-beam 
machining
Cutting and small hole making in 
thin films; etching of circuits in 
microprocessors, large number 
of simple holes in hard to 
machine materials
Material removal rate is ~0.1 mg/s
Vacuum is needed, very 
expensive equipment, fast, 
drilling rates of 2000 holes/s
11
Chapter 5
(Continued)

[Page 152]
152   Pattern Transfer with Subtractive Techniques
TABLE II.1 Subtractive Processes Important in ICs, Micro-, and Nanomachining (continued)
Category
Subtractive Technique
Applications
Typical Etch Rate
Remark
References
Electrical discharge 
machining (EDM)
Shaping and cutting complex 
parts made of hard materials; 
some surface damage may result; 
drilling holes and channels in 
hard brittle metals
V: 50–380 dc; A: 0.1–500; typical 
removal rate for metals: 0.3 cm3/
min
Poor resolution (>50 µm), 
only conductors, expensive 
tooling and equipment
12
 Chapter 5
Mechanical
Mechanical 
turning, drilling, and 
milling 
Almost all machined objects 
surrounding us
Removal rates of turning 
and milling of most metals: 
1–50 cm3/min, for drilling: 
0.001–0.01 cm3/min
Prevalent machining 
technique
13
Chapter 6
Physical dry etching, 
sputter etching, and 
ion milling
Si surface cleaning, unselective 
thin film removal
 Si etch rate: 300 Å/min
Unselective and slow, plasma 
damage
3
Chapter 3
Water-jet machining 
(WJM)
Cutting all types of nonmetallic 
materials 25 mm and thicker 
Varies considerably with work 
piece material
14
Chapter 6
Abrasive water-jet 
machining (AWJM) 
and abrasive jet 
machining (AJM)
Single or multilayer cutting of 
metallic and nonmetallic 
materials; cutting, slotting, 
deburring, flash removal, and 
cleaning of metallic and 
nonmetallic materials
Up to 7.5 m/min
Tends to round off sharp 
edges; some hazards 
because of airborne 
particles 
14
Chapter 6
Abrasive grinding
15
Chapter 6
Electrolytic in-process 
dressing (ELID) 
grinding
16
Chapter 6
Ultrasonic drilling
Holes in quartz, silicon nitride 
bearing rings
Typical removal rate of Si: 1.77 
mm/min
Especially useful for hard, 
brittle materials
17
Chapter 6
Focused ion-beam (FIB) 
milling
Microholes, circuit repair, 
microstructures in arbitrary 
materials
Typical Si etch rate: 1 µm/min
Long fabrication time: >2 h 
including setup
18
 Chapter 6
Different-colored entries correspond to different chapters where more details can be found. RT, room temperature; chem. etch., chemical etching; iso., isotropic; anis., anistropic. 
Source:  Kalpakjian, S., and S. R. Schmidt. 2003. Manufacturing processes for engineering materials, 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. See also http://www.engineershan 
dbook.com.

[Page 153]
Pattern Transfer with Subtractive Techniques   153
References
 
1. Flamm, D. L. 1993. Feed gas purity and environmen-
tal concerns in plasma etching: Part I. Solid State Technol 
October:49–54.
 
2. Pandhumsoporn, T., M. Feldbaum, P. Gadgil, M. Puech, 
and P. Maquin. 1996. Micromachining and microfabrication 
process technology II Austin, TX: SPIE.
 
3. Manos, D. M., and D. L. Flamm, eds. 1989. Plasma etching: 
an introduction. Boston: Academic Press.
 
4. Chang, F. I., R. Yeh, G. Lin, P. B. Chu, E. Hoffman, E. J. 
Kruglick, K. S. J. Pister, and M. H. Hecht. 1995. Gas-phase 
silicon micromachining with xenon difluoride. Proceedings: 
SPIE microelectronic structures and microelectromechani-
cal devices for optical processing and multimedia applications 
2641:117–28.
 
5. Kern, W., and C. A. Deckert. 1978. Thin film processes. Eds. 
J. L. Vossen, and W. Kern. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
 
6. Yoshida, T., T. Kudo, and K. Ikeda. 1992. Proceedings: IEEE 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’92). Travemunde, 
Germany: IEEE.
 
7. Jackson, T. N., M. A. Tischler, and K. D. Wise. 1981. An 
electrochemical P-N junction etch-stop for the formation 
of silicon microstructures. IEEE Electron Device Lett EDL-
2:44–45.
 
8. Meek, R. L. 1971. Electrochemically thinned N/N+ epi-
taxial silicon-method and applications. J Electrochem Soc 
118:437.
 
9. Engineer’s Handbook.
 10. Watanabe, Y., Y. Arita, T. Yokoyama, and Y. Igarashi. 1975. 
Formation and properties of porous silicon and its applica-
tions. J Electrochem Soc 122:1351–55.
 11. Chryssolouris, G. 1991. Laser machining. New York: Springer 
Verlag. 
 12. Kalpajian, S. 1984. Manufacturing processes for engineering 
materials. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
 13. DeVries, W. R. 1992. Analysis of material removal processes. 
New York: Springer Verlag.
 14. Lorincz, J. November 2009. Waterjets: evolving from 
macro to micro. Manufacturing Engineering. Society of 
Manufacturing Engineers and http://www.drolsenslab.
com/
 15. Salmon, S. February 2010. What is abrasive machining? 
Manufacturing 
Engineering. 
Society 
of 
manfacturing 
Engineers.
 16. Ohmori, H., and I. D. Marinescu, eds. 2011. Handbook 
of ELID technologies. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, The 3rd 
International conference on Ultraprecision and ELID-Grinding, 
8–9 September, 2010, Toledo, OH and www.nexsys.co.jp/
contents_e/technology.htm
 17. Moreland, M. A. 1992. Engineered materials handbook. Ed. 
S. J. Schneider. Metals Park, OH: ASM International.
 18. Vasile, M. J., C. Biddick, and S. Schwalm. 1994. Micro-
fabriction by ion milling: the lathe technique. J Vac Sci 
Technol B12:2388–93.

[Page 154]
[empty page]

[Page 155]
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Dry Etching: Deﬁnitions and Jargon
Plasmas or Discharges
Physical Etching: Ion Etching or 
Sputtering and Ion-Beam Milling
Plasma Etching (Radical Etching)
Physical/Chemical Etching
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
Vapor-Phase Etching without 
Plasma (XeF2)
Dry Etching Models—In Situ 
Monitoring
Examples
Questions
References
3
Dry Etching
I think there is a world market for maybe five computers.
Thomas Watson
Chairman, IBM, 1943
Science has a way of getting us to the future without consulting the 
futurists and visionaries.
Robert Park 
Voodoo Science
Introduction
Lithography steps precede a number of subtractive and additive processes. 
Materials are either removed or added to a device, usually in a selective 
manner, transferring the lithography patterns onto integrated circuits 
(ICs) micro- or nanomachines. This chapter deals with material removal 
by dry etching processes. In dry etching, the solid substrate is etched 
by gaseous species. While introducing resist stripping in Chapter 1, we 
 learned that the popularity of dry stripping of resists (ashing) and the 
need for better control of critical dimension (CD) precipitated major 
research and development efforts in all types of plasma-based dry etching 
155
Tek-Vac Model DRIE-1200-LL-ICP:
High Density Plasma Etching System
for 200 mm substrates
 
Wafer
preparation
Design
Front-end
processes
Photo-
lithography
Ion
implantation
Etch
Cleaning
Planarization
Test &
assembly
Etching in IC, micro- and nano-
fabrication

[Page 156]
processes. The  preference of dry etching over wet 
etching methods is based on a variety of advantages: 
fewer disposal problems, less corrosion of metal 
features in the structure, and less undercutting and 
broadening of photoresist features; that is, better 
CD control (nanometer dimensions compared with 
3 µm or larger for wet etching) and, under the right 
circumstances, a cleaner resulting surface. With 
the new generations of ICs, all with sub-100-nm 
geometries, surface tension precludes a wet etchant 
from reaching down between photoresist features, 
whereas dry etching avoids this problem. In Figure 
3.1, dry anisotropic and wet isotropic etchings for 
patterning a thin film of SiO2 on a Si substrate are 
compared. In step (a) the photoresist protects parts 
of the underlying SiO2 from dry or wet etching. 
In steps (b) and (c) the etching proceeds until the 
underlying Si substrate is reached, undercutting the 
photoresist in wet etching but not in dry etching. In 
step (d) the resist is stripped. As in IC manufacture, 
dry etching has evolved into an indispensable tech-
nique in miniaturization science. After the commer-
cial successes with wet-etched Si  micromachined 
products in the 1980s and early 1990s, the matu-
ration of flexible, generic, and fast anisotropic deep 
reactive ion etching (DRIE) techniques in the late 
1990s spawned a second wave of Si miniaturized 
commercial products.
Dry Etching: Definitions and Jargon
In dry etching, substrates are etched without wet 
chemicals or rinsing and enter and leave the etching 
system in a dry state. The term dry etching covers a fam-
ily of methods by which a solid surface is etched in the 
gas or vapor phase physically by ion bombardment, 
156   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
(a)
Pattern resist mask
Photo-
resist
Sio2
Photo-
resist
Sio2
Photo-
resist
Sio2
Photo-
resist
Photo-
resist
Photo-
resist
Sio2
Sio2
Sio2
Sio2
Sio2
Etching thin ﬁlm
Etching completed
Remove resist mask
(b)
(c)
(d)
Anisotropic
reactive ion etching
Isotropic
wet etching
FIGURE 3.1 Comparison of dry anisotropic and wet isotropic etching to pattern a thin SiO2 film. In step (a) the photoresist 
protects parts of the underlying SiO2 from dry or wet etching. In steps (b) and (c) the etching proceeds until the underlying 
Si substrate is reached, undercutting the photoresist in wet etching but not in dry etching. In step (d) the resist is stripped.

[Page 157]
chemically by a chemical reaction through a reactive 
species at the surface, or by combined physical and 
chemical mechanisms or reactive ion etching (RIE). 
A key ingredient in dry etching involves the creation 
of plasma. Plasma-assisted dry etching is categorized 
according to the specific setup as either glow discharge 
etching (diode setup) or ion-beam etching (triode 
setup). Using glow discharge techniques, a broad 
plasma is generated in the same part of the vacuum 
chamber where the substrate is located; when using 
ion-beam techniques, plasma is generated in a sepa-
rate chamber or in another part of the same vacuum 
chamber from which ions are extracted and directed 
in a beam toward the substrate by a number of elec-
trode grids. In Figure 3.2 we compare a dry etching 
diode and dry etching triode setup.1 It is also com-
mon to differentiate between 1) physical sputter/ion 
etching and ion-beam etching (IBE)2 or also ion-beam 
milling (IBM), 2) chemical plasma etching (PE), and 
3) synergetic reactive ion etching (RIE). Each of these 
techniques will be discussed in detail further below, 
but here we present a short dry etching synopsis:
 
1. In physical sputter/ion etching and ion-beam 
milling (IBE), etching occurs as a consequence 
of a purely physical effect, namely, momentum 
transfer between energetic Ar+ ions and the sub-
strate surface. Some type of chemical reaction 
takes place in all the other dry etching meth-
ods, but not in this one. 
 
2. In chemical plasma etching (PE), neutral chemical 
species such as chlorine or fluorine atoms gener-
ated in the plasma diffuse to the substrate, where 
they react to form volatile products with the layer 
to be removed. The only role of the plasma is to 
supply gaseous, reactive etchant species.
 
3. In the case of physical/chemical etching (RIE), 
line-of-sight-impacting ions damage the sur face, 
inducing highly anisotropic chemical reactions 
of the surface with plasma neutrals, or, alterna-
tively, a passivating layer is cleared by the ion bom-
bardment, clearing horizontal surfaces only and 
again resulting in highly anisotropic etching.
We can also distinguish plasmas produced in 
a DC field (0 Hz), an AC field (50 kHz and up), a 
radiofrequency (RF) field (13.6–27 MHz), and in a 
microwave field (300 MHz–10 GHz). Finally, dry 
plasma etching systems can also be divided into 
single- wafer and batch reactors.
In Table 3.1, we review the most common dry 
etching methods and clarify the associated jargon in 
the legend. Of the techniques listed, PE and RIE are 
the most widely used in IC manufacture and micro- 
and nanomachining. 
In selecting a dry etching process, the desired 
shape of the etch profile and the selectivity of the 
etching process require careful consideration. 
Figure 3.3 shows different possible dry etch profiles, 
where, depending on the etching mechanism used, 
nondirectional, i.e., isotropic, or directional, i.e., 
vertical, or anisotropic etch profiles are obtained. In 
dry etching, anisotropic etch profiles—directional 
or vertical—can be generated in single crystalline, 
polycrystalline, and amorphous materials. The 
anisotropy of dry etching is not a result of aniso-
Dry Etching   157
FIGURE 3.2 Plasma-assisted dry etching is categorized according to the specific setup as either glow discharge etching 
(diode setup) (a) or ion-beam etching (triode setup) (b).

[Page 158]
tropy in the etching rate in different crystallographic 
directions, as in the case of anisotropic wet chemi-
cal etching in single crystal Si (Chapter 4); rather, 
the degree of anisotropy is controlled by the plasma 
conditions. Selectivity of a dry etch refers to the dif-
ference in etch rate between the mask and the film to 
be etched, again controllable by plasma conditions.
At low pressures, in the 10–3–10–4 Torr range, aniso-
tropic etching is easy, but accomplishing selectivity is 
difficult. The reason is that etching in this regime is 
mechanical in nature: the substrate is hit directionally, 
and atoms are ejected like a billiard ball. Physical ion-
beam etching (IBE) at those pressures results in tapered 
profiles as shown in Figure 3.3a, low selectivity, and 
low etch rates because the mechanical energy transfer 
is inefficient. At higher pressures (1 Torr), in plasma 
etching (PE), chemical effects dominate, leading to 
better  selectivity and higher etch rates than in the case 
of ion beams, but etched features are isotropic (Figure 
3.3b). Chemical etching reactions are fast and efficient 
compared with mechanical etching, where atoms are 
ejected by mechanical force. Reactive ion etching 
(RIE) enables profile control as a result of the syn-
ergistic combination of physical ion sputtering with 
the chemical activity of neutral reactive species with 
a high etch rate and high selectivity. In the extreme 
case of anisotropic etching, perfect vertical sidewalls 
result (no lateral undercut) with perfect retention of 
158   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Ion
+
+
+
Ion
Ion
Neutral
Neutral
Inhibitor
Neutral
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Volatile product
Volatile product
Volatile product
FIGURE 3.3 Important dry etching profiles associated with different dry etching techniques. (a) Sputtering. (b) Chemical 
etching in plasma at low voltage and relative high pressure leads to isotropic features and lateral undercuts. (c) Ion-
enhanced etching: physical-chemical is the most perfect image transfer as the undercutting is limited by the combined 
action of physical and chemical etching. The low pressure and high voltage lead to directional anisotropy. (d) Ion-
enhanced inhibitor. Sidewalls are protected from undercutting by a surface species (e.g., a polymer), which starts etching 
when hit by a particle such as an ion, a photon, or an electron. Because very few particles hit the sidewalls (high voltage 
and high pressure), undercutting is suppressed. (From Flamm, D. L. 1993. Feed gas purity and environmental concerns in 
plasma etching: Part I. Solid State Technol October:49–54. With permission.75)
TABLE 3.1 Some Popular Dry Etching Systems
CAIBE
RIBE
IBE
MIE
MERIE
RIE
Barrel 
Etching
PE
Pressure (Torr)
~10−4
~10−4
~10−4
10−3–10−2
10−3–10−2
10−3–10−1
10−1–100
10−1–101
Etch 
Mechanism
Chemical/ 
physical
Chemical/ 
physical
Physical
Physical
Chemical/ 
physical
Chemical/ 
physical
Chemical
Chemical
Selectivity
Good
Good
Poor
Poor
Good
Good
Excellent
Good
Profile
Aniso-
tropic or 
isotropic
Aniso-
tropic
Aniso-
tropic
Aniso-
tropic
Aniso-
tropic
Isotropic 
or 
aniso-
tropic
Isotropic
Isotropic 
or 
aniso-
tropic
Commercial 
equipment
Ionfab 300 
Plus
Ionfab 300 
Plus
Ionfab 300 
Plus
MIE-710, 
Materials 
Research
Tegal 6000 
MERIE
Unaxis 
Plasma-
Therm 
790
Polaron 
K1050X 
from 
Quorum 
Techno- 
logies
Technics 
PE-IIA
CAIBE, chemically assisted ion-beam etching; RIBE, reactive ion-beam etching; MIE, magnetically enhanced ion etching; MERIE, magneti-
cally enhanced reactive ion etching; RIE, reactive ion etching; PE, plasma etching. See text.

[Page 159]
the CDs (see Figure 3.3c and d). In the case of isotropic 
etching, dimensionality losses are incurred with an 
etch depth the order of the lateral dimensions as illus-
trated in Figure 3.4. To ensure uniform etch rates over 
the whole wafer and between wafers, isotropic over-
etching may be required, further compromising the 
dimensionality. Figure 3.4 compares the etch profile 
of no overetching with a 25% overetch. Making the 
initial lithography smaller compensates for the loss of 
dimensionality incurred by overetching.
Even though isotropic etching leads to non vertical 
sidewalls and loss of dimensionality, there remain 
some advantages to their use. Often a vertical side-
wall is not the desired edge profile. For example, 
with line-of-sight deposition methods, such as resis-
tive evaporation (see Chapter 7), a tapered sidewall 
is easier to cover than a vertical wall. Another exam-
ple in which a nonvertical process has an advantage 
is illustrated in Figure 3.5. To take away the layer 
shown on the vertical walls, an anisotropic etchant 
would require extensive overetching, whereas an 
isotropic etchant will remove the material quickly.
Plasmas or Discharges
Introduction
Plasmas, defined as ionized gases that are neutral 
with equal numbers of ions and electrons, are com-
monly referred to as the fourth state of matter. A more 
precise  definition is that plasma is a quasineutral gas 
of charged and neutral particles exhibiting collec-
tive behavior. The different states of matter generally 
found on earth are solid, liquid, and gas, and we have 
learned to work, play, and rest using these familiar 
states of matter. But in 1879, Sir William Crookes, an 
English physicist, identified a fourth state of matter, 
now called plasma. Plasmas in the stars and in the 
tenuous space between them make up more than 99% 
of the visible universe and perhaps most of which is 
not visible. Here on Earth, plasmas are important in 
film etching, sputter deposition, fluorescent lamps, 
welding arcs, and gas lasers (to name only a few).
Most dry etching systems also find their com-
mon base in plasmas or discharges, areas of high 
energy electric and magnetic fields that rapidly dis-
sociate a suitable feed gas (e.g., sulfur hexafluoride, 
SF6 for Si etching) to form neutrals, energetic ions 
(SF5
+ and F −), photons, electrons, and highly reac-
tive radicals (F •). A surface in contact with plasma 
is exposed to fluxes of atoms, molecules, ions, elec-
trons, and photons. This bombardment stimulates 
the production of outgoing fluxes of neutrals, ions, 
electrons, and photons, leading to a modified or 
etched surface layer.3 We will start our foray into 
Dry Etching   159
Material to be etched
Unetchable mask
Underlying unetchable layer
No overetching
25% overetching
Isotropic etch profile
FIGURE 3.4 Example illustrating the loss of dimension-
ality incurred by an isotropic etch when the depth is of 
the order of the lateral dimensions involved. Making the 
initial lithography smaller compensates for the loss of 
dimensionality by overetching.
Layer to be
etched
Vertical etch process
(no overetching)
Isotropic etch process
(no overetching)
FIGURE 3.5 An example of dry etching illustrating a case 
where an isotropic etch is preferred to a vertical etch pro-
cess. To clear the layer on the vertical walls, an isotropic 
etch only requires a minimal overetch, whereas an aniso-
tropic etch requires a substantial amount of overetching. 

[Page 160]
the physics and chemistry of plasmas by looking at 
the simplest plasma setup—a DC-diode glow dis-
charge in a low-pressure argon atmosphere. After a 
discussion of the spatial zones in a glow discharge, 
we explain the Paschen curve and then introduce 
radiofrequency (RF) plasmas. 
Physics of DC Plasmas
The simplest plasma reactor consists of opposed 
parallel-plate electrodes in a chamber maintainable 
at low pressure, typically in the order of 1 mbar, 
as illustrated in the reactor shown in Figure 3.6a. 
The electrical potentials established in the reaction 
chamber, filled with an inert gas such as argon at 
a reduced pressure, determine the energy of ions 
and electrons striking the surfaces immersed in 
the discharge. To explain the generation of a DC 
plasma consider the setup shown in Figure 3.6a 
where we have simply put two electrodes (anode 
and cathode) at opposite ends of an evacuated 
glass tube and applied 1.5 kV between them. With 
the electrodes separated by 15 cm this results in a 
100  V/cm field. Electrical breakdown (rapid ioni-
zation of a medium following the application of an 
overvoltage) of the argon gas in this reactor will occur 
when electrons, accelerated in the existing field, 
transfer an amount of kinetic energy greater than 
the argon ionization potential (i.e., 15.7 eV) to the 
argon neutrals. Elastic collisions deplete very little 
of the electron’s energy and do not significantly 
influence the molecules because of the great mass 
difference between electrons and gas molecules. 
Inelastic collisions, on the other hand, excite the 
molecules of the gas or ionize them by completely 
removing an electron. Thus, such energetic inelastic 
collisions may generate a second free electron and 
a positive ion for each successful strike. Both free 
electrons re-energize, creating an avalanche of 
ions and electrons that results in a gas breakdown 
emitting a characteristic beautiful blue glow (in the 
case of argon; for air or nitrogen a pink color results 
from excited nitrogen molecules). The excitation/
relaxation processes are responsible for the plasma 
glow. Avalanching requires the ionization of 10–20 
gas molecules by one secondary electron. At the 
beginning of a sustained gas breakdown, a current, 
typically several hundred milliamps, starts to 
flow, and the voltage between the two electrodes 
decreases from 1.5 kV to about 150 V. Newly 
produced electrons are accelerated toward the 
anode, and with sufficient voltage, the gas rapidly 
becomes filled with positive and negative particles 
throughout its volume, i.e., it becomes ionized. The 
discharge current builds up to the point where the 
voltage decrease across a current-limiting resistor 
is equal to the difference between the supply volt-
age (1.5 kV) and the electrode potential difference 
(150 V). To sustain plasma, a mechanism to gene-
rate additional free electrons must exist after the 
plasma-generating electrons have been captured 
at the positively charged anode. Plasma-sustaining 
electrons  are  generated through the emission of 
secondary electrons (Auger electrons) when the 
160   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Cathode
Anode
Glow
Ions
Electrons
Plasma Sheath
V
(b)
V
V
O
Positive
column
(a)
(+)
Cathode
(_)
e
p
Glass envelope
Anode
Anode dark
space
Faraday
dark
space
Negative
glow
Cathode
dark space
FIGURE 3.6 Voltage distribution in a DC diode discharge in equilibrium. (a) Structure of the glow discharge in a long 
tube-based DC diode system. (b) Voltage distribution in a real DC diode system where the anode is brought much closer 
to the cathode than in (a) and is positioned in the negative glow region (so-called obstructed glow).

[Page 161]
cathode is struck by ions. The continuous generation 
of those “new” electrons prompts a sustained curr ent 
and a stable plasma glow. The discharge reaches a 
steady state when electron generation and loss pro-
cesses balance each other. Electrons are lost by 1) drift 
and diffusion to the chamber walls, 2) recombination 
with  positive ions, and 3)  attachment to neutral 
molecules to form negative ions. Once this equili-
brium is reached, the glow region of the plasma, 
being a good electrical conductor, sustains a very low 
field only, and its potential is almost constant. Most 
of the space between the electrodes is now filled with 
a soft glow as a result of the relaxation of excited 
species; however, certain dark spaces are observed 
near the electrodes. Most of the potential drops reside 
at the electrode surfaces where electrical double 
layers are formed in “sheath fields,” counteracting 
the loss of electrons from the plasma (Figure 3.6b). 
The most significant dark space is seen at the cathode. 
This dark space, called the “ion sheath,” is a positive 
space charge region, which is key to most dry 
etching processes. The cathode sheath, the first few 
millimeters in front of the cathode, corresponds to 
the cathode dark space (also called Crookes or Hittorf 
region). Positive ions entering this sheath move 
slower toward the cathode than electrons move 
away from it, leaving this sheath with an excess of 
positive charges. Thus, if a conductor is placed on 
the cathode, it is bombarded with ions and may be 
etched. If an insulat ing material, such as a dielectric 
or an oxide-coated silicon wafer, is placed on the 
cathode (or the anode for that matter), the process 
stops. The dielectric rapidly charges up, and the field 
in the gas drops, causing the generation of electrons 
to cease. For this reason, DC plasmas are rarely 
useful for etching silicon wafers. The solution to this 
problem lies in the use of an AC power source of 
sufficiently high frequency to reverse polarity before 
the dielectric becomes fully charged. Typically, 
radiofrequency (RF) is used, although the minimum 
effective frequency is in the range of >50 kHz (see 
below under RF plasmas).
In Table 3.2 we summarize the cathode dark space 
characteristics.
The light distribution shown in Figure 3.6a is only 
observed when the interelectrode distance is large 
compared with the size of the electrodes. The “Faraday 
dark space” and the “positive column” are character-
ized by a low electric field to conduct the electrons 
toward the anode. These two regions are often present 
Dry Etching   161
TABLE 3.2 Cathode Dark Space Characteristics
Characteristics
Remark
Fewer electrons
Highly mobile electrons are accelerated quickly away from the negative 
cathode.
More positive ions
As electrons escape, they leave a high concentration of positive ions. 
These are attracted to the negative cathode.
Low conductivity
Positive ions move slowly. The result is that the field is higher across the 
cathode dark space.
Ions are accelerated
When the ions drift into the field of the dark space, they are 
accelerated toward the cathode.
Ions collide with the cathode and with neutral 
species on their way to the cathode
Therefore, the cathode is bombarded both with ions and with neutral 
species such as radicals and gas molecules. The ionic bombardment 
releases secondary electrons, which sustain the glow discharge. At low 
pressures and high voltages, the bombardment can cause sputtering.
Secondary electrons are created here
These electrons quickly accelerate to the ionization energy. As they 
leave the high field region and encounter ionizing collisions, they lose 
energy and then only have enough energy to excite. This is the edge of 
the negative glow region.
The dark space increases as the pressure is 
reduced (longer mean free path, higher 
energies, fewer collisions)
Eventually the dark space extends nearly across the chamber; the mean 
free path becomes too large to maintain a sufficient number of 
collisions and the glow is extinguished.
A conductor placed on the cathode
Will be subjected to ion bombardment.
An insulator placed on the cathode
The material charges up, and all the applied voltage exists across the 
material, and the plasma is extinguished.
Source: Based on a class by Dr. Lynn Fuller and Dr. Richard Lane, Microelectronic Engineering, Rochester Institute of Technology.

[Page 162]
in glow discharges used as lasers (“positive column 
lasers”) and as fluorescence lamps. However, for most 
of the other applications of glow discharges (e.g., 
sputtering, deposition, chemical etching, analytical 
chemistry), the distance between cathode and anode 
is very short, so that normally (i.e., at typical dis-
charge conditions) only a short anode zone is present 
beside the cathode dark space and the negative glow 
region, where the slightly positive plasma potential 
returns back to zero at the anode (see Figure 3.6b). 
This situation is termed an obstructed glow. Virtually 
all processing plasmas used in industry operate 
with a short interelectrode distance (e.g., twice that 
of the cathode dark space width) using the negative 
glow as  principal plasma.4 For electrodes of 12 cm in 
dia meter, the interelectrode distance will typically 
be less than 1 cm. In the negative glow region, the 
potential is nearly constant and slightly positive, and 
hence the electric field is very small. It is this type of 
discharge that we depict in Figure 3.6b, with only a 
cathode dark space, negative glow, and anode dark 
space. If the interelectrode distance becomes signifi-
cantly more than twice the dark space thickness, the 
discharge is extinguished. The latter characteristic 
can be applied to prevent discharge from contacting 
areas in a reactor where it is not desired.5
A striking characteristic of plasma is its permanent 
positive charge with respect to the electrodes—a 
result of the random motion of electrons and ions. 
The positive charge of plasma can be understood 
from kinetic theory, which predicts that for a ran-
dom velocity distribution, the flux of ions, ji, and 
electrons, je, on a surface is given by:
 
j
n
v
i,e
i,e
i,e
=
<
>
4
 
(3.1)
where n and <v> are the densities and average veloci-
ties, respectively. Because ions are heavier than elec-
trons (typically 4,000–100,000 times as heavy), the 
average velocity of electrons is larger. Consequently, 
the electron flux is larger than the ion flux, and the 
plasma loses electrons to the walls, thereby acquir-
ing a positive charge. The bombarding energy of 
ions is proportional to the potential difference 
between the plasma and the surface being struck by 
the ions. The reason behind the asymmetric volt-
age distribution at the anode and cathode as seen 
in Figure 3.6b is as follows: electrons near the cath-
ode rapidly accelerate away from it because of their 
relatively light mass; ions, being more massive, 
accelerate toward the cathode more slowly. Thus, on 
average, ions spend more time in the Crookes dark 
space, and, at any instant, their concentration is 
greater than that of electrons. The net effect is a very 
large field in front of the cathode compared with 
that in front of the anode and in the glow region 
itself. Consequently, the greatest part of the voltage 
between the anode and the cathode, Ve, is dropped 
across the Crookes dark space where charged par-
ticles (ions and electrons) experience their largest 
acceleration. This region is also called the cathode-
fall region.
Glow discharges represent nonequilibrium condi-
tions as the average electron energy, <ve>, also called 
electron temperature:
 
<
>
ve
= kT (e.g., 1–10 eV)
e
 
(3.2)
is considerably higher, in the range of 1–10 eV, 
than the average ion energy, <vi>, also called ion 
temperature:
 
<
> =
v
kT (e.g., 0.04 eV)
i
i
 
(3.3)
which is much colder, typically having energies 
of 0.02–0.1 eV. Thus, a discharge or plasma can-
not be described adequately by one single temp-
erature but rather by the ratio of electron and ion 
temperature [Te (electrons)/Ti (ions) = 10–100]. 
High-temperature electrons in a low-temperature 
gas are possible because of the small mass of 
electrons (me) compared with ions and neutrals. In 
collisions between electrons and argon atoms (MA), 
as a result of an me/MA ratio of 1.3 × 10–5, electrons 
have a very poor energy transfer and stay warmer 
longer than the heavier ions and neutrals. In plasma 
with an ionization fraction of 10–4, there are many 
more cold gas atoms than ions, and the ions quickly 
reach the background gas temperature as a result 
of the many collisions between ions and neutrals.4 
Electrons can attain a high average energy, often 
many electronvolts (equivalent to tens of thousands 
of degrees above the gas temperature), permit-
ting electron-molecule collisions to excite high-
temperature-type reactions, forming free radicals 
in the low-temperature neutral gas. Generating the 
162   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 163]
same reactive species without plasma would require 
temperatures in the ~103–104 K range, destroying 
resists and damaging most inorganic films.
Plasma is typically weakly ionized: the number 
of ions is small compared with the number of reac-
tive neutrals such as radicals. The ratio between 
ionized and neutral gas species in a glow discharge 
plasma is in the order of 10–6–10–4. This fact, as we 
will see below, is crucial in understanding which 
entities are responsible for the etching of a substrate 
placed in a glow discharge. There are 1 million times 
more radicals than ions or electrons because radi-
cals form more easily and their lifetime is much lon-
ger. We will see that ions do not etch, but radicals 
do. Ions affect the process by energetic (physical) 
bombarding of the surface, influencing the chemi-
cal processes of etching. The degree of ionization in 
plasma depends on a balance between the rate of 
ionization and the rate at which particles are lost by 
volume recombination and by losses to the walls of 
the apparatus. Wall losses generally dominate vol-
ume recombination. Accordingly, the occurrence 
of a breakdown in a given apparatus depends on 
the gas pressure (particle density), the type of gas, 
electric field strength (electron velocity), surface-to-
 volume ratio of the plasma, and distance between 
the anode and the cathode (see also Paschen’s law 
in the section below). In air at atmospheric pressure 
(760 Torr) the mean free path is very short, and it is 
difficult for electrons to acquire enough energy to 
ionize gases. In such case, only extremely high elec-
tric fields may create a plasma in the form of arcing 
(as in lightning; see Figure 3.7) instead of a steady 
glow discharge.
The choice of a dry etching technique depends 
on the efficiency or “strength” of the particular 
plasma. Plasma strength is evaluated by parameters 
such as average electron energy, <ve> (Equation 3.2), 
average ion energy (Equation 3.3), electron density 
(e.g., between 109 and 1012 cm–3), plasma ion den-
sity (e.g., 108–1012 cm–3), neutral species density 
(e.g., 1015–1016 cm–3), and ion current density (e.g., 
1–10 mA/cm2). A quantity of particular use in char-
acterizing plasma’s average electron or ion energy 
is the ratio of the electrical field to the pressure:
 
kT
E
p
i,e ~
 
(3.4)
With increasing field strength, the velocity of 
free electrons or ions increases because of accelera-
tion by the field (~E), but velocity is lost by inelastic 
collisions. Because an increase in pressure decreases 
the electron or ion mean free path, resulting in 
more collisions, the electron or ion energy decreases 
with increasing pressure (~1/P).
To use the described DC plasmas for 1) dry etch-
ing and 2) sputter deposition, one uses one of the 
following setups:
 
1. In the etching arrangement, the substrate to 
be etched is placed on the cathode of the DC 
diode system. An argon plasma in this setup 
produces sufficiently energetic ions (between 
200 and 1000 eV) to induce physical etching, 
that is, ion etching or sputtering of the material 
on the cathode.
 
2. The same setup is used for sputter deposition 
where atoms from the target (cathode) are 
ejected like a billiard ball and deposited on the 
substrate laying on the anode (see Chapter 7).
The low pressure in sputter etching (10–200 
mTorr) gives rise to a long mean free path, and the 
externally applied voltage concentrates across the 
cathode plasma sheath where ions are accelerated 
before hitting the cathode. Each ion will collide 
numerous times with other gas species before trans-
versing the plasma sheath, as the sheath thickness 
is larger than the mean free ion path. As a result of 
these collisions, ions lose much of their energy and 
move across the sheath with a drift velocity that is 
Dry Etching   163
FIGURE 3.7 Discharge in lightning.

[Page 164]
less than “free fall” velocity. But these vertical veloc-
ities are still very large compared with the random 
thermal velocities in the glow discharge region. The 
resulting bombarding ion flux, ji, is given by:
  
j
qn
E
i
i
i
=
μ
 
(3.5)
where E = electric field
ni = ion density 
µi = ion mobility
q = charge
Reducing the pressure in the reactor increases 
the mean free path because particles have more of 
a chance to accelerate before colliding with another 
particle or wall. Consequently, ions accelerating 
toward the cathode at lower pressures can gain more 
energy before a collision takes place. A typical sput-
tering profile was illustrated earlier in the schematic 
in Figure 3.3a. In the opposite high pressure mode, 
reactive species such as radicals generated by the 
DC plasma may combine with the substrate to form 
volatile products, chemically etching the substrate 
in so-called plasma etching. In this case, ions strik-
ing the surface have lower energy (e.g., less than 
10–20 eV) as a result of the lower sheath voltages 
and short mean free path because of the relatively 
high pressures (typically >0.1 Torr). Aside from gen-
erating the radicals through energetic collisions in 
the plasma, ions contribute very little or nothing to 
the etching process itself. The fast etching radicals 
reach the etch site via diffusion from the plasma 
rather than by electromigration. A typical plasma 
etching profile was shown in Figure 3.3b.
Spatial Zones in a DC Glow Discharge 
Introducing Figure 3.6a we noticed that the struc-
ture of plasma discharges in tubes that are long 
compared to the electrode sizes is complex. When 
a DC glow discharge is sustained in a long, narrow 
cylindrical tube filled with a rare gas at low pressure, 
the visible light emitted from the glow is distrib-
uted as shown in Figure 3.6a and, in more detail, in 
Figures 3.8 and 3.9. In Figure 3.9 we also show the 
potential distribution and the ion and electron den-
sity along the length of such a discharge tube (a DC 
“gas diode”). Regions described as “glows” emit 
significant light; regions labeled as “dark spaces” do 
not. Photons are created by the excitation/relaxation 
of the gas molecules, and when excitation/relax-
ation is the dominant process the plasma glows. 
The glow discharge can be subdivided into several 
regions between the anode and the cathode. Besides 
the Crookes or Hittorf dark space (cathode DS), the 
Aston DS, the Faraday DS, and the anode DS, a cath-
ode glow can be observed, a negative glow (NG) 
region, the positive column (PC), and the anode glow 
(AG). The “dark” regions are not really dark, just less 
luminous than the bright regions. As the discharge 
becomes more extended (i.e., stretched horizontally 
in the geometry of the figure), the positive column 
may become striated, and for monatomic gases, the 
cathode glow may become striated as well. That is, 
164   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Aston
dark
space
(AD)
Negative
glow
(NG)
Faraday
space
(FS)
Positive
column
(PC)
Anode
glow
(AG)
Anode
dark
space
(AD)
Anode
+
Cathode
–
Cathode
glow
Cathode
dark space
FIGURE 3.8 Detailed structure of a glow discharge in a 
DC gas diode.
Electron density
Te glow discharge
V
n+
n-
Potential
Ion density
Cathode
glow
Negative
glow
Positive
column
Anode
glow
Aston DS
Cathode
Cathode DS
Faraday DS
Anode
Anode DS
+
_
FIGURE 3.9 Detailed structure of a glow discharge in a 
DC diode with potential distribution and the ion and elec-
tron density along the length of the discharge tube (see 
also Figure 3.8). 

[Page 165]
additional alternating dark and bright regions may 
form. Alternatively, compressing the discharge hori-
zontally results in fewer regions. The positive col-
umn will be compressed, whereas the negative glow 
will remain the same size, and, with small enough 
gaps, the positive column will disappear altogether.
The cathode dark space has the strongest electric 
field in the discharge. This region is filled with a 
positive space charge of ions moving in the opposite 
direction of the electrons. Electrons leaving the cath-
ode with a few electronvolts of energy do not have 
the capacity of excitation/relaxation, resulting in a 
very thin first dark layer at the cathode (Aston dark 
space-AD). However, electrons emitted from the 
cathode rapidly attain energy suitable for excitation/
relaxation, giving rise to a small bright layer; that is, 
the first cathode layer or cathode glow. After this thin 
excitation layer, the electrons are exhausted, and a 
second dark layer arises. Electrons then  re-energize 
in the field and may form a second thin cathode layer, 
vaguer than the first, and so on. In Figures 3.8 and 
3.9 we show one Aston dark space and one cathode 
glow layer only. If there is only one cathode glow, the 
second Aston dark space corresponds to the Crookes, 
Hittorf, or cathode dark space. A plurality of Aston 
dark spaces and thin cathode glow layers are only 
clearly observable in monoatomic gases; in poly-
atomic gases other energy dissipation processes take 
over.6 In the main part of the cathode DS (Crookes or 
Hittorf dark space), electrons have gained too much 
energy from the electric field for efficient excitation, 
and luminescence becomes very weak.
The negative glow is the bright segment adjacent 
to the cathode dark space. In this brightest region of 
the glow discharge, there are many more electrons 
(a result of charge multiplication), and they do not 
gain any further energy, as this region is equipoten-
tial or field free.
The electron energy in the negative glow region 
is much more suitable for excitation/relaxation, and 
a bright light with a color characteristic for the dis-
charge gas (blue in the case of argon) results. The 
electrons are exhausted by this effort and drift out 
into the Faraday dark space and the positive column 
at low velocity.
If the distance between anode and cathode is suf-
ficiently large, a long positive column is present. 
There are now much fewer ions around, so the elec-
trons can be accelerated in the gentle field. As they 
speed up, their number density goes down (the 
main losses are through diffusion to the walls). 
When they have sufficient energy to excite the mol-
ecules of the gas, the emitted light becomes evident. 
This light is produced with minimal excitation and 
consists only of light emitted by neutral atoms that 
have been excited above their resonance energy, 
which explains its different character from the light 
emitted by the negative glow. The positive column 
is less bright than the negative glow, and, although 
of another color, it is also characteristic of the dis-
charge gas (purple in the case of argon). This region 
is of no importance in thin film processing technol-
ogy but, as mentioned before, is very important for 
plasma discharges used as light sources (e.g., a fluo-
rescent Hg-Ar discharge lamp) and in lasers.4
Close to the anode, electrons are attracted and 
accelerated, and positive ions are repelled. The accel-
erating electrons excite gas molecules, and an anode 
glow results. 
The described discharge regions vary in radiation 
intensity, potential and electrical field distribution, 
space charge, and current density, and their occur-
rence and position depend on the discharge para-
meters such as pressure, voltage, current, kind of gas, 
and, as we have seen, the distance between cathode 
and anode. We refer to work by Coe et al.,7,8 Raizer 
et al.,9 and Bogaerts et al.10–12 for a more in-depth 
study of the various phenomena involved in low-
pressure noble gas discharges.
Paschen’s Law 
The preceding section on DC plasmas introduces 
the concept of avalanche and gas breakdown in a 
DC diode system. To enhance our understanding of 
plasmas in general, and specifically to understand 
better what happens when the electrode distance or 
pressure in the discharge chamber is changed, we 
now introduce Paschen’s law.
When the electric field between a pair of metal 
electrodes in air (at room temperature and atmo-
spheric pressure) increases to more than, roughly, 
3 MV m–1, electrical breakdown occurs. Analogous to the 
process described above for the argon-filled chamber, 
Dry Etching   165

[Page 166]
free electrons accelerate in the electric field, and if 
they pick up enough energy before hitting air mole-
cules, ionization results and more ions and electrons 
are created. This can lead to yet further ionization 
or an avalanche destroying the insulating properties 
of the air between the electrodes and leading to the 
passage of a high current, accompanied by the emis-
sion of heat, light, and sound—that is, a spark dis-
charge. A spark discharge in a localized region (e.g., 
near a sharp point) is called a corona discharge.
The voltage for electrical breakdown depends on 
the geometry of the electrode gap, the gas, and the 
pressure. In 1889, Paschen published a paper des-
cribing a generalized form for that relationship, and 
this has become known as Paschen’s law.13 The law 
essentially states that the breakdown characteristics 
of an electrode gap are a function of the product of 
the gas pressure and the gap distance, usually writ-
ten as V = f (P × d), where the breakdown voltage 
V is a function of the pressure P and the gap dis-
tance d. As the pressure or gap is reduced, the break-
down voltage decreases slowly to a minimum and 
then rises steeply, as illustrated in Figure 3.10, rep-
resenting the Paschen’s law curve in air and other 
gases. The sharp increase in the breakdown voltage 
on the left side in Figure 3.10 (low P × d side) occurs 
because the electrode spacing is too small for ion-
ization to occur. The number of gas molecules in 
the space between the electrodes is proportional to 
P × d. When the pressure is too low or the distance 
too small, most electrons reach the anode without 
colliding with gas molecules. As a consequence, the 
lower the pressure or the shorter the d, the higher 
the value of V required to give electrons enough 
energy to cause breakdown of the gas. For air, the 
minimum breakdown voltage (Vmin) is about 300 V 
at ∼8-µm gap distance (see also Table 3.3). On the 
right side of this plot (high P × d side), the slow 
increase in breakdown voltage with increasing elec-
trode distances and higher pressures arises because 
electron collisions with gas atoms become more and 
more frequent so that for the electrons to gather suf-
ficient energy to overcome the ionization potential 
of the inert gas, more potential needs to be applied.
Some microdevices such as electrostatic micro-
motors, microionizers for ion mobility spectro-
meters,  and microswitches operate in air without 
sparking, as they operate on the left side of the 
Paschen curve (see Volume III, Chapter 8). Our 
intuition would tend to predict that the smaller the 
gap distance, the smaller the breakdown voltage. 
This typifies how linear scaling can be mislead-
ing when predicting the behavior of microdevices. 
Microstructures, with dimensions of a few micro-
meters, operate in air as if surrounded by a reduced 
pressure environment.
Different gases exhibit similar “Paschen” behav-
ior, with the curves more or less shifted from the 
air curve, depending on the mean free path of the 
gas molecules involved (see Figure 3.10). Paschen’s 
law—V = f(P × d)—should be more correctly stated 
166   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 3.10 A DC breakdown voltage as a function of gas 
pressure P and electrode spacing d for plane parallel elec-
trodes in air and some other gases. Such curves are deter-
mined experimentally and are known as Paschen curves. 
TABLE 3.3 Minimum Breakdown Voltage (Vmin) and 
Pressure/Distance Product (P × d) at That Minimum 
Voltage for Various Gases as Deduced from Their 
Paschen Law Curves
Gas
Vmin in Volts (V)
P × d at Vmin (Torr cm)
Air
327
0.567*
Ar
137
0.9
H2
273
1.15
He
156
4.0
CO2
420
0.51
N2
251
0.67
N2O
418
0.5
O2
450
0.7
SO2
457
0.33
H2S
414
0.6
*At 1 atm = 760 mmHg or 760 Torr, d = 7.460 10−4 cm or ~8 µm.
Source: Naidu, M. S., and V. Kamaraju. 1995. High voltage 
engineering. New York: McGraw-Hill.14

[Page 167]
as V = f(δ × d), where δ is the density of gas mol-
ecules, which is, of course, affected by the tempe-
rature and the pressure of the gas. Much research 
has been done to provide a theoretical basis for 
Paschen’s law and to develop a greater understand-
ing of the breakdown mechanism. This has proven 
to be a formidable task, as many factors  have 
an effect on the breakdown in a gap, such as radia-
tion, dust, and surface irregularities. The electrode 
material also affects the sparking voltage, with 
cathodes of barium and magnesium having higher 
voltages than aluminum, for example.
In Table 3.3 we list the minimum breakdown volt-
age (Vmin) and the product of the pressure and electrode 
spacing (P × d) at that such voltage for various com-
mon gases as deduced from Paschen’s law curves.14 
A good text and reference book on electrical 
breakdown of gases, although old, is written by 
Meek and Craggs.15
Physics of RF Plasma Reactors
AC voltages overcome the problem of charge accu-
mulation on a dielectric in a DC plasma system. The 
positive charge that accumulates as a result of ion 
bombardment during one-half of the AC cycle can be 
neutralized by electron bombardment during the next 
half cycle. The frequency of AC must be high enough 
so the half period will be shorter than the charge-up 
time of the dielectric. Although this time will vary 
because of conditions and dielectric materials, for 
most applications the frequency must be greater than 
50 kHz. At low frequencies, both electrons and ions 
can follow the changing field, so that a glow discharge 
is the same as DC, except that the polarity reverses 
twice each cycle. At high frequency, the massive ions 
cannot respond to the frequency changes, whereas 
electrons can. By far the most common RF used is 
13.56 MHz, allowed by the Federal Communications 
Commission (because of its noninterference with 
radio-transmitted signals). The RF power supply is 
rated between 1 and 2 kW. In RF-generated plasma, a 
radiofrequency voltage applied between the two elec-
trodes causes free electrons to oscillate and collide 
with gas molecules, leading to a sustainable plasma. 
The RF-excited discharges can be sustained without 
relying on the emission of  secondary electrons from 
the cathode. Electrons pick up enough energy dur-
ing oscillation in an RF field to cause ionization, 
thus sustaining the plasma at lower pressures than 
in DC plasma (e.g., 10 vs. 40 mTorr). The RF break-
down voltage of an AC plasma exhibits the Paschen 
behavior of a DC plasma; that is, a minimum in the 
required voltage as a function of the pressure with 
the mean free path of electrons, λe, substituting the 
spacing, d, between electrodes. 
In the simplest case of RF ion sputtering, the sub-
strates to be etched are laid on the cathode (target) 
of a discharge reactor, for example, a planar parallel-
 plate reactor as shown in Figure 3.11. The reactor 
consists of a grounded anode and powered cath-
ode or target enclosed in a low-pressure gas atmo-
sphere (e.g., 10–1–10–2 Torr of argon). The RF plasma, 
formed at low gas pressures, consists of positive cat-
ions, negative anions, radicals, and photons (the UV 
photons create the familiar plasma glow). As with 
DC plasma, neutral species greatly outnumber elec-
trons and ions—the degree of ionization only being 
on the order of 10–4–10–6 for parallel-plate gas dis-
charges. With one of the two electrodes capacitively 
coupled to the RF generator, this electrode auto-
matically develops a negative DC bias and becomes 
the cathode with respect to the other electrode (see 
Figure 3.12a). This DC bias (also called self-bias VDC) 
is induced by the plasma itself and is established 
as follows. When initiating an AC plasma arc, elec-
trons, being more mobile than ions, charge up the 
Dry Etching   167
Reactive ion etching
Etch
gas(es)
Plasma
shower
head
Reaction
chamber
Lower plate
for
holding wafer
Wafer
RF
power
source
Pump
Plasma
FIGURE 3.11 Two-electrode setup (diode) for RF ion 
sputtering or sputter deposition. For ion sputtering, the 
substrates are located on the cathode (target); for sputter 
deposition (see Chapter 7), the substrates to be coated are 
located on the anode. 

[Page 168]
capacitively coupled electrode; because no charge 
can be transferred over the capacitor, the electrode 
surface retains a negative DC bias.
The energy of charged particles bombarding the 
surface in a glow discharge is determined by three 
different potentials established in the reaction 
chamber: the plasma potential Vp, that is, the poten-
tial of the glow region, the self-bias VDC, and  the 
bias  on the capacitively coupled electrode (VRF)pp 
(see also Figure 3.12b). The following analysis clari-
fies how these potentials relate to one another and 
how they contribute to dry etching.
The self-bias buildup, VDC, on an insulating elec-
trode by the electron flux (Equation 3.1) is given by:
 
V
kT
2e ln T m
T m
DC
e
e
i
i
e
=
 
(3.6)
where Te and Ti are the electron and ion tempera-
tures defined by Equations 3.2 and 3.3, and me 
and mi are the electron and ion masses, respec-
tively.16 In the plasma, there are equal amounts of 
hot electrons (Te = 2 × 104 K) and cold positive ions 
(Ti = Tgas = 500 K). For a common RF power density 
of 4 kWm−2 the self-bias is about 300 V, so that the 
powered electrode (the cathode) is bombarded with 
300 eV of positive ions.17
The electron loss creates an electric sheath field 
in  front of any surface immersed in the plasma, 
168   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Cathode
Anode
RF
V(x)
0
VDC
VP
(a)
(c)
(b)
x
Cathode
potential
(VRF)p-p
VDC
VP
0
t
Plasma potential (approx.)
2Vp ~ (VRF)
_ VDC
2
pp
V(t)
Glow
t
FIGURE 3.12 An RF plasma. (a) Approximate time-averaged potential distribution for a capacitively coupled planar RF 
discharge system. (b) Potential distribution in glow discharge reactors—Vp: plasma potential; VDC: self-bias of cathode 
electrode; (VRF)pp: peak-to-peak RF voltage applied to the cathode. (c) Equivalent electrical circuit of an RF plasma. 

[Page 169]
counteracting further electron losses. This sheath or 
dark space forms a narrow region between the conduc-
tive glow region and the cathode (the Crookes dark 
space) where most of the voltage (VDC in Figure 3.12a) 
is dropped as in the DC plasma case. The cathode, 
being capacitively coupled, effectively acts as an insu-
lator for DC currents. The thickness of the sheath is 
typically 0.01–1 cm, depending on pressure, power, 
and frequency. The other electrode is grounded 
and conductive (no charge buildup and no voltage 
buildup) and automatically becomes the anode with 
respect to the capacitively coupled electrode.
The time-average of plasma potential Vp, DC cath-
ode potential (self-bias potential) VDC, and  peak-to- 
peak RF voltage (VRF)pp applied to the cathode are 
approximately related as (see Figure 3.12b):
 
2V
V
2
V
p
RF
pp
DC
~ (
)
|
|
−
 
(3.7)
Clearly, the magnitude of the self-bias depends 
on the amplitude of the RF signal applied to the 
electrodes. In the RF discharge, the time-averaged 
RF potential of the glow region, referred to as the 
plasma potential Vp, is more significantly positive with 
respect to the grounded electrode than in the case of 
a DC plasma.
Positive argon ions from the plasma are extracted 
by the large field at the cathode and sputter that 
electrode at near-normal incidence, with energies 
ranging from a few to several hundred electronvolts, 
depending on plasma conditions and chamber 
construction. One of the most important para-
meters determining plasma condition is total reac-
tor pressure. As pressure is decreased to less than 
0.05–0.1 Torr, the total ion energy, Emax, increases 
as both the self-bias voltage and the mean free path 
of the bombarding ions increase. Subsequently, ion-
 substrate bombardment energy increases sharply 
with decreasing pressure. The maximum energy of 
positive ions striking a substrate placed on the cath-
ode is proportional to:
 
E
e(|V
V
eV
max
DC
p
T
=
+ 
=
|
)
 
(3.8)
with VT = |VDC| + Vp, whereas the maximum energy 
for a substrate on the grounded electrode (i.e., the 
anode) is proportional to:
 
E
eV
max
p
=
 
(3.9)
Typical values are 300 eV for the cathode and less 
than 20 eV for the anode.17 Equations 3.8 and 3.9 
can be deduced from an inspection of Figure 3.12a. 
The situation where the wafers are placed on the 
cathode is referred to as reactive ion etching or reac-
tive sputter etching. Chamber construction, especially 
the ratio of anode to cathode area, influences the 
rates of VT/Vp and, consequently, as calculated from 
Equations 3.8 and 3.9, the energy of the sputtering 
ions on these respective electrodes. Etching of the 
anode should be avoided, that is, Vp should be kept 
small (e.g., <20 eV). To deduce the influence of the 
geometry of the anode and cathode on dry etching, 
we compare the sheath voltages in front of the anode 
and cathode using the Child-Langmuir equation, 
expressing the relationship between the ion-current 
flux, ji, the voltage drop, V, over the sheath thickness 
of the dark space, d, and the mass of the current-
carrying ions, mi. The relation can be deduced from 
Equation 3.5, assuming the presence of a space-
charge limited current:
 
j
KV
m d
i
3
2
i
2
=
 
(3.10)
in which K is a constant.18 The current density of the 
positive ions must be equal on both the anode ji(P) 
and cathode ji(T); that is, ji = ji(P) = ji(T), resulting in 
the following relation for the sheath voltages:
 
(cathode) V
d
(anode) V
d
T
3
2
T
2
p
3
2
p
2
=
 
(3.11)
The plasma behaves electrically as a diode (large 
blocking voltage drop toward the capacitively cou-
pled cathode and small voltage drop on the anode/
plasma interface), in parallel with the sheath capaci-
tance. As soon as any electrode tends to become 
positive relative to the plasma, the current increases 
dramatically, causing the plasma to behave as if a 
diode were present in the equivalent electrical cir-
cuit of the plasma. Hence a planar, parallel setup 
also is called a diode setup. The equivalent electri-
cal circuit representing an RF plasma is represented 
in Figure 3.12c. The dark spaces in plasma are areas 
Dry Etching   169

[Page 170]
of limited conductivity and can be modeled as 
capacitors:
 
C ~ A/d  
(3.12)
The plasma potential is determined by the rela-
tive magnitudes of the sheath capacitances, which, 
in turn, depend on the relative areas of anode and 
cathode. An RF voltage will split between two capac-
itances in series according to:
 
V
V
C
C
T
p
p
T
=
 
(3.13)
Using Equations 3.12 and 3.13, we can write:
 
V
V
A
d
d
A
T
p
p
p
T
T
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(3.14)
and substituting into Equation 3.11, we obtain:
 
V
V
A
A
R
T
p
p
T
4
=
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
4
 
(3.15)
where Ap is the anode area and AT the cathode 
area. If there were two symmetric electrodes, both 
blocked capacitively, sputtering would occur on 
both surfaces. If the area of the cathode were signif-
icantly smaller than the other areas in contact with 
the discharge, the plasma potential would be small, 
and little sputtering would occur on the anode, 
whereas the cathode would sputter very effectively. 
Because the cathode in a setup such as that repre-
sented in Figure 3.11 usually is large (>1 m2), allow-
ing many silicon wafers or other substrates to be 
etched simultaneously, the grounded area needs to 
be larger yet. In sputtering systems, the anode and 
the entire sputtering chamber are grounded, cre-
ating a very small anode dark space where hardly 
any sputtering takes place. Other researchers have 
assumed conservation of the positive ion current; 
that is, ji(P) × Ap = ji(T) ×  AT instead of current 
density, and they find an exponent 2 in deriving 
Equation 3.15. The exponential in Equation 3.15 in 
practical systems is usually closer to 2.5
In a setup where the electrode dimensions are 
large compared with the electrode distance, the 
anode and cathode areas are considered equal, and 
little difference is made between VT and Vp.5
Higher ion energies (VT large) translate into 
lower etch selectivity and can be a cause of device 
damage (Table 3.4). Consequently, a key feature for 
good etch performance (Table 3.5) is effective ion-
ization to produce very high quantities of low-en-
ergy ions and radicals at low pressures. Selectivity 
as high as 40:1 might be required in the future for 
ICs and even more for micromachines. It is gen-
erally believed that  “radiation” damage of plasma 
can be minimized by keeping ion energies low. It 
is also generally believed that a lot of the radiation 
damage can be annealed out. In reality, very little 
is understood of the damage plasma can do. The 
higher the etch rate, the better the wafer throughput. 
Good selectivity, uniformity, and profile control are 
more easily achieved at lower etch rates. Trenches of 
various depths are made in Si in the manufacture of 
metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) devices. Shallow 
170   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 3.4 Device Damage
Some “flavors” of device damage:
• Alkali (sodium) and heavy metal contamination
• Catastrophic dielectric breakdown
• Current-induced oxide aging
• Particulate contamination
• UV damage
• Temperature excursions that can activate 
metallurgical reactions
• “Rogue” stripping processes that simply do not 
remove all the residue
• Plasma-induced charges, surface damage, ion 
implantation
TABLE 3.5 Etch Performance*
Etch performance is judged in terms of the following:
 1. Etch rate: Rate at which material is removed from the 
substrate
 2. Uniformity: Etch rate constancy across the substrate
 3. Throughput: Amount of substrates/wafers etched 
during one process cycle
 4. Directional control: Control of the horizontal (CD) 
and vertical etch rate (profile)—isotropic or 
anisotropic
 5. Surface quality (residue, microloading effects)
 6. Device damage
 7. Particle control
 8. Reproducibility 
 9. Selectivity of etch:
a. Controlled by etchant composition
b. Controlled by etch rate
*See also Introduction to Part II.

[Page 171]
trenches (0.5–1.5 µm) are used to aid in reducing 
the effects of lateral diffusion during processing 
and to make flat structures (planarization). Deeper 
trenches (1.5–10 µm) are used to create structures 
that become capacitors and isolation regions in inte-
grated circuits. For the shallowest trenches, pho-
toresist is adequate as a mask. For deeper etching, 
a silicon dioxide mask may be needed. In microma-
chining, one would like to obtain aspect ratios of 100 
and beyond; thus, the difficulty in masking keeps 
mounting. With aspect ratios above 2:1 or 2.5:1, the 
etching action at the bottom of a trench tends to slow 
down or stop altogether.
In answer to these identified needs, equipment 
builders have come up with low-energy,  high-density 
plasmas, for example, magnetrons, inductively cou-
pled plasmas (ICPs),19 and electron cyclotron reso-
nances (ECRs)20 (see below Figure 3.36).
Physical Etching: Ion Etching or 
Sputtering and Ion-Beam Milling
Introduction
Bombarding a surface with inert ions (e.g., argon 
ions), in a setup as shown in Figure 3.11, translates into 
ion etching or sputter etching. With ions of sufficient 
energy impinging vertically on a surface, momentum 
transfer (sputtering) causes bond break age and 
ballistic material ejection, throwing the bombarded 
material across the reactor to depo sit on an opposing 
collecting 
surface, 
provided 
the 
surrounding 
pressure is low enough. The kinetic energy of the 
incoming particles largely dictates which events are 
most likely to take place at the bombarded surface, 
that is, physisorption, surface damage, substrate 
heating, reflection, sputtering, or ion implantation. 
At energies less than 3–5 eV, incoming particles are 
either reflected or physisorbed. At energies between 
4 and 10 eV, surface migration and surface damage 
results. At energies >10 eV (e.g., from 5–5000 eV), 
substrate heating, surface damage, and material 
ejection, that is, sputtering or ion etching, take place. 
At yet higher energies, >10,000 eV, ion implantation, 
that is, doping, occurs. The energy requirements for 
these various processes are summarized in Table 3.6 
(see also Figure 3.15).
The deposition phenomenon mentioned above 
can be used to deposit materials in a process called 
sputter deposition (Chapter 7). A low pressure result-
ing in a long mean free path is required for material 
to leave the vicinity of the sputtered surface without 
being backscattered and redeposited.
In what follows, we shall consider two purely phys-
ical dry etching techniques at energies >10 eV, that is, 
sputtering or ion etching and ion-beam milling.
Sputtering or Ion Etching
The gradient in the potential distribution around 
the target lying on the cathode (see Figure 3.11) 
accelerates the ions, prompting them to impinge on 
the substrate in a direction normal to the surface. 
The etch rate in the direction of the impinging ions 
(Vz) becomes a strong function of Emax (Equations 
3.8 and 3.20). The impinging ions erode or sputter 
etch the surface by momentum transfer. This offers 
some advantages: volatility of the etch products is 
not as critical as for dry chemical etching, and only 
a billiard ball effect plays a role in physical etching. 
As a consequence, differences in etch rates for vari-
ous materials are not large (sputter yields for most 
are within a factor of three), and the method entails 
directional anisotropy. Physical etching is inher-
ently nonselective because the ion energy required 
to eject material is large compared with differences 
in chemical bond energy and  chemical reactivity. 
When no reactive etching processes are available 
for a given material, physical etching is always an 
option. Directional anisotropy remains as long as 
the dimensions of the surface topographical struc-
tures are small compared with the thickness of the 
sheath between the bulk plasma and the etched sur-
face. However, etch rates are slow, typically a hun-
dred to a few hundred angstroms per minute. The 
use of a magnetron can help improve the etch rate 
Dry Etching   171
TABLE 3.6 Energy Requirements Associated with 
Various Physical Processes
Ion Energy (eV)
Reaction
<3
Physical adsorption
4–10
Some surface sputtering
10–5000
Sputtering
10–20 K
Implantation

[Page 172]
and minimize heating of substrates. In both DC and 
RF diode sputtering, most electrons do not cause 
ionization events with Ar atoms. They end up being 
collected by the anode, substrates, and so on, where 
they cause unwanted heating. A magnetron adjusts 
this situation by confining the electrons with mag-
netic fields near the target surface; consequently, 
current densities at the target may increase from 
1 mA/cm2 to 100 mA/cm2.
As sputter etching is nonselective, it introduces 
a masking problem. Another hurdle is the need for 
rather high gas pressure to obtain sufficiently large 
ion currents, resulting in a short mean free path, λi, 
of the ions. With a mean free path smaller than the 
interelectrode spacing, considerable redeposition of 
sputtered atoms on the etching substrate lying on the 
cathode can occur. Electrical damage from ion bom-
bardment also must be taken into account when crit-
ical electronic components reside on the substrate.
Ion-Beam Etching or Ion-Beam Milling
Ion-beam milling (IBM) is a process wherein the 
plasma source for ion etching is decoupled from 
the substrate, which is placed on a third electrode. 
Decoupled plasma is also called remote plasma, 
and the equipment needed is called a triode setup. 
The plasma source can be an RF discharge or a 
DC source (Penning source). In a typical DC tri-
ode setup, as shown in Figure 3.13, control of the 
energy and flux of ions to the substrate in the sub-
strate chamber happens independently. The sample 
being etched can be rendered neutral by extracting 
low-energy electrons from an auxiliary thermionic 
cathode (i.e., a hot filament neutralizer), thus mak-
ing this DC equipment usable for sputtering insula-
tors, as well as conductors. In ion-beam milling, as 
in ion etching, noble gases are generally used as they 
exhibit higher sputtering yields as a result of heavy 
ions and avoid chemical reactions. The argon pres-
sure in the upper portion of the chamber can be low 
(10–4 Torr), resulting in a large mean free ion path. 
Adding a hot wire (Kaufman source) or a hollow 
cathode can enhance ionization at those low pres-
sures. In a Kaufman source, electrons are emitted by 
a hot filament (typically tantalum or tungsten) and 
accelerated by a potential difference between the 
cathode filament and an anode. A hollow cathode 
is a metal cylinder with a hole several millimeters 
in diameter. When the pressure is decreased, the 
hollow cathode starts to emit extremely strong light 
(negative glow) when the cathode sheath thickness 
reaches about the same dimensions as the diameter 
of the hole. The hollow cathode bounces electrons 
back and forth within the negative glow, thereby 
enhancing the plasma density considerably beyond 
that of a normal discharge.5
The discharge voltage in IBE must be larger than 
the gas ionization potential (15.7 eV for argon) and 
typically is operated at several times this value, about 
40–50 eV, to establish a glow discharge. Ions are 
extracted from the upper chamber by sieve-like elec-
trodes (extraction grids), formed into a beam, accel-
erated, and fired into the lower chamber where they 
strike the substrate. Achievable ion energies range 
from about 30 eV to several keVs. Beam divergence 
through collisions with residual gas molecules in the 
substrate chamber usually limits the lowest practical 
ion energy to a few hundred electronvolts. Typical 
etch rates with argon ions of 1 keV of energy and an 
ion current density of 1.0 mA/cm2 are in the range of 
100–3000 Å/min for most materials such as silicon, 
172   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Substrate
   holder
Substrate
Electron
source
      Hot
  ﬁlament
neutralizer
Accelerating
electrode
Cathode
Anode
50 V
1-5 kV
Focusing
     coil
+
+
+
+
+
+
FIGURE 3.13 Ion-beam etching (IBE) apparatus (triode). 
In an ion-beam apparatus, the beam diameter is approxi-
mately 8 cm. Substrates are mounted on a moveable 
holder allowing etching of large substrates. Coils focus 
the ion beam and densify the ion flux in magnetically 
enhanced ion etching (MIE).

[Page 173]
polysilicon, oxides, nitrides, photoresists, and met-
als. Inert ion-beam etching (IBE) in an ion miller is, 
in principle, capable of very high resolution (<100 
Å), but aspect ratios are usually less than or equal to 
unity, and selectivity is poor. The use of the extrac-
tion grid also increases the potential for contaminat-
ing the ion beam with sputtered grid material.
Higher plasma ion densities may be created by 
using magnetic coils in a magnetron sputtering 
machine to increase the electron path length. Just as 
the ionospheric van Allen belts are confined by the 
Earth’s dipole field, plasma remains confined within 
the magnetic envelope generated by the coils, thus 
preventing electron loss to plasma-exposed sur-
faces. This principle is exploited, for example, in 
magnetically enhanced ion etching (MIE) (see coils 
in Figure 3.13). A magnetic field is applied so that 
electrons cannot pass directly from the anode to the 
cathode, but rather follow helical paths between col-
lisions, greatly increasing their path length and ion-
ization efficiency. To understand this enhancement 
in ionization efficiency, consider an electron mov-
ing with a velocity ve. This velocity will be affected 
by both the electric and the magnetic fields, and the 
force on the electron is given by the Lorentz force 
(see Volume I, Equation 3.64):
 
F = e (Ve × B) 
(Volume I, Equation 3.64)
in which all quantities, except for the electron 
charge, are vectors. The direction of the force vector 
on the electron is perpendicular to both the mag-
netic field and the  direction of the velocity; conse-
quently, the electron will spiral around the magnetic 
field lines (see Figure 3.14).
With an angle ϕ between the momentary electron 
velocity vector and the magnetic field vector, the 
radius r of the electron orbit is:
 
r
m v
eBsin
e
e
=
φ
 
(3.16)
where me is the mass of the electron. Equation 3.16 is 
obtained by equating the magnetic and centripetal 
forces. When the electron is moving at right angles 
to the magnetic field, this simplifies to: 
 
r
m v
eB
e
e
=
 
(3.17)
The circular motion of electrons in the presence of a 
magnetic field can also be described in terms of an 
angular frequency ωc (also the cyclotron frequency), 
which can be calculated from the electron velocity 
ve and the radius r of the electron helix as described 
in Equation 3.17:
 
ω =
c
e
v
r
 
(3.18)
At an electron energy of 2 eV, the mean electron 
velocity is 9 × 105 m s−1 (see Equation 3.2). According 
to Equation 3.17, with a magnetic field B of 5 × 10−3 
Tesla (T) applied, electrons will be forced into a cir-
cular path with a radius of about 1 mm.21 At a higher 
electron temperature of 100 eV, the cyclotron radius 
of an electron in a field of 0.01 T (or 100 Gauss) is 
3.2  mm. These cyclotron radii are of the order of 
the mean free path and smaller than the smallest 
dimension of the average dry etch reactor. By length-
ening the electron path considerably, electrons are 
prevented from reaching the reactor walls where 
Dry Etching   173
+
+
+
-
-
-
•
•
E
E
B
B
F = e (ve × B)
Electric ﬁeld alone
Magnetic ﬁeld alone
Crossed electric and magnetic ﬁelds
FIGURE 3.14 Electron path with electric field alone and with magnetic field alone and finally with crossed electric and 
magnetic fields.

[Page 174]
they would be lost. Any velocity component of an 
electron parallel to the magnetic field will change 
the circular path into a helix. In principle, ions also 
will move in helical paths; however, the radius r (see 
Equation 3.17), because of the heavy mass of ions, is 
so large that the effect can be neglected. Clearly, from 
the above, a magnetic field can lower wall recom-
bination by confining the electrons, hence making 
relatively low field strengths adequate for obtain-
ing high plasma densities. When plasma density is 
increased with magnetic confinement, the degree of 
ionization is between 10−2 and 10−4, compared with 
10−4–10−6 for simple plate discharges, resulting in an 
increased etch rate.
The cyclotron resonance frequency of an elec-
tron estimated from Equation 3.18 is about 108 s−1, 
which is in the microwave range. If the RF excita-
tion frequency is in the same range, resonance takes 
effect, causing an additional increase in the RF 
energy transfer efficiency. Microwave energy may be 
injected into plasma to energize the ECR ion source 
as reviewed further below (Figure 3.36b).
When inert argon ions in a triode setup as shown 
in Figure 3.13 are replaced with reactive ions, reac-
tive ion-beam etching (RIBE) occurs. The ions not 
only transfer momentum to the surface but they 
also react directly with the surface, which means 
a chemical/physical mechanism is involved. Direct 
reactive ion etching of a substrate is the exception 
rather than the rule, and it is the radicals generated 
in the plasma that usually dominate the chemical 
reactions at the surface.
Systems using a hot filament to produce a plasma 
have a relatively short lifetime in the presence of 
reactive gases, as conventional filament materials 
tend to etch away (e.g., tungsten in the presence of 
halides forms volatile tungsten halides).21 The latter 
type of plasma source problem is avoided by using 
microwave excitation.
IBE may cover an area of 3–8 cm. This also is 
referred to as showered ion etching. Yet another type 
of IBE, a maskless technique called focused ion beam 
(FIB), in which the beam is made extremely nar-
row and used as a direct writing tool, is discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 6.
Because of its low etch rate and low selectiv-
ity, IBE is used more for fundamental mechanistic 
studies rather than for patterning. For example, in 
IBE, the substrate can be tilted relative to the direc-
tion of ion bombardment, and, as the ion energy at 
the substrate and the angle of incidence are known, 
fundamental information, such as sputter yields, 
can be obtained.21 The sputter yield S is defined as 
the mean number of atoms removed from the sur-
face per incident ion. The sputtering yield depends 
on the incident ion energy, the mass of the incident 
ion, the mass of the substrate atom to be etched 
away, the angle of the incident ion with respect to 
the substrate, the crystallinity and the crystal ori-
entation of the substrate, the temperature of the 
substrate during etching, and the partial pressure 
of oxygen in the residual gas. The sputter yield as 
a function of the incident ion energy is shown in 
Figure 3.15. The sputtering yield increases with 
the incident ion energy and reaches a broad maxi-
mum at energies between 5 and 50 keV. Beyond 50 
keV, the sputtering yield decreases because of the 
deeper penetration of the ions in the substrate—
that is, ion implantation.22 The angular depen-
dence of the sputtering yield S will be considered 
below when we discuss etching profiles in physical 
etching.
In Chapter 7 we will learn more about sputter 
deposition. In sputter deposition the substrate on 
the cathode is replaced by a sputter target cathode, 
and materials sputtered from that target are depos-
ited on the substrate now placed on the anode.
174   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
100
10
1
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
1
Ion energy __ eV
10
102
103
104
105
106
Sputter yield __ atoms/ion
Treshold energy
    for sputtering
FIGURE 3.15 Sputter yield as a function of the energy of 
the bombarding ion.

[Page 175]
Etching Profiles in Physical Etching
Introduction
The ideal result in dry or wet etching is usually the 
high-fidelity transfer of the mask pattern onto the 
substrate, with no distortion of critical dimensions 
(CDs). Isotropic etching (dry or wet) always enlarges 
features and thus distorts CDs. Chemical anisotropic 
wet etching is crystallographic. As a consequence, 
CDs can be maintained as long as features are strategi-
cally aligned along certain lattice planes (see Chapter 
4 on wet chemical etching and wet bulk microma-
chining: pools as tools). With sputtering, the anisot-
ropy is controllable by the plasma conditions.
As can be seen from Figure 3.3a, ion etching and 
ion milling do not lead to undercutting of the mask, 
but the walls of an etched cut are not necessarily ver-
tical. A variety of factors contribute to this loss of 
fidelity in pattern transfer, and they are either caused 
by involatile sputtering reaction products or by spe-
cial ion-surface interactions. We shall briefly review 
these dry physical ion etching problem areas.
Faceting Due to Angle-Dependent Sputter Rate
In Figure 3.15 sputter yield S is shown as a function 
of the energy E of the bombarding ion. The sputter 
yield is a complex function of the binding energy 
U of the material and its atomic number Zmaterial as 
well as the nature of the sputtering gas (with its own 
atomic number Zgas). S  increases for heavier gases 
and also depends on the angle of  incidence of the 
ions (θ). The dependence of S on different factors is 
summarized in Table 3.7. Many different phenom-
ena may occur when an ion hits a substrate/target. 
The ions may bounce back, implant, absorb on the 
surface, or reflect by a grazing collision sequence. 
In Figure 3.16 we plot the sputter yield S as a func-
tion of θ, the angle at which ions are directed at the 
surface (0° is perpendicular and 90° is glancing). 
Sputtering is often most efficient at about 20–30° 
off glancing. In sputtering (at energies <50 keV), 
the incoming ions may be modeled as hard spheres 
colliding with the substrate, with 95% of the inci-
dent energy going into the substrate (thus making 
cooling of the target absolutely required) and 5% of 
the incident energy carried off by substrate/ target 
atoms. The atoms come off with a cosine distribu-
tion. It intuitively can be understood that 1) at a 
glancing angle the incoming ions do not eject atoms 
from the substrate/target (S = 0), 2) hitting the sub-
strate perpendicularly with ions leads to fewer atoms 
being ejected from the substrate/target, and 3) that 
in between there are a maximum number of atoms 
being kicked out.
Even when starting out with a vertical mask side-
wall, ion sputtering exhibits a tendency to develop a 
facet on the mask edge at the angle of maximum etch 
rate. This corner faceting is detailed in Figure 3.17a. 
The corner of the mask, always a little rounded even 
when the mask walls are very vertical, etches faster 
than the rest and is worn off. Faceting at the mask 
corner arises because the sputter yield S for materials 
is a function of the angle at which ions are directed 
at the surface [S = f(θ), see Figure 3.16]. The sputter-
etch rate of resist, for example, reaches a maximum 
at an incidence angle of about 60°, more than twice 
the rate at normal incidence.22 Sloped mask sidewalls 
may eventually be followed by sloped etch steps in the 
Dry Etching   175
TABLE 3.7 Sputtering Yield S Dependence on Various 
Factors
Factor
Effect on Sputter 
Yield S
Target 
material
Binding energy U 
Higher U means 
lower S
Atomic number 
Zmaterial 
Higher Z means 
lower S
Sputtering 
gas
Atomic number 
Zgas 
S increases for 
heavier gases
Incident energy E 
S increases for higher 
energy
Geometry
S reaches a maximum 
20–30° of glancing
0°
90°
Perpendicular
Glancing
Angle of incidence
S
60–70°
FIGURE 3.16 Sputter yield as a function of angle of inci-
dence of bombarding ions.

[Page 176]
substrate. Faceting of the substrate itself will proceed 
along its own preferred sputtering direction angle. 
The faceting is more pronounced with an applied bias 
as a result of the increased electric field at corners. 
Usually, faceting affects only the masking pattern, 
and making the mask sufficiently thick minimizes its 
influence on the fidelity of the pattern transfer.
It should be noted that some of the disadvantages 
of physical etching, such as resist corner faceting, 
can sometimes be exploited. For example, a gently 
sloping edge is advantageous to facilitate metal cov-
erage or planarization because a tapered sidewall is 
easier to cover than a vertical wall, especially when 
using line-of-site deposition methods. The method 
most often used to obtain such a taper is a controlled 
resist failure, that is, erodible or sacrificial masks 
(Figure 3.18). In other words, the “negative effect” of 
faceting described in connection with Figure 3.17a is 
put to good use.
Ditching or Trenching
When the slope of the side of the mask is no lon-
ger completely vertical, some ions will collide at a 
glancing angle with the sloping edges before they 
arrive at the etch surface. This gives a local increase 
in etch rate, leading to ditches (Figure 3.17b). For 
this mechanism to be active, there must be a siz-
able fraction of ions with at least slightly off-vertical 
trajectories, or the sidewall must have a slight taper 
as shown in Figure 3.17b.23 For example, the taper of 
the sidewall could result from redeposition (see next 
section) or faceting (see above). Because ditching is a 
176   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Redeposition
(c)
Ang. distr. of ions
(e)
Trenching
(b)
Faceting
(a)
Backscattering
(d)
Photoresist
Substrate
Facets
in mask
Redeposited
material
FIGURE 3.17 Limitations of dry physical etching. (a) Faceting. Sputtering creates angled features. An angled facet 
(~60°) in the resist propagates as the mask is eroded away. Sloped walls may also be created in the underlying sub-
strate. (b) Ditching or trenching as a result of glancing incidence of ions. (c) Redeposition of material sputtered from 
the bottom of a trench. (d) Backscattering. (e) Angular distribution of incident ions. (Based on Lehmann, H. W. 1991. 
Thin film processes II. Eds. J. L. Vossen, and W. Kern. Boston: Academic Press.1)
(b)
(c)
Mask
ﬁlm
(a)
Substrate
FIGURE 3.18 Erodible or sacrificial masks. (a) Patterned 
masking structure prior to etching. (b) Nonerodible mask. 
(c) Partially erodible mask.

[Page 177]
small effect (e.g., 5%), it often goes unnoticed unless 
thick layers are etched.
Redeposition
Another sputtering limitation, already alluded to, 
is the redeposition of involatile products on step 
edges (Figure 3.17c). Redeposition involves sputtered 
involatile species from the bottom of the trench 
settling on the sidewalls of the mask and etched 
trench. The phenomenon manifests itself mainly on 
sloped sidewalls.
By tilting and rotating the substrate during etching 
(Figure 3.19), etch profiles can be improved. The 
reasons for tilting and rotating improvements are a 
combination of shadowing the bottom of the step (to 
reduce trenching), partially etching the side walls of 
the mask (to reduce redeposition), and gaining more 
nearly vertical edges on the etched profiles in the 
substrate. Especially with aspect ratios exceeding 
unity, redeposition becomes prob lematic, and reactive 
gas additives are necessary to generate volatile etch 
products. With aspect ratios greater than 2:1 or 2.5:1, the 
etching action at the bottom of too-fine features tends 
to slow down or stop altogether. Reactive additives 
bring us into the realm of chemical-physical etching 
(discussed further below). For micromachining, tilting 
and rotating of substrates are recurring topics. They 
are some of the desirable modifications of standard 
equipment used for micromachining applications (for 
example, see the fabrication of Spindt field emitters 
shown in Figure 2.42). 
Redeposition may also be used to control sidewall 
profiles. The material redeposited on the sidewall 
protects the sidewalls, whereas the material redepos-
ited at the bottom gets removed during the etching 
process. With the proper control of the redeposition, 
one can achieve a highly anisotropic profile.
Backscattering
Backscattering, illustrated in Figure 3.17d, is a form of 
redeposition associated with involatile etch products. 
A fraction of the sputtered and invol atile species 
from the surface is backscattered onto the substrate 
after several collisions with gas phase species. This 
indirect redeposition may involve contaminants 
from the walls and fixtures in the vacuum chamber. 
Backscattering fixes the upper pressure limit for ion-
enhanced etching. Significant redeposition can take 
place at pressures as low as 10 mTorr.1
Angular Distribution of Incident Ions
Sheath scattering and/or field nonuniformities cause 
off-vertical ion trajectories. Most ions impinge per-
pendicularly on the substrate. Scattering of a small 
fraction of ions in the sheath causes a distribution of 
impingement angles.1 This scattering in the sheath 
is responsible for hourglass-shaped etch profiles 
that have been observed in trench etching of silicon 
(see Figure 3.17e). Besides sheath scattering, there is 
a second mechanism active that may lead to skew-
ing of ion directionality; namely, inhomogeneities 
in the electrical field at the substrate surface. With 
etching conductors, the bending of electric field 
lines caused by surface topography has the effect 
of enhancing ion flux at feature edges and leads to 
ditching. On the other hand, with etching insula-
tors, charging effects may cause appreciable ion 
fluxes to the sidewalls of a trench and contribute to 
lateral etching. The latter will again lead to hour-
glass-shaped trenches. The  importance of the effect 
is very much related to the electrical conductivity 
of the masking and etching surfaces, with the great-
est significance for strongly insulating materials.24
Temperature Control during Dry Etching
During dry etching, heavy ion bombardment of the 
substrate generates a lot of heat. To protect photo-
resist masks, temperature control is required. This 
could in principle be achieved by water cooling the 
Dry Etching   177
Tilting and rotating
Ion
beam
Resist
Deposit
Feature
Etch stop
θ
Mask
Sample
Rotate
Partial
shadowing
here
Combined etching
and redeposition
here
FIGURE 3.19 Left: By tilting and rotating the substrate 
during etching etch profiles can be improved. Right: 
Redeposition may be used to control sidewall profiles.

[Page 178]
wafer-chuck (pedestal or cathode) although the low 
pressure makes for poor heat transfer between the 
substrate and the wafer-chuck, so helium backside 
cooling is required. Alternatively a clamp ring or elec-
trostatic chuck (E-chuck) is used to hold the wafer.
Physical Etching Summary
In physical etching, ion etching or sputtering, and 
ion-beam milling, argon or other inert ions extracted 
from the glow discharge region are accelerated in an 
electrical field toward the substrate, where etching 
is purely impact controlled. Sputtering is inherently 
nonselective because large ion energies compared 
with the differences in surface bond energies and 
chemical reactivities are involved in ejecting sub-
strate material. The method is slow compared with 
other dry etching means, with etch rates limited 
to several hundreds of angstroms per minute com-
pared with thousands of angstroms per minute, 
and higher for chemical and ion-assisted etching (as 
high as 6 µm/min with the newest deep RIE equip-
ment). Sputter etching tends to form facets, ditches, 
and hourglass-shaped trenches and frequently rede-
posits material in high-aspect-ratio (>2:1) features. 
Electrical damage to the substrate from ion bom-
bardment and implantation can be problematic. 
However, some of the reversible plasma damage can 
be removed by a thermal anneal. With the continu-
ing increase in device complexity, which includes 
layers of different chemical composition, inert ion 
etching and ion-beam sputtering will continue to 
find new applications.
Plasma Etching (Radical Etching)
Introduction
In reactive plasma etching (PE), which corresponds 
to a high-pressure RIE extreme, reactive neutral 
chemical species such as chlorine or fluorine atoms 
and molecular species generated in the plasma dif-
fuse to the substrate where they form volatile prod-
ucts with the layer to be removed. The only role of 
the plasma is to supply gaseous, reactive etchant 
species. Consequently, if the feed gas were reactive 
enough, no plasma would be needed. At pressures of 
>10−3 Torr, the neutrals strike the surface at random 
angles, leading to isotropic, rounded features. A dry 
chemical etching regime can be established by oper-
ating at low voltages, eliminating impingement of 
high-energy ions on the sample, and facilitating sur-
face etching almost exclusively by chemically active, 
neutral species formed in the plasma. The reaction 
products—volatile gases—are removed by the vac-
uum system. The volatility of the formed reaction 
product introduces a major difference with sputter-
ing, where involatile fragments are ejected like a bil-
liard ball and may be redeposited close by.
Reactor Configurations
Reactive plasma etching is one extreme of RIE and 
basically follows the same process we encountered 
when discussing dry stripping of resists (Chapter 1, 
Dry Stripping). Three different popular configura-
tions for plasma etching (barrel reactor, downstream 
etcher, and parallel-plate system) were shown in 
Figure 1.36. In resist etching, the process is called 
ashing. Depending on the configuration, high-energy 
ion bombardment of the substrate can be prevented, 
more or less, and plasma-induced device damage 
avoided. For example, in a barrel reactor, the sub-
strates are shielded by a perforated metal shield to 
reduce substrate exposure to charged high energetic 
species in the plasma. In a downstream stripper, the 
geometry of the reactor allows reactant generation 
and stripping to take place in two physically sepa-
rated zones (triode-type configuration with a remote 
plasma). In parallel-plate strippers, the substrates 
are placed inside the plasma source, which leads to 
higher ion damage compared with the two previous 
methods.
Reaction Mechanism
The plasma etching process can be broken down 
into as many as five primary steps, as illustrated in 
Figure 3.20. The first step is the production of the 
reactive species in the gas phase (1). In a glow dis-
charge, a gas such as CF4 dissociates to some degree 
by impact with energetic particles in the plasma 
with an average energy distribution between 1 and 
10 eV. In the dissociation, reactive species such as 
178   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 179]
CF3
+, CF3, and F are formed. This step is vital because 
most of the gases used to etch thin films do not react 
spontaneously with the film; for example, CF4 does 
not etch silicon. In a second step, the reactive species 
diffuse to the solid (2) where they become adsorbed 
(3), diffuse over the surface, and react with the sur-
face (4). The etching species must get to the surface 
to react with a thin film or substrate molecules. The 
mechanics of getting to the surface can limit aspect 
ratio and determines undercutting and uniformity. 
Adsorption also can affect aspect ratio. The reaction 
is strongly temperature-dependent. Finally, the reac-
tion products leave the surface by desorption and 
diffusion to the bulk (5). Desorption can stop the 
etching process if the reacted species are not volatile, 
and diffusion to the bulk gas phase can lead to non-
uniform etching as a result of dilution of unreacted 
etching species. As in a parallel resistor combina-
tion, total resistance is determined by the smallest 
resistance—the reaction with the smallest rate con-
stant determines the overall reaction rate.
Some of the reaction steps listed above occur in 
the gas phase and are termed homogeneous reactions, 
whereas others occur at the surface and are called 
heterogeneous reactions. For homogeneous reactions, 
the plasma only plays the role of creating highly 
reactive species from the plasma gas. Radicals  are 
more abundant in a glow discharge than ions 
because they are generated at a lower threshold 
energy (e.g., < 8 eV), which leads to a higher gene-
ration rate. Moreover, the uncharged radicals have 
a longer lifetime. Low-energy ions rarely act as the 
reactant themselves; instead, neutrals are respon-
sible for most reactive etching (chemical etching) 
at pressures greater than 0.001–0.005 Torr. Radi-
cals and molecules formed in the plasma are 
not inherently more chemically reactive than 
ions, but they are present in significantly higher 
concen trations. Heterogeneous reactions display 
even more complexity than homogeneous reactions. 
In prin ciple, all the species generated in the plasma 
may influence the reaction rate at the surface; 
nonreactive species may decrease the reaction rate 
by blocking surface sites, and adsorption of radicals 
may enhance the reaction rate. Radicals and other 
neutrals reach the surface by diffusion, whereas ions 
are accelerated toward the surface by the negative 
potential on the substrate electrode. Besides chemi-
cally active species and ions, the effect of electron 
bombardment and irradiation by visible and UV 
radiation emanating from the plasma requires con-
sideration. Chemical etching occurs at low bias, 
and because, in principle, no highly energetic 
ions bombard the surface, sputtering itself is not 
an important surface-removal mechanism, and 
radiation damage to the substrate is reduced. 
Unfortunately, the term reactive ion etching is used 
indiscriminately for all chemical dry etching, even 
though ions themselves are not the major reactive 
species. Radicals and molecules also serve as the 
primary depositing species for all types of films 
in plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition 
(PECVD) (see Chapter 7). Ions directly participate in 
chemical etching only in RIBE, where ion reactions 
at very low pressures can etch at modest rates of less 
than 400 Å/min. RIBE is an example of physical/
chemical dry etching where the same ion has 
both a physical (ion impact) and a chemical (reactive 
etching) component. Working with remote plasma 
in a triode-type system (e.g., a downstream stripper) 
further reduces ion bombardment of and current 
flux to the wafer. The steps of reactant genera-
tion and etching are separated efficiently because 
charged species (mainly electrons and positive 
Dry Etching   179
FIGURE 3.20 Primary process steps occurring in a plasma 
etch process. See text for details.

[Page 180]
O2
+  ions in the case of pure oxygen plasma used 
for stripping resist) suffer a much higher loss than 
reactive neutrals such as atomic oxygen as a result of 
the presence of plasma excitation.
In the absence of crystallographic effects (typically 
seen with III–V compounds but not with Si), chemi-
cal dry etching leads to isotropic profiles only when 
ions do not assist the reaction. In the case where ions 
assist, anisotropy is induced (see below under Energy-
Driven Anisotropy or Damage Mechanism). Isotropic 
etching of the reactive species leads to mask undercut-
ting. In some cases mask undercutting is required—
for example, in device fabrication involving lift-off or 
when layers on sidewalls must be cleared. 
Because of the chemical nature of the etching pro-
cess, a high degree of control over the relative etch 
rates of different materials (i.e., selectivity) can be 
obtained by choosing suitable reactive gases. During 
stripping, oxygen plasma removes photoresists by 
oxidizing the hydrocarbon material to volatile prod-
ucts. Fluorine compounds are used for silicon etch-
ing, and many materials are susceptible to chlorine 
etching. For example, aluminum is etched in chlo-
rine but not in fluorine because aluminum chlo-
rides are volatile, whereas aluminum fluorides are 
involatile. Mixtures of gaseous compounds such as 
CF4 (fluorocarbon)-O2 assist in patterning silicon, 
silicon dioxide, silicon nitride, and so on.
Macro- and Microscopic Loading Effects 
Macroscopic Loading Effects
In dry etching, the number of radicals in the plasma 
is in the same range as the number of atoms to be 
removed; in wet etching, on the other hand, the 
number of etchant molecules might be 105 times 
higher than the number of atoms to be removed. A 
“loading effect” occurs in dry etching as the etchant 
is depleted by reaction with the substrate material. 
As a result, the etch rate is inversely proportional to 
the Si area that is exposed to the plasma.2 The more 
purely chemical the etching process, the bigger the 
loading effect. With lower pressures, the loading effect 
becomes smaller. Conventional plasmas can sus-
tain enough radicals to etch at rates of 1000 Å/min. 
With more effective power sources, such as a cyclo-
tron or magnetron, 104 Å/min can be achieved.
The loading effect brings an important limita-
tion of dry etching to light: as the etch rate becomes 
dependent on wafer loading, uniformity is jeopar-
dized. If the supply of reactant limits the etch rate, 
small variations in flow rate or gas distribution 
uniformity may lead to nonuniformities in the etch 
rate. The gas flow F is the most important param-
eter to control in this regard. Gas flow rates are on 
the order of 5–200 sccm (standard cubic centi meter 
per minute), with a maximum flow rate set by the 
maximum pumping speed and the desired work-
ing pressure.1 The symmetry of the gas flow (i.e., 
the relative position of gas inlet and pumping port) 
has to be optimized for a given reactor configura-
tion. Hence a minimum flow rate of the reactant 
gas prevents the process from being limited by 
reactant supply. A utilization factor, U (the ratio of 
rate of formation of etch product to the rate of etch 
gas flow), may be defined, and U ≥ 0.1 is suggested 
for uniform etching. To illustrate: a 500-Å/min 
etch rate of a 3-in. Si wafer in a CF4 plasma corre-
sponds to a removal rate of 5 × 1019 Si atoms/min, 
or a SiF4 evolution rate of approximately 2 sccm. 
This means that the CF4 flow rate should be at least 
20 sccm.1,25
Closely linked to the utilization factor U is the 
residence time τ in seconds of the feed gas in the dry 
etch reactor. The residence time is given by:
 
τ = PV
F
 
(3.19)
where V = reactor volume in liters
 
P = steady-state pressure in Torr
 
F =  flow rate of the feed gas in Torr-liters per 
second
(Most gas flow meters are calibrated in standard 
cubic centimeters per minute and 1.0 Torr-L/s = 79.0 
sccm.) 
The residence time represents the average length 
of time a molecule of gas spends in the chamber irre-
spective of any chemical reaction that might occur. 
Etching uniformity is also impacted by the rela-
tive reactivity of the wafer surface with respect to the 
cathode material used. Resulting nonuniformities 
in this case are referred to as bull’s eyes because circu-
lar interference patterns appear on an etched wafer. 
180   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 181]
If an aluminum electrode is used for Si or poly-Si 
etching in SF6 plasma, a very pronounced bull’s eye 
effect will be evident. The striking nonuniformity in 
this etching pattern results from a lower consump-
tion of reactant species above the aluminum elec-
trode because aluminum only mildly reacts with 
reactive species formed by SF6. By applying an elec-
trode material that consumes the fluorine reactive 
species as fast as Si itself (e.g., a Si cathode), concen-
tration gradients of reactant species at the edge of 
the wafer are avoided, resulting in uniform etching 
(see Figure 3.21).
Microloading Effects during Plasma Etching
The loading effect may also be observed while etch-
ing different features on the same wafer. In this case 
one refers to local loading or microloading effect. 
For example:
 
1. Density of the unmasked areas may vary over 
small distances, resulting in differences in etch 
rate analogous to macroscopic loading.
 
2. Etch rates in DRIE show a dependence on the 
aspect ratio of the feature being etched; the etch 
rate is diffusion limited and decreases with 
increasing aspect ratio. In cases where a high-
aspect-ratio trench is etched in the vicinity of 
a wide trench, the latter locally decreases the 
availability of etching species at the expense of 
the narrower trench.26 The effect is also known 
as “RIE lag” or aspect-ratio-dependent etching 
(ARDE). Lower etch rate for higher AR trenches 
(smaller widths) is illustrated in Figure 3.22.
Possible mechanisms for explaining the RIE lag 
are the depletion or trapping of the reactant species 
(conductance limitations) as the species travel to 
the bottom of the trench, thus causing distortion of 
the ion paths as a result of charging and shadowing 
effects involving neutrals or ions. In all cases the 
result is the reduction of the probability of reactant 
species reaching the bottom.
Silicon Grass or Black Silicon
A common issue of nonuniformity with RIE, 
especially in the case of deep dry chemical etching 
(DRIE; see below), is the micrograss or black silicon 
structures observed, for example, at the bottom of a 
deep Si trench (Figure 3.23). Jansen et al.2,27 associated 
the effect, with all types of micro- and nanomasking 
from materials deposited or grown on the Si, for 
example, native oxide or dust (that is, contamination 
already present on the wafer before etching). Si spikes 
formed as a result of dirty wafers before etching are 
easily prevented by a precleaning step, and because 
the etch is very selective, the native oxide needs to 
be removed completely. More grass may form during 
etching because of redeposition of mask material.2 
Dry Etching   181
FIGURE 3.21 Chemical and physical effects leading to 
nonuniform etching across a wafer (bull’s eye effect). 
(From Elwenspoek, M., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, and A. 
Prak. 1994. Micromechanics. Report No. 122830, Twente, 
the Netherlands: University of Twente.25)
FIGURE 3.22 Illustration of RIE lag. The probability of 
reactant species reaching the bottom is reduced. (See red 
lines; wider trenches etch deeper.)

[Page 182]
This source of black Si is more  pronounced with 
higher ion energies; therefore, working with a lower 
self-bias is in general advantageous. Grass formation 
during RIE was also explained as a consequence 
of the sharpening of the ion angular distribution 
with the increasing aspect ratio of a trench during 
etching.23 To further minimize the latter types of 
nonuniformities, wafers should be positioned away 
from the edges of electrodes to eliminate edge effects 
caused by changing sheath thicknesses and varying 
the angles  of incidence. A good thermal contact 
between wafers and cathode is also important. Local 
temperature variations caused by nonuniform heat-
sinking can lead to large etch nonuniformities, 
particularly in chemically dominated processes.25
Atmospheric Plasma Etching 
Introduction
Until recently, most plasma science experiments 
were carried out under vacuum conditions. How-
ever, atmospheric-pressure plasmas enjoyed a growth 
spurt in the 1980s driven by new applications such 
as high power lasers, MEMS electrostatic switches, 
novel plasma processing applications and sputte-
ring, EM absorbers and reflectors, remediation of 
gaseous and other pollutants and waste streams, 
sterilization, decontamination, and other biome-
dical applications. Recently, new hardware designs 
have enabled the stable operation of nonthermal 
plasmas at atmospheric pressure, and publications 
on atmospheric-pressure glow discharge plasmas 
have grown rapidly. We introduce two examples 
of atmos pheric plasmas: one operates in an argon 
plasma arc, whereas the other is arc free.
The main characteristics of a plasma, such as the 
breakdown voltage and the voltage current charac-
teristic and structure of the discharge, depend on 
the geometry of the electrodes and the vessel, the 
gas used, and the electrode material. In the highly 
182   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 3.23 Silicon “micrograss” structures, which form 
by plasma etching of silicon in an atmosphere that causes 
small pieces of silicon dioxide to sputter and then block 
(mask) etching where they land.
Voltage (V)
Dark discharge
Townsend regime
Corona
Saturation
regime
Background ionization
Glow discharge
Breakdown voltage
Normal glow
Abnormal
glow
Arc discharge
Glow-to-arc
transition
Termal
arc
Non-
thermal
H
I
F
F
G
J
K
C
D
E
B
A
10–10
102
104
1
Current (amps)
10–8
10–6
10–4
10–2  
FIGURE 3.24 Voltage current plot of a glow discharge.

[Page 183]
nonlinear voltage current plot of plasma, as shown 
in Figure 3.24, we discern several regimes:
A to B:  The applied electrical field E accelerates 
residual ions and electrons as a result of 
background radiation in the reactor (e.g., 
from cosmic rays, radioactive materials 
in the building). These ions and electrons 
move toward the electrodes.
B to C:  As the applied V increases, eventually all 
the available residual charges are swept 
up. This causes the current through the 
plasma to saturate. 
C to E:  As the applied V increases beyond C, the E 
field is now large enough that the remain-
ing electrons can ionize gas. As V increases 
further, secondary electrons also cause 
ionization.
D to E:  In the so-called Townsend regime, coro-
nal discharges occur at various edges and 
sharp points of the electrodes in the gas. 
This is the result of the E field concentra-
tion at such sites.
A to E:  Electrical breakdown occurs. The voltage 
is now high enough to cause ionization to 
occur because of secondary electrons in 
the gas. Additional  secondary electrons 
are generated at the cathode as a result of 
ion impact on it. There is a sudden increase 
of the current by several orders of magni-
tude, causing an avalanche.
F to G:  After breakdown from E to F, the gas enters 
the normal glow where the voltage V is 
almost independent of the current over 
several orders of magnitude. As the current 
increases, the fraction of the cathode occu-
pied by plasma increases until the plasma 
covers the entire cathode surface at G.
G to H:  In the abnormal glow regime, further 
increases in the applied voltage cause 
increases in the current. This is the region 
of operation for most sputtering and other 
plasma systems.
H to K:  At H, the electrodes have become suffi-
ciently hot that the cathode can now emit 
electrons thermionically, and a second 
avalanche can happen in the arc region 
(this is the regime used in spectrochem-
istry). If the DC power supply is capable 
(low internal R), a transition from glow to 
arc happens in the region from H to I. In 
this arc regime from I to K, the discharge 
V decreases as I increases. The point J 
marks the transition from a nonthermal 
to a thermal arc (electrons have the same 
temperature as the gas).
At atmospheric pressures, plasmas are weakly ion-
ized, and the mean-free path for electron-molecule 
collisions is very short (<1 µm). These plasmas are 
typically thermal with electrons and gas at the 
same temperature. At atmospheric pressure a small 
perturbation can easily cause a glow-to-arc transition. 
The transition time is very short, and this makes it 
hard to stabilize an atmospheric glow discharge. 
Some tricks to prevent an arc include the use of inert 
gas to lower breakdown voltage, high-frequency 
power sources and operation in the dielectric barrier 
discharge mode, and a structured cathode (e.g., a pin 
cathode). Stabilization of high-pressure (atmospheric-
pressure) plasmas is most easily achieved if the 
plasma is confined to “small” spaces. Interesting 
pattern formation and self-organization has been 
observed in these microplasmas.
Atmospheric Downstream Plasma
In atmospheric plasma jet etching, reactive chemical 
species are generated in a DC arc between two elec-
trodes in a noble gas (such as argon) at atmospheric 
pressure. A stream of reactant gas (the gas jet) such 
as CF4 then flows into the arc and onto the wafer, 
which is located up to 12 in. away to avoid damage, 
as shown in Figure 3.25.28 Although atmospheric 
plasma sources have been used previously for indus-
trial powder spray and plasma cutting (see Chapters 
5 and 9), they have not been used in microelectronic 
processing for fear of damaging and contaminating 
the silicon wafer surface. Among the concerns were 
possible overheating as a result of high power den-
sity, contamination from chemical erosion of elec-
trodes, and nonuniform etching. 
Atmospheric downstream plasma (ADP) proces-
sing overcomes these problems by using a magneti-
cally controlled, inert gas, DC arc-plasma discharge. 
Dry Etching   183

[Page 184]
Plasma jet etching is an atmospheric variant of plas ma 
etching capable of producing very high etch rates 
without substrate damage. By deploying the plasma 
in a downstream configuration, ADP prevents ion 
impact damage while keeping wafer temperatures 
low. This technology may improve the performance 
and reduce the cost of bulk material removal opera-
tions, such as mechanical grinding, lapping, and 
wet chemical etching [especially chemomechanical 
polishing (CMP); see Chapter 1, Figure 1.66]. ADP 
etching for back-side damage removal after grind-
ing and wafer thinning is a potential major applica-
tion. Other applications include damage-free dicing 
and via etching (for the latter two applications, 
an aluminum mask is used). The trend to thinner 
wafers and thinner chips will not stop with the cur-
rent 200–250-µm thickness, but is forecast to con-
tinue reducing to 100–150 µm and even thinner 
(see Figure 3.26), driven by the demand for portable 
electronic devices, smart cards, multichip mod-
ules, PC Card (originally PCMCIA Card for People 
Can’t Memorize Computer Indu stry Acronyms or 
more seriously for Personal Computer Memory 
Card Interface Association), and so on. Wafer stre-
ngth requirements of large-diameter wafers limit 
back-grinding to thickness of 200–250 µm; there-
fore, new technology is essential. Tru-Silicon Techno-
logies is one of the companies providing this type 
of equip ment (for a tutorial on applications of ADP, 
see http://www.trusi.com/frames.asp?).
Atmospheric Arc-Free Plasma Etching
A picture of an atmospheric, arc-free (!), plasma jet 
invented at the University of California, Los Angeles 
is shown in Figure 3.27.29 The “cold flame” (T ~ 75oC) 
shown here is impinging on a finger (http://www.
seas.ucla.edu/prosurf). This jet was developed for 
184   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Si Wafer
C + 4F
SiF4
CO2
CO
Argon
CF4
FIGURE 3.25 Atmospheric downstream plasma processing of a Si wafer. (From Tru-Silicon Technologies, http://www.
trusi.com/frames.asp?.)
FIGURE 3.26 A 50-µm thin silicon wafer produced using 
atmospheric downstream plasma (ADP). (From Tru-Silicon 
Technologies.)
FIGURE 3.27 A picture of an atmospheric, arc-free 
(!), plasma jet invented at University of California, Los 
Angeles. The “cold flame” (T ~ 75oC) shown here is 
impinging on a finger (http://www.seas.ucla.edu/prosurf).

[Page 185]
etching materials and depositing materials at atmo-
spheric pressure and temperatures between 100 and 
275°C. Gas mixtures containing helium, oxygen, 
and carbon tetrafluoride are passed between an 
outer, grounded electrode and a center electrode, 
driven by 13.56-MHz RF power at 50–500 W. At a 
flow rate of 51 L/min, a stable, arc-free discharge was 
produced. The discharge extends out through a noz-
zle at the end of the electrodes, forming a plasma jet. 
Materials placed 0.5 cm downstream from the noz-
zle are etched at high rates: 8.0µm/min for Kapton 
(O2 and He only), 1.5 µm/min for silicon dioxide, 
2.0 µm/min for tantalum, and 1.0 µm/min for tung-
sten.29 The plasma jet produces a large flux of atoms 
and/or radicals, depending on the gas fed to the 
device. The setup may also be used for deposition. 
For example, tetraethoxysilane was used to deposit 
high-quality silicate glass films. It should be noted 
that like ADP this is a downstream plasma source. 
The ions and electrons are rapidly consumed by col-
lisions before impinging on the substrate.
Physical/Chemical Etching
Introduction
The most useful plasma etching is neither entirely 
chemical nor physical. By adding a physical com-
ponent to a purely chemical etching mechanism, 
the shortcomings of both sputter-based and purely 
chemical dry etching processes can be surmounted.
In physical/chemical techniques, ion-surface inter-
actions promote dry etching. A first type is found in 
reactive ion beam etching (RIBE). RIBE constitutes a 
rather exceptional case of energy-driven anisotropy 
where ions are reactive and etch the surface directly. 
More common in energy-driven etching is chemi-
cally assisted ion-beam etching (CAIBE). In this case, 
ion bombardment induces a reaction by making the 
surface more reactive for the neutral plasma species, 
for example, by creating surface damage. In inhibi-
tor-driven anisotropy, ions clear the surface of film-
forming reaction products, allowing etching with 
reactive neutrals to proceed on the cleared areas. 
We will also learn that silicon dry etch anisotropy 
may be influenced by local dopant concentrations 
and that a wide variety of existing gas compositions 
crucially influences the etch profile. To help the 
reader summarize matters, a list of simplifying rules 
is provided at the end of this section.
Energy-Driven Anisotropy or 
Damage Mechanism
During energy-driven anisotropy, bombardment 
by ions (<1000 eV) disrupts an unreactive substrate 
and causes damage, such as dangling bonds and dis-
locations, resulting in exposed surface atoms, which 
are more reactive toward etchant species (electrons 
or photons also can induce surface activation). Ion 
bombardment is mainly in the vertical direction so 
that the etch rate in the vertical direction is much 
higher than in the lateral direction (anisotropy!). 
Besides “energy-driven anisotropy,” the process 
is also referred to as the damage mechanism. In Figure 
3.3c, a typical resulting etch profile was shown. 
Vacuum pumping removes the volatile reaction 
products. This type of etching is referred to as reac-
tive ion etching (RIE) when it involves reactive chemi-
cals in a diode-type reactor, and as chemically assisted 
ion-beam etching (CAIBE) when it involves chemical 
reactants (e.g., Cl2) introduced over the substrate 
surface in a triode-type setup. Figure 3.11 shows a 
parallel-plate setup for RIE, and a hexode reactor is 
shown in Figure 3.28. The hexode reactor is designed 
for batch processing. In this design, the cathode has 
the shape of a hexagon surrounded by the cylindri-
cal chamber walls forming the anode. As many as 24 
100-mm-diameter or 18  150-mm-diameter wafers 
Dry Etching   185
Stainless steel
bell jar
Substrates
Gas in
RF
FIGURE 3.28 Schematic diagram of a multiwafer RIE 
etcher, the so-called hexode reactor.

[Page 186]
can be mounted on the slightly tilted sidewalls of 
the hexagonal cathode. The latter is slowly rotated 
during operation to increase uniformity.1
The etch rate reached by RIE is substantially 
higher than in ion etching. For example, the etch 
rate of Si in Ar sputtering hovers around 100 Å/min 
compared with 2000 Å/min for a reactive gas such 
as CCl2F2. Chemically assisted ion etching can lead 
to accurate transfers of the mask pattern to the sub-
strate and to a fair selectivity in etching different 
materials. The directional anisotropy ensues from 
operating at low pressures and high voltages. Under 
these conditions, the mean free path of reacting 
molecules typically grows larger than the depth to 
be etched, resulting in the horizontal surfaces being 
hit and etched by reactive neutrals more frequently 
than the sidewalls. The need for energetic impinging 
ions, as in the case of physical etching, is reduced as 
the complex on the surface activates more easily. In 
Figure 3.29 we illustrate the energy-driven anisot-
ropy process or damage mechanism.
Reactive ion-beam etching (RIBE), like CAIBE, 
involves chemical reactants in a triode setup. There 
is an important difference, however. In the case of 
RIBE, the reactive ions are introduced through the 
ion source itself; in CAIBE, the reactive gas is fed over 
the substrate to be etched, and unreactive ions are 
generated in the ion source. At very low pressures in 
RIBE systems, reactive ions, substituting Ar ions, can 
sustain a modest etch rate of less than 400 Å/min. 
In CAIBE, ion bombardment of a substrate in the 
presence of a reactive etchant species leads to a syn-
ergism where fast directional material removal rates 
greatly exceed the separate sum of chemical attack 
and sputtering rates. At one point, this type of etch-
ing was thought to be caused by direct chemical reac-
tions between the ions and the surface material (as 
with RIBE). However, in most practical situations for 
etch rates ranging from 1,000–10,000 Å/min that is 
impossible because the ion flux is much lower than 
the surface removal rates. The synergistic effect of 
chemical attack and sputtering rates is illustrated in 
Figure 3.30; the etch rate of Ar+ ion bombardment 
alone or the chemical etch rate of XeF2 alone does 
not add up to the combined effect.
CAIBE is particularly effective in achieving highly 
anisotropic etch profiles because of the independent 
control of the physical and chemical etching compo-
nents. To get an idea of how smooth a sidewall can 
be achieved by CAIBE, consider the work on verti-
cal mirror facets in an InGaN/AlGaN laser diode 
structure. Atomic force microscope (AFM) measure-
ments show that the laser diode vertical sidewalls 
etched in a CAIBE system (using Cl2 and BCl3 as the 
reactive species) exhibit a root mean squared rough-
ness of only 40–60 Å, and the inclination angle is 
within ±2° of vertical.30 Using N2/H2/CH4 chemis-
try, extremely smooth sidewalls were also observed 
in CAIBE etching of InP.31 To reduce surface dam-
age, the aim is to increase the chemical component, 
decrease the ion acceleration energy, and work with 
a high ion flux. In CAIBE, as in other ion-beam 
techniques, the ion acceleration energy and the ion 
density can be independently controlled. With an 
ICP or ECR, a highly dense and uniform ion beam 
(e.g., Ar+) is generated. ICP and ECR plasmas are dis-
cussed below.
The distinction between RIBE and CAIBE is not 
absolute because the presence of a reactive gas in 
CAIBE will produce some beam ions from species 
that back-diffuse into the broad-beam ion source. 
In a magnetically enhanced RIE (MERIE) system, a 
higher ion flux is obtained at lower energy through 
186   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Ions
Photoresist
Polysilicon
Oxide
Wafer
FIGURE 3.29 Energy-driven anisotropy or damage mecha-
nism. (Drawing by Genis Turon.)

[Page 187]
magnetic confinement of the plasma. For typical 
RIBE and CAIBE performance characteristics also 
visit http://www.oxfordplasma.de/technols/ibe.htm.
A hypothetical etch profile for Si and SiO2 etching 
with a reactive gas and positive ion bombardment 
is shown in Figure 3.31a. In the absence of ionic 
 bombardment, the etch rate is assumed to be zero 
for SiO2; consequently, the SiO2 film etches with 
perfect anisotropy (vertical sidewalls). The silicon 
etch rate in the absence of ionic bombardment, on 
the other hand, is assumed to be finite but small; 
consequently, the etched feature ends up having a 
profile with slanted sidewalls. Mathematically, the 
above can be expressed in terms of etch depth Z, 
undercut X, the etch rate under bias VZ, and the etch 
rate without bias VX, as:
 
V
V
X
Z
x
z
=
 
(3.20)
Dry Etching   187
9
8
7
6
5
Si etch rate (nm/min)
XeF2 gas
only
Ar+ ion beam  + XeF2 gas
Ar+ ion beam
only
0
100
200
300
400
Time (s)
500
600
700
800
900
4
3
2
1
0
FIGURE 3.30 Etch rate experiment in RIE. Etch rate of Ar+ bombardment alone or chemical etch of XeF2 alone does not 
add up to their combined synergistic effect. 
x
x
z
z
vx
Mask
Si
SiO2
SiO2
(a)
(b)
Bias voltage on wafer (V)
0                                      –100                                   –200 
Si
Etch Rate
= vz
vz
vx
FIGURE 3.31 Relationship between the shape of the etched wall profile and the dependence of the etch rate on the 
wafer potential. (a) Etch profiles. (b) Etch rate bias dependence. The etch rate of SiO2 in the z-direction, Vz, increases with 
increasing wafer bias. Assuming no chemical etching component is present in the SiO2 reaction, that is, VX = 0 (the etch 
rate equals 0 at bias = 0), an ideal vertical profile results. The etch rate of Si also is bias-dependent, but some reaction 
occurs at VX = 0. In other words, a chemical component to the reaction does not need ion bombardment resulting in 
nonvertical walls (see text). (From Manos, D. M., and D. L. Flamm, eds. 1989. Plasma etching: An introduction. Boston: 
Academic Press.76)

[Page 188]
(See Figure 3.31b.) The anisotropy of RIE can fur-
ther be enhanced by the use of helium back-side 
cooling (as low as –120°C might be required). The 
low- temperature suppression of chemical attack 
of silicon by fluorine atoms exemplifies how lower 
temperatures further improve anisotropy and criti-
cal dimension control. Although suppressing the 
isotropic fluorine reaction, the same low tempera-
ture influences ion-assisted reactions only slightly 
and hence improves the anisotropy of profiles; the 
etch rate at VX = 0 decreases or becomes zero.
Inhibitor-Driven Anisotropy 
or Blocking Mechanism
Inhibitor-driven 
anisotropy 
embodies 
another 
example of a physical/chemical etching technique 
(Figure 3.3d). In this case, etching leads to the 
production of a surface-covering agent in a so-called 
blocking mechanism. Ion bombardment clears the 
“passivation” from horizontal surfaces; reaction with 
neutrals proceeds on these cleared surfaces only, 
and the etch proceeds again mainly in the vertical 
direction as shown in Figure 3.32. The protective film 
may originate from involatile etching products or 
from film-forming precursors that adsorb during the 
etching process. Passivating gases, such as BCl3 and 
some halocarbons (Freons™ such as CCl4 and CF2Cl2), 
are sources of inhibitor-forming species. In  the 
latter case, the reactive gas component appears  to 
be adsorbed on the surface (for example, a polymer 
is formed), where it is subsequently dissociated by 
electron, ion, or photon bombardment, clearing the 
surface for reaction with the reactive neutrals.
An example of etch profile manipulation with 
inhibitor-driven chemistry using an idealized Si 
sample is illustrated in Figure 3.33. At the top of 
this figure, we show the silicon etch rate as a func-
tion of percentage of H2 in CF4 for a biased and an 
unbiased wafer. We remember from earlier in this 
chapter that the silicon etch rate increases as the 
wafer bias is increased; thus, the etch rate curve for 
the biased wafer lies above the one for the unbiased 
wafer. If H2 is added to a CF4 feed gas, the Si etch rate 
decreases, and at some value of H2 concentration, 
the nonbombarded surface etch rate decreases to 
zero (VX = 0 at 10% H2 in Figure 3.33), whereas the 
bombarded surface continues to etch. The decrease 
in etch rate stems from an increase in the amount 
of passivating polymerization. Aggressive fluorine 
reacts with the hydrogen so that carbon compounds 
polymerize more readily. As before, Equation 3.20 
can be used to calculate the ratio of underetch X to 
etch depth Z. At VX = 0, that ratio, of course, is zero.
188   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Inert
species
Ions
Photoresist
Polysilicon
Oxide
Wafer
FIGURE 3.32 Inhibitor-driven anisotropy or blocking 
mechanism. (Drawing by Genis Turon.)
z
Si
Si
Mask
Mask
Silicon etch rate
Bias = –150 V
No bias
Percentage of H2 in CF4
10% H2 in CF4 etch gas 
Pure CF4 etch gas
x
z
Vx
Vx
Vz
Vz
=
A
10
20
30
x
FIGURE 3.33 Trench profile manipulation by decreasing 
the fluorine-to-carbon ratio (through hydrogen introduc-
tion). (From Manos, D. M., and D. L. Flamm, eds. 1989. 
Plasma etching: An introduction. Boston: Academic Press.76)

[Page 189]
Similarly, aluminum etching in CCl4 + Cl2 or 
CHCl3 + Cl2 plasmas presents a good example of an 
inhibitor system. Even though Cl2 gas and chlorine 
atoms formed in these plasmas are rapid chemical 
etchants for clean aluminum, aluminum in these 
plasma mixtures can afford near-vertical profiles 
with excellent line-width control.
Another typical example of a sidewall mechanism 
is the etching of phosphorus-doped Si, which etches 
isotropically in Cl2 plasma but etches ani sotropically 
when C2F6 is added to the source gas. Qualitatively 
the effect is accounted for by assuming that the two 
gases dissociated in the plasma are:
 
C2F3 + e → 2CF3 + e 
Reaction 3.1
 
Cl2 + e → 2Cl + e 
Reaction 3.2
and the possible surface reactions are:
 
xCl + Si → SiClx (etching) 
Reaction 3.3
 CF3 + Cl → CF3Cl (recombination) 
Reaction 3.4
Reaction 3.3 results in etching of the silicon surface, 
and Reaction 3.4 results in recombination with-
out material removal. Ion bombardment enhances 
Reaction 3.3, and Reaction 3.4 is assumed to be 
dominant on the sidewalls. The recombination reac-
tion acts as a sidewall passivant.
In practice, the anisotropy brought about by the 
directed ion flux in plasma allows the final etched 
feature to be within 10% of its dimensions on the 
mask, and submicron resolutions become feasible. 
A desire to move away from sidewall passivating 
chemistries to avoid CD loss is prominent, espe-
cially in the IC industry. Thick sidewall coatings 
not only reduce CD control, but they also prove 
difficult to strip. Processes involving little or no 
sidewall thickness increase are sought for tight CD 
control in submicron devices. In this respect, wafer 
cooling (to as low as –120°C) presents an attrac-
tive way of obtaining sidewall protection without 
the need for additional chemistries. At low sub-
strate temperatures, reaction products are invola-
tile and can serve as very thin sidewall inhibitors. 
Generally, at lower temperatures, lateral etch rate 
can be suppressed while using simpler chemistries. 
In micromachining applications where feature 
size is in general larger than in ICs and aspect ratios 
are more extreme, applying passivating chemistries 
is almost a necessity, but wafer cooling can help 
the process.
Dopant-Driven Anisotropy
Although not commonly acknowledged, silicon 
plasma etch anisotropy may be influenced by local 
dopant concentrations. For example, Li et al.32 
have demonstrated that Cl-based plasma etch can 
be used to etch lightly doped p- or n-type silicon 
anisotropically and heavily doped n-type silicon 
isotropically. These authors, by forming buried n+ 
layers beneath a lightly doped epitaxial layer, were 
able to selectively undercut structures above the n+ 
regions.32 Schwartz and Schaible33 also described the 
dopant dependence of dry plasma etching.
It is more commonly known that the Si etch rate 
depends on the electronic properties of the Si sub-
strate.34 The n-type silicon (e.g., doped with P, As, 
and so on) etches faster than intrinsic silicon, which 
etches faster than p-silicon (e.g., doped with B, Ga, 
and so on). Dopant concentration effects on etch 
rates only become  apparent at concentrations greater 
than 1019 cm−3. The doping effect is not chemical in 
nature because it is absent if the dopants are not 
electrically activated. The effect depends on the elec-
tronic structure of the surface, and band-bending 
effects at the semiconductor surface have explained 
it. Using ECR etching, Juan et  al.35 demonstrated 
Dry Etching   189
Ion energy
Pressure (torr)
Physical
(sputter etching)
Ion-assisted etching
(damage mechanism)
Chemical
plasma
etching
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
FIGURE 3.34 Ion energy versus pressure for a plasma. 
(Redrawn by Genis Turon from Flamm, D. L. 1992. Dry 
plasma resist stripping part I: overview of equipment. 
Solid State Technol 35:37–39. With permission.36)

[Page 190]
that the n++ Si etch increases, but the p++ Si etch rate 
decreases with respect to lightly doped silicon. Thus, 
it was established that, with a high microwave power 
or high RF power, as well as an increased tempera-
ture, a large difference in etch rates of p++ and n++ Si 
results. 
Ion Energy versus Pressure Relationship 
in a Plasma: Comparison of 
Different Dry Etch Technologies
In the preceding sections, we described two extreme 
cases of dry etching—ion etching (purely physical) 
and plasma etching (purely chemical)—and the 
intermediate case of chemical/physical etching. 
In general, three factors control the etch rate in a 
plasma reactor: 1) neutral atom and free radical con-
centration, 2) ion concentration, and 3) ion energy. 
Ion and radical concentrations control the reaction 
rate, whereas ion energy provides the necessary 
activation and controls the degree of anisotropy. The 
respective contribution to chemical and physical 
action of plasma can be manipulated by varying 
voltage and gas pressure. For good CD control, 
anisotropy is required, and positive ions need to 
be formed at low pressures (<10–2 Torr) to strike the 
surface at normal incidence. Etching at low pressures, 
with a long mean free path length of the ions, λi, 
is inherently more anisotropic (i.e., directional) 
and less contaminating because etch reaction 
byproducts are more volatile at lower pressures 
and are easier to remove. At these lower pressures, 
ion density drops off quickly, causing a lower etch 
rate and lower wafer throughput. Increasing the 
power or wafer bias increases the etch rate, as the 
remaining ions become more energetic. Higher ion 
energies can cause additional problems in terms of 
device damage. What is needed is a plasma source 
operating at low pressure with very high ion density. 
Operating at low pressures also reduces the effects of 
chemically induced macro- and microloading (see 
above). With high pressure, short λi, and low voltage, 
one gets isotropic chemical etching. The pressure/
voltage relationship for a plasma is schematically 
represented in Figure 3.34.36 Thus, sputtering and 
dry chemical etching represent the two extremes 
of a continuous dry etching spectrum (Table 3.8) 
with physical etching by sputtering with inert argon 
ions at one end and chemical etching with reactive 
neutral species at the other.
In Tables 3.9 and 3.10 we contrast the features of 
different etching techniques, highlight the under-
lying mechanism, and give a typical application. 
Entries concerning endpoint detection will be clari-
fied further below.
Gas Compositions in Dry Etching
Most dry bulk etching of silicon is accomplished 
using fluorine free radicals, generated from fluorine-
containing gases and by forming volatile SiF4 dur-
ing the etch (the byproducts in dry etching should 
always have the highest possible vapor pressure). As 
opposed to chlorine- and bromine-based processes, 
fluorine plasma reactions with silicon usually pro-
ceed spontaneously, not requiring ion bombard-
ment. This method results in high etch rates, and by 
themselves fluorine radicals produce profiles that are 
nearly isotropic. Often, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
are used to produce polymer deposition in paral-
lel with the etching process. Oxidizing additives 
increase etchant concentration and suppress exces-
sive polymerization. The addition of oxygen to CF4 
in Si etching typifies the procedure.37 Oxygen, at con-
centrations less than 16%, reacts with CFX radicals to 
enhance F atom formation [increase of fluorine-to-
carbon ratio (F/C)] and eliminate polymerization. 
At yet higher concentrations, adsorbed oxygen on 
190   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 3.8 Dry Etching Spectrum
Types of Etching
Methods
Geometry
Selectivity
Excitation Energy
Pressure
Gas/vapor etching
Chemical
Isotropic
Very high
None
High (760–1 Torr)
Plasma etching
Chemical
Isotropic
High
10–100s of watts
Medium (>100 mTorr)
Reactive ion etching
Chemical and physical
Directional
Fair
100s of watts
Low (10–100 mTorr)
Sputtering etching
Physical
Directional
Low
100–1000s of watts
Low (~10 mTorr)
1 Torr = 1 mmHg.

[Page 191]
the surface depresses the etch rate.37 Radical scaven-
gers, such as hydrogen, increase the concentration of 
inhibitor former and reduce etchant concentration 
of fluorine in the etchant (decrease of F/C) (see also 
example in Figure 3.33). Heinecke38 realized that 
the etch ratio of SiO2/Si could be increased either by 
adding H2 to the CF4 feed gas or by using CHF3 or, 
in  general, fluorocarbons displaying a smaller F/C 
ratio than CF4. Adding hydrogen to fluorocarbon 
gases helps promote CFX film growth (such as CF2, 
C2F4) for selective SiO2 etching. Carbon accumulates 
less on oxide surfaces than on Si surfaces, as SiO2 
surfaces directly react with hydrogen. By adding 
hydrogen, carbon blocking increases (especially on 
the Si) because hydrogen scavenges fluorine, form-
ing HF and preventing reaction with carbonaceous 
species on the surface.
The same approach helps to optimize the 
selectivity on other oxide/nonoxide systems (e.g., 
SiO2/resist, SiO2/Si3N4, and Ta2O5/Ta). The F/C ratio 
should  not  be made smaller than 2, or contami-
nation of the whole system with CXFy polymer sets 
in. Factors that tend to control polymerization and 
selectivity are temperature, hydrogen concentration, 
pressure, and ion bombardment. Some etchants, such 
as Cl atoms, do not readily etch through thin native 
oxide films on Si, Nb, and Al, for example. These 
native oxides prevent the onset of etching unless 
small  amounts of native oxide etchants, such as 
BCl3, are added. Inert gases such as argon or helium 
help stabilize the plasma, enhance anisotropy, 
improve uniformity, or reduce the etching rate 
by dilution. Because helium has a high thermal 
conductivity, it also improves heat transfer between 
wafers and the supporting electrodes.25
From the above, the F/C ratio in dry etching is 
a key parameter to control. With an F/C ratio >3, 
etching is dominant, and with an F/C <2, polym-
erization takes over. In Figure 3.35 we show the 
F/C ratio for a number of different etchant gases 
(for CF4, the F/C ratio is obviously 4 and for C2F4 
it is 2) and different applied voltages. A negative 
bias on a surface exposed to the plasma increases, 
at a constant F/C ratio, the etching behavior over 
Dry Etching   191
TABLE 3.9 Comparison of Different Dry Etch Technologies
Chemical Etch
RIE
Physical Etch
Examples
Stripping
Plasma patterned etches
Argon sputtering
Etch rate
High to low
High, controllable
Low
Selectivity
Very good
Reasonable, controllable
Very poor
Etch profile
Isotropic
Anisotropic, controllable
Anisotropic
Endpoint
By time or visual
Optical
By time
TABLE 3.10 Dry Etch Mechanism and Their Application
Pure Chemical Etch
Reactive Ion Etch (RIE)
Pure Physical Etch
Blocking mechanism
Damaging mechanism
No ion bombardment
Light ion bombardment
Heavy ion bombardment
Only ion bombardment
Photoresist strip
Single crystal Si etch
Ti strip
Polysilicon etch
Oxide etch
Sputtering etch
Nitride strip
Metal etch
Nitride etch
Loading
ETCHING
C2F4
C4F10 C2F6
CF4
POLYMERIZATION
H2 addition
–200
–100
01
2
Fluorine-to-carbon ratio (F/C) of gas-phase etching species
Bias applied to the surface (Volts)
3
4
5
O2 addition
FIGURE 3.35 F/C ratio, DC bias, and polymerization. 
(Drawing by Genis Turon.)

[Page 192]
polymerization tendency. This effect is caused by 
the enhanced energy of the ions striking the sur-
face, resulting in polymer sputtering. In an etch of 
an oxide film, the oxygen byproducts react with C 
to release more F, and the F/C ratio increases shift-
ing to a more aggressive etching regime. When 
etching Si or a silicide, no oxygen is released, and F 
is consumed, lowering the F/C ratio and thus favor-
ing polymerization. For selectivity, etching in the 
etch-dominant region but near the polymerization 
region is preferred.
Table 3.11 lists frequently used reactive gases and 
typical applications.
The Environmental Protection Agency mandate 
to eliminate the use of CFCs changed the type of 
gases used for dry etching purposes. This evolution 
in gas mixtures is captured in Table 3.12.39
The primary new etchant gases are SF6, NF3, and 
SiF4 (fluorine-based etch); Cl2, BCl3, and SiCl4 (chlo-
rine-based etch); and Br2 (bromine-based etch). For 
very aggressive etch chemistry at low pressures (e.g., 
to etch deep trenches in Si), HBr has also gained 
popularity. Other new etchant gases include SiBr4, 
HI, I2, and even nonhalogenated gases such as CH4 
and H2. Table 3.13 lists etchants appropriate for etch-
ing some common electronic materials.
Table 3.14 presents an overview of the etch rates or 
etch ratios for a variety of important micro fabrication 
materials in some popular reactive gases and gas 
mixtures.40 Examples include etching of photoresist 
on Si, SiO2, aluminum, and so on in O2 plasma and 
etching of silicon with a metal mask (e.g., Al) in CF4 
plasma. Metal masks influence the etch rate of silicon 
or even SiO2 by catalytic action of fluorinated metal 
surfaces, leading to excess production of free radicals.
Finally, Table 3.15 reviews mask materials listing 
their suitability for a number of gases.25 A plus sign 
in this table corresponds with a low etch rate and 
high selectivity; a minus sign stands for high etch 
rate and low selectivity. 
For further reading on gas composition for dry 
etch ing and stripping, see Flamm,42–44 Jansen et al.,2 
Peters,39 and Moreau.40
Simplifying Rules
Some simple rules help interpret Tables 3.11–3.15 
when specifying a choice of dry etchant and mask 
for a specific application. These rules are a set of 
semiempirical observations; they should not be 
looked on independently, and some state the same 
phenomenon in slightly different ways.41
192   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 3.11 Frequently Used Reactive Plasma Gases
Etchant Purpose
Composition (Additive-Etchant): Application
Oxide etchant: etches through oxide to initiate etching
C2F6−Cl2:SiO2
BCl3−Cl2:Al2O3
CCl4−Cl2:Al2O3 
Oxidant: increases etchant concentration and suppresses 
polymerization
O2−CF4:Si
N2O−CHF3:SiO2
O2−CCl4:GaAs, InP
Inert gas: stabilizes plasma, dilutes etchant, improves heat transfer
Ar−O2: organic material removal
He−CF3Br:Ti, Nb
Inhibitor former: improves selectivity, induces anisotropy
C2F6−Cl2:Si
BCl3−Cl2:GaAs, Al
H2−CF4:SiO2
CHF3−SF6:Si
O2 (50%)−SF6:Si
Water and oxygen scavenger: prevents inhibition, improves 
selectivity
BCl3−Cl2:Al
H2−CF4:SiO2
Radical scavenger: increases film formation and improves selectivity
H2−CF4:SiO2
CHF3−SF6:Si
CF3Br−SF6:Si
CF2Cl2−SF6:Si
Source:  Most data from Flamm, D. L. 1993. Feed gas purity and environmental concerns in plasma etching: Part I. Solid State Technol 
October:49–54. With permission.75

[Page 193]
 
1. F/C ratio: During etching, polymerization 
occurs simultaneously. Etching stems from the 
fluorine, and polymerization from the hydro-
carbons. The dominant process will depend on 
the gas stoichiometry, reactive-gas additions, 
the amount of material to be etched, and the 
electrode potential. Adding hydrogen causes 
HF to form and the F/C ratio to decrease, lead-
ing to more polymerization and less etching 
(see example in Figure 3.33). A decrease in the 
fluorine concentration can also occur by over-
loading the reactor, leading to overconsump-
tion of fluorine and favoring of polymerization. 
Adding oxygen to a fluorine carbon mixture 
leads to formation of CO and CO2 reaction 
products, increasing F/C, and thus the etch rate, 
while decreasing the polymerization tendency. 
In other words, the addition of oxygen to a gas 
mixture reduces the tendency of Freons™ to 
polymerize and increases the concentration 
Dry Etching   193
TABLE 3.12 Evolution in Gas Mixtures for Dry Etching
Material Being Etched
Conventional Chemistry
New Chemistry
Benefits
Poly-Si
Cl2 or BCl3/CCl4 + sidewall 
passivating gases
Cl2 or BCl3/CF4 + sidewall 
passivating gases
Cl2 or BCl3/CHCl3 + sidewall 
passivating gases
Cl2 or BCl3/CHF3 + sidewall 
passivating gases
SiCl4/Cl2
BCl3/Cl2
HBr/Cl2/O2
HBr/O2
Br2/SF6
SF6
CF4
No carbon contamination
Increased selectivity to SiO2 
and resist
No carbon contamination
Higher etch rate
Al
Cl2
BCl3 + sidewall passivating gases
SiCl4
SiCl4/Cl2
BCl3/Cl2
HBr/Cl2
Better profile control
No carbon contamination
Al-Si (1%)-Cu (0.5%)
Same as Al
BCl3/Cl2 + N2
N2 accelerates Cu etch rate
Al-Cu (2%)
BCl3/Cl2/CHF3
BCl3/Cl2 + N2 + Al
Additional aluminum helps 
etch copper
W
SF6/Cl2/CCl4
SF6 only
NF3/Cl2
No carbon contamination
Etch stop over TiW and TiN
No carbon contamination
TiW
SF6/Cl2/O2
SF6 only
WSi2, TiSi2, CoSi2
CCl2F2
CCl2F2/NF3
CF4/Cl2
Controlled etch profile
No carbon contamination
Single crystal Si
Cl2 or BCl3 + sidewall passivating 
gases
CF3Br
HBr/NF3
Higher selectivity trench etch
SiO2 (BPSG)
CCl2F2
CF4
C2F6
C3F8
CCl2F2
CHF3/CF4
CHF3/O2
CH3CHF2
CFC alternatives
Si3N4
CCl2F2
CHF3
CF4/O2
CF4/H2
CHF3
CH3CHF2
CFC alternatives
GaAs
CCl2F2
SiCl4/SF6
SiCl4/NF3
SiCl4/CF4
Fluorine provides etch stop on 
AlGaAs
InP
None
CH4/H2
Hl
Clean etch
Higher etch rate than with 
CH4/H2
Source: Peters, L. 1992. Plasma etch chemistry: the untold story. Semicond Int May:660–70. With permission.39

[Page 194]
of halogen etchants ensuing from these gases. 
Adding oxygen to improve the F/C ratio leads 
to aggressive resist etching. Gases such as NF3 
and ClF3 allow high fluorine concentrations 
(for aggressive Si etching) without the addition 
of oxygen, thus avoiding resist attack.
 
2. Selective versus unselective dry etching: 
The polymerizing point of the gas (i.e., the 
composition of the gas where polymerization 
takes over) primarily determines selectivity. 
The closer one works to the polymerization 
point, the better the selectivity. Factors that 
194   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 3.13 Plasma Etchants for Microelectronic Materials
Material
Common Etch Gases*
Dominant 
Reactive Species
Product
Comment
Vapor Pressure 
in Torr at 25°C 
Aluminum
Chlorine-based
Cl, Cl2
AlCl3
Toxic gas and 
corrosive gases
7 × 10−5
Copper
Chlorine forms low 
pressure compounds
Cl, Cl2
CuCl2
Toxic gas and 
corrosive gases
5 × 10−2
Molybdenum
Fluorine-based
F
MoF6
530
Polymers of carbon, 
photoresists (PMMA 
and polystyrene)
Oxygen
O
H2O, CO,
CO2
Explosive hazard
H2O = 26 CO, 
CO2 > 1 atm
III-V and II-VI 
compounds
Alkanes
Flammable gas
Silicon
Fluorine- or chlorine-
based
F, Cl, Cl2
SiF4,
SiCl4
Toxic gas
SiF4 > 1 atm 
SiCl4 = 240
SiO2
CF4, CHF3, C2F6, C3F6
CFX
SiF4, CO, 
CO2
SiF4 > 1 atm CO, 
CO2 > 1 atm
Tantalum
Fluorine-based
F
TaF3
3
Titanium
Fluorine- or chlorine-
based
F, Cl, Cl2
TiF4
TiF3
TiCl4
TiF4 = 2.104
TiCl4 = 16
Tungsten
Fluorine-containing
F
WF6
1000
*Common chlorine containing gases: BCl3, CCl4, Cl2, and SiCl4. Common fluorine containing gases: CF4, SF4, and SF6.
Source:  From Flamm, D. L. 1993. Feed gas purity and environmental concerns in plasma etching: Part I. Solid State Technol October:49–54; 
Elwenspoek, M., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, and A. Prak. 1994. Report No. 122830, University of Twente, Twente, the Netherlands.; 
Moreau, W. M. 1988. Semiconductor lithography. New York: Plenum Press; and Hess, D. W., and D. B. Graves. 1989. Microelectronics 
processing: chemical engineering aspects. Eds. D. W. Hess, and K. F. Jensen. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.75,25,40,41
TABLE 3.14 Frequently Used Reactive Plasma Gases, Reported Etch Rates, and Etch Ratios
Film/Underlayer (F/U)
Etch Ratios 
Si3N4 over AZ-2400 resist
CF4-10
SiO2 over AZ-1350 resist
CF4/H2-10
Poly-Si over PBS resist 
CF4-15
PSG over AZ-1350
SF6-10
SiO2 over Si underlayer
CF3Cl-30
Si3N4 over SiO2 underlayer
NF3-50
Poly-Si over SiO2 underlayer
CCl4-10
Si over SiO2 underlayer
SF6-30
Etchant
Material and Etch Rate (Å/min)
Ar
Si-124, Al-166, Resist-185, Quartz-159
CCl2F2
Si-2200, Al-1624, Resist-410, Quartz-533
CF4
Si-900, PSG-200, Thermal SiO2-50, CVD SiO2-75
C2F6-Cl2
Undoped Si-600, Thermal SiO2-100
CCl3F
Si-1670
Source: Moreau, W. M. 1988. Semiconductor lithography. New York: Plenum Press. With permission.40

[Page 195]
have a tendency to increase the polymerization 
rate increase selectivity. Decreased temperature, 
high hydrogen concentration, low power, high 
pressure, and high monomer concentration all 
increase polymerization and thus selectivity. 
Typical unselective etchants for Si and poly-
silicon, used for noncritical etching, are CF4 
and CF4-O2. Less toxic gases such as CF4 and 
SF6 have preference over fluorine and are more 
selective, leading to polymerization. The most 
commonly used gases for selective Si etching 
are Cl2, CCl4, CF2Cl2, CF3Cl, Br2, and CF3Br, 
along with mixtures such as Cl2-C2F6. Small 
additions of halogens significantly increase the 
selectivity of fluorine-based etchants, especially 
the selectivity of silicon over silicon dioxide. 
For pure chlorine, the etch rate of SiO2 is so 
low that even a native oxide can prevent the 
Si from etching. The high selectivity of SiO2/Si 
is a major objective of many plasma processes 
trying to mimic the wet HF etch efficiency in 
this regard.
 
3. Substrate bias: A negative bias on a surface 
exposed to the plasma increases, at a constant 
F/C ratio, the etching behavior over polymer-
ization tendency. This effect is caused by the 
enhanced energy of the ions striking the sur-
face, resulting in polymer sputtering.
 
4. and 5. Dry etching of III–V compounds: 
Group III halides, particularly fluorides, tend to 
be involatile. As a result, F plasmas are usually 
substituted for chlorine-containing plasmas, 
and elevated substrate temperatures are used 
to further help volatilize the chlorides (fourth 
rule). The chemical composition (Ga/As ratio) 
of the different atomic planes in GaAs varies, 
and crystallographic etch patterns are observed 
under etch conditions in which chemical pro-
cesses dominate (fifth rule). The latter establishes 
a major difference with dry Si etching, whereas 
crystallography does not play a role at all.
 
6. Metal etching: Chlorocarbons and fluorocar-
bons are typically used to etch metal films 
because they can reduce native metal oxides 
chemically. Oxygen and water vapor must be 
rigorously excluded during etching because 
of the high stability of the metal-oxide bond. 
Also, because of the stability of such bond, ion 
bombardment is essential. Because AlF3 is not 
volatile, chlorine-containing gases are preferred 
for Al etching, whereas tungsten can be etched 
in fluorine (SF6 or NF3/chlorine).
 
7. Organic ﬁlms: To retain an organic mask while 
etching away materials such as SiO2 and Si3N4, 
one must work in etching conditions close to 
the polymerization point so that some loss 
of resist is compensated by condensation of 
reaction product, for example, CF4-C2H4 and 
CF4-H2. We have already discussed that CF4-O2 
plasmas severely degrade resist materials.
 
8. Carbon-containing additives: Carbon-containing 
additives generally degrade the selectivity of 
Cl- and Br-based inorganic chem istries for 
polysilicon etching over SiO2. The Br atom attack 
on SiO2 is thermodynami cally unfavorable, 
whereas reactions between carbon halogen-
bonded species and SiO2 are exothermic. 
With HBr, a selectivity of 300:1 of polysilicon 
Dry Etching   195
TABLE 3.15 Mask Materials in Dry Etching
Mask Material
SF6
CHF3
CF4
O2
N2
Si
−
−\+
−
+
+
SiO2
+\−
−
+\−
+
+
Si3N4
+\−
−
+\−
+
+
Al/Al2O3
+
+
+
+
+
W
−
−
−
+
+
Au
+
+
+
+
+
Ti
−
−
−
+
+
Resist
+\−
+\−
+\−
−
+
CFs
+
+
+
+
−
Source:  Elwenspoek, M., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, and A. Prak. 1994. Micromechanics. Report No. 122830, 
Twente, the Netherlands: University of Twente.25

[Page 196]
over silicon dioxide can be achieved when 
completely avoiding carbon-containing gases 
or photoresists; the presence of resists or carbon 
traces in gases severely diminishes this ratio.
Leading suppliers of plasma etching equipment 
are Applied Materials, Inc. (Santa Clara, CA; http://
www.appliedmaterials.com) and Lam Research Cor-
poration (Fremont, CA; http://www.lamrc.com).
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
Introduction—Need for 
High-Density Plasmas
For building high-aspect-ratio micromachines and 
nanomachines with dry etching, until the mid-
1990s, one had to battle three major problems. The 
first was the low etch rates with which to contend; 
typical Si dry etch rates of 1 µm/min required more 
than 5 hours to etch 300 µm deep! A second imped-
iment was the inability to maintain high- aspect 
ratios over etch depths of a few tens of microns. 
Third, masking layers performed poorly and could 
not protect during a long etch.45 New, high-density 
plasma sources provide an answer to each of these 
problems. As a result, for many applications, deep 
reactive ion etching (DRIE) presents an attractive 
MEMS solution today. An important example is the 
fabrication of high-aspect-ratio micromolds, which 
may be made much less expensive with deep DRIE 
than fabricating them with LIGA—an alternate 
high-aspect-ratio technique (see Chapter 10).
Ideally, dry etching stations generate high plasma 
densities (>1011/cm3) to achieve a high etch rate while 
operating at low pressure (1–20 mTorr). Low pressure 
increases ion directionality and discourages micro-
loading. Normally low pressure also means less ion-
ization and low plasma density. However, as we saw 
earlier, the use of magnetic fields forces electrons to 
spin with a very small gyroradius. This makes for 
a longer travel distance and thus more chance for 
electrons to collide with atoms, making a higher 
plasma density at low pressure possible. The source 
also needs to produce ions uniformly in energy and 
distribution while keeping the energy of  the ions 
low to prevent damaging active electronics. The 
magnetic field reduces the charge difference in the 
sheath region, lowering the DC bias and therefore 
reducing the ion energy.
The two high-density plasma sources discussed 
here are inductively coupled plasma (ICP) stations 
[also called transformer coupled plasma (TCP)] and 
electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) machines. Both 
systems work at low pressures (a few mTorr) and can 
independently control ion flux and ion energy. In 
Figure 3.36 we show a schematic of an ICP and an 
ECR station.
Inductively Coupled Plasma 
In 
inductively 
coupled 
plasmas, 
a 
coil, 
operating at the standard 13.56 MHz, drives the 
196   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 3.36 (a) ICP station. (b) ECR station.

[Page 197]
plasma inductively (Figure 3.36a). Such an ICP 
source creates high-density, low-pressure, low-
 energy plasmas by coupling ion-producing electrons 
to the magnetic field arising from the rf voltage. 
Electrons travel a long way without collisions with 
the chamber walls or electrodes. The upper part of 
the ICP chamber, where the plasma is generated, is 
either ceramic or quartz. The RF source in the upper 
chamber generates the plasma and controls the ion 
density, whereas the RF bias in the lower chamber 
controls the ion bombardment energy. Thus, the 
ion energy and ion density are effectively controlled 
independently. By cooling the wafer chuck to liquid 
nitrogen temperatures (77 K) and using a helium gas 
flow under the wafer for efficient heat transfer, wafer 
temperature can be maintained at cryogenic temper-
atures during etching.46 The cryogenic cooling of the 
chuck results in condensation of reactant gases and 
protects the sidewalls from etching, which renders a 
more anisotropic process. 
The Alcatel RF ICP source is one of the systems 
advanced as an ideal source for deep anisotropic 
Si etching. The electron density in this plasma source 
reaches >1012/cm3, and using fluorine-based gases, sil-
icon etches at rates of up to 6 µm/min with etch uni-
formity better than ±5% while maintaining a Si/SiO2 
selectivity of more than 150:1. Etch depths  greater 
than 250 µm and profile angles of ±1º were demon-
strated while maintaining aspect ratios of 9:1. 
Using an ICP etching station from Surface 
Technology Systems (STS), Klaassen et al.45 were 
able to etch 300 µm deep in Si at 5 µm/min using a 
photoresist layer as mask of a 6-µm thickness only. 
Polymerization of the photoresist mask on the side-
walls of the etched trenches slows the lateral etch rate 
and results in high anisotropy. The Si to photoresist 
selectivity was determined at about 50:1. However, 
cryogenic cooling (e.g., –100°C) may introduce unde-
sirable thermal stresses, and an important, much-
touted alternative is the “Bosch process” patented by 
Robert Bosch GmbH (Stuttgart, Germany).47
The Bosch advanced silicon etch (ASE) typically 
achieves high-aspect ratios of 20–30:1, and etch 
rates of ∼3 µm/min are standard.47 In this process 
carried out, for example, in an STS or PlasmaTherm 
high-density plasma system, one switches (pulses) 
between sequential passivation (85 sccm C4F8, 8 s, 
0 W platen, 600 W coil, 16 mTorr) and etching 
(80 sccm SF6, 6 s, 8 W platen, 600 W coil, 33 mTorr) 
(see Table 3.16). In the passivation step, a ~10-nm-
thick fluorocarbon deposits and energetic SFx
+ ions 
remove this layer at the bottom of a trench, as 
sketched in Figure 3.37.
The repetitive alternation of etch and passivation 
steps results in a very directional etch. Some scal-
loping near the top of the trench is observed, but in 
general the sidewalls exhibit good surface planarity 
with roughness less than 50 nm.48 The  scalloping 
effect is illustrated in Figure 3.38. The experiment 
depicted in this figure also demonstrates that chang-
ing the length of the sequential passivation and 
etching cycles can control scalloping. 
Using the Bosch process, Chow et al.49 fabricated 
through-wafer electrical interconnects by dry etching 
20-µm holes through a 400-µm wafer (see Example 
3.1). By etching from both sides, the required aspect 
ratio is reduced by two, from 40:1 to 20:1. Each etch 
takes 180 minutes. 
Dry Etching   197
TABLE 3.16 Characteristics of the DRIE Process Used in 
the STS and PlasmaTherm Systems
SF6 flow
30–150 sccm
C4F8 flow
20–100 sccm
Etch cycle
5–15 s
Deposition cycle
5–12 s
Pressure
0.25–10 Pa
Temperature
20–80ºC
Etch rate
1.5–4 µm/min
Sidewall angle
90º ± 2º
Selectivity to photoresist
~100 to 1
Selectivity to SiO2
~200 to 1
Source: Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechani-
cal systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.48
Etch
Etch
Deposit polymer
FIGURE 3.37 Illustration of the Bosch process.

[Page 198]
Ayon et al.26 tackled the issue of microloading in 
the Bosch process by increasing the ion flux through 
control of the applied source coil power. Ions reach-
ing the wafer surface during the etch cycle promote 
more efficient removal of the protective polymer 
coating at the bottom of the trench, obviating the 
microloading effect. To etch ultradeep anisotropic 
silicon trenches in the range of 300–500 µm, Ayon 
et al.26 compensate the reduction of neutral species 
flux reaching the feature bottom by increasing the 
SF6 flow rates during the etching cycle (thus replen-
ishing the etching species while the higher pressure 
also facilitates the removal of etching byproducts). 
This method results in a net improvement in pas-
sivation and etch rates and is known as the MIT 59 
method (Figure 3.39). The method has already been 
applied in processes like the fabrication of accelero-
meters, gyros, microdisk-drive armatures, SCALPEL 
mask mem branes, microgas turbines, tethered 
motors, power MEMS, and, in general, for etching 
through wafers.26,50 A deep silicon back-side Bosch 
etch also allows fabrication of high-aspect- ratio 
and MEMS devices integrated with complementary 
metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) circuitry (see 
Example 3.3).51
An extensive database for the Bosch process con-
ditions required to achieve prescribed profiles, as 
well as targeted silicon etch rates and uniformity, 
was presented in the Journal of the Electrochemical 
Society by Ayon et al.52,53
Electron Cyclotron Resonance
New, high-density plasma sources may also be 
based on microwave discharges (Figure 3.36b). An 
RF source controls the ion energy, and a microwave 
power source controls the ion flux. Microwaves are 
electromagnetic waves in the 1–100-GHz (corre-
sponding to wavelengths from 30 to 0.3 cm) range. 
Waves in this frequency range are transmitted by 
the use of waveguides, which are typically made of 
metal tubes of rectangular or circular cross-section. 
Cavities with metallic conducting walls resonate at 
specific frequencies and harmonics that are easy to 
calculate. The energy dissipated within the cavity 
dictates the frequency range above and below the 
resonant frequency that the cavity will accept and is 
characterized by the quality factor Q:
 
Q
f
2 f
0
=
Δ
 
(3.21)
where ± ฀f  are the frequencies at which the ampli-
tude is one-half that at the resonant frequency, f0, 
for the same input power. In the case of an empty 
waveguide, the dissipation of energy inside the cavity 
is determined by the skin depth, δ, of the electrical 
198   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 3.38 Sidewall roughness at the top of a deep anisotropic etching of Si (Bosch process) as a function of pulse 
duration: SF6/C4F8 = 7s/2s (a) and SF6/C4F8 = 3s/1s (b).
FIGURE 3.39 MIT 59 method. See text.

[Page 199]
field into the metal walls, which is given by (see also 
Volume I, Chapter 5, Equation 5.215):
 
δ =
ρ
πμf
 
(3.22)
where ρ is the resistivity in Ωm, µ the permittivity of 
free space (4π × 10−7 Henry/m), and f the frequency 
in hertz. For the generation of microwave plasmas, 
a cavity in the form of a cylinder with radius a and 
length l is generally used operating in TM0,1 mode, 
that is, with the electric field parallel to the axis of 
the cylinder. In this case:
 
λ =
0
2.61a 
(3.23)
where λ0 is the microwave wavelength. The resonant 
frequency of the cavity changes as a result of the 
change in the dielectric constant of the ionized gas, 
and Q decreases because of the increased power loss 
in generating the plasma. 
In a quartz chamber filled with a gas at low pres-
sure (0.1–10 Torr), the microwave power will cause 
breakdown when free electrons within the quartz 
chamber gain sufficient energy to ionize the gas. A 
static magnetic field generated by solenoid coils is 
also applied to the quartz chamber, and electrons 
move in a circular motion at the ECR frequency for 
that magnetic field (see Equation 3.18). In an ECR 
etching station, the ECR discharge creates a region, 
or surface layer, within the quartz chamber where 
the electron cyclotron frequency and the microwave 
frequency are equal and the electric field component 
is perpendicular to the static magnetic field. Under 
these conditions, the electrons within the ECR region 
are accelerated until they lose energy by an ioniza-
tion or excitation collision with a neutral gas mole-
cule. Varying the input microwave power and the gas 
pressure controls the plasma density. The maximum 
plasma density is reached if the microwave input 
power is such that the plasma frequency is equal to 
the microwave frequency, which is itself equal to the 
ECR frequency. The interaction of the magnetic field 
and the microwaves results in an intense, high-den-
sity plasma maintainable at low pressure. In opera-
tion, a 2.45-GHz microwave frequency is generated 
by a magnetron and injected into an etching cham-
ber, enclosed by a quartz bell jar, through a wave-
guide. The maximum number of electrons (and ions) 
that can be formed within the quartz chamber at 2.45 
GHz is about 7.5 × 1010 electrons/cm3. 
In many ECR systems, the wafers are placed down-
stream of the plasma to further limit their exposure 
to this intense discharge. Wafers can also be biased 
to control ion bombardment energy. Like MERIE, 
ECR and ICP produce higher plasma densities with 
low-energy density, reducing charge-up damage.
Juan et al.54 used ECR to etch polyimide molds 
for the fabrication of electroplated microstructures 
in one of several reported “pseudo-LIGA” processes 
(see also Chapter 10). A fast polyimide etch rate of 
0.91 µm/min and a high selectivity over a Ti etch 
mask of 3150:1 were reached in an oxygen plasma. 
Polyimide (Dupont Pyralin® PI-2611) was spun on 
in multiple coatings and cured at 380°C for 1 hour. 
According to the authors, etching with an ECR 
source is 10 times faster and six times more selective 
than conventional RIE. The combination of magnetic 
confinement and microwave power, leading to an 
order of magnitude greater dissociation efficiency at 
much lower pressures than RIE, reduces scattering 
of reactive species and promotes vertical profiles 
and smooth surface morphology. Cooling down 
to –130°C helps maintain a vertical etch profile by 
suppressing spontaneous chemical reactions. This 
way, lateral resonator elements 32-µm thick with a 
1-µm gap have been fabricated in polyimide, and 
electroplated Ni accelerometers with an aspect ratio 
of 11:1 were formed from these polyimide molds. 
Compared with LIGA, where the average wall 
roughness is <50 nm, the walls produced by this 
process still appear rough, but for many applications 
they might be adequate.
For a review on etching high-aspect-ratio trenches 
in silicon by DRIE, we refer to Jansen et al.2 This 
article features an excellent review of possible trench 
shapes. Equipment for DRIE is available from STS 
(Abercarn, Wales, UK; http://www.stsystems.com), 
Plasma Therm Inc. (St. Petersburg, FL; http://www.
plasmatherm.com/index.html), and Alcatel, S.A. 
(Paris, France; http://www.alcatel.com).
Vapor-Phase Etching without Plasma (XeF2)
As far back as 1983, it was demonstrated that etch-
ing of Si with XeF2 in a CAIBE reactor enabled 
Dry Etching   199

[Page 200]
sidewall tailoring by changing the partial pressure 
of XeF2, the ion energy, and the current density.55 
At the higher partial pressures of XeF2, isotropic 
etching and undercutting became predominant. 
Isotropic etching of Si with xenon difluoride (XeF2) 
actually does not require a plasma to generate 
the etching species. XeF2 is a white solid with a 
room temperature vapor pressure of about 4 Torr, 
which reacts readily with Si. The Si etch occurs 
in the vapor phase at room temperature and at 
pressures between 1 and 4 Torr, established by a 
vacuum pump throttled to the right pressure. The 
etch rate is very dependent on the feature size in Si 
to be etched (see microloading). Hoffman et al.56 
observed silicon etch rates as high as 10 µm/min 
but worked at more typical rates of 1–3 µm. The 
extreme selectivity of XeF2 to silicon over silicon 
dioxide and silicon nitride are well documented, 
and Hoffman et al.56 have shown that XeF2 also dis-
plays extreme etching selectivity over aluminum 
and photoresist. One important problem is that 
XeF2 reacts with water to form water and HF. The 
latter may unintentionally react with Si to form 
SiO2. The exothermic etch reaction, according to 
Chang et al., is given by:
 
2XeF2 + Si → 2Xe + SiF4 
Reaction 3.5
with only Si in the solid phase.
A 50-nm Al mask or a single layer of hard-baked 
photoresist suffices as deep etch masks. The simpli-
city of the process, the fast etch rate, as well as the 
resistance of even very thin layers of oxide, nitride, 
and Al metal make this etching process a possible 
choice for etching micromachined structures in the 
presence of CMOS electronics (in a “post-CMOS 
procedure”). The etched surfaces have a granular 
structure (10 µm and smaller feature size), and 
this etchant is not suited when polished mirror 
surfaces are required. In Figure 3.40a, an Al hinge 
5 µm wide and 1.1 µm thick, holding an oxide 
200   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 3.40 (a) Al hinge (5 µm wide and 1.1 µm thick) holding a suspended oxide plate (plate is on the right side of 
the photograph). The Si is etched from underneath the Al hinge and oxide plate by XeF2. The suspended oxide plate is a 
200-µm square. (Courtesy of Dr. Kris Pister.) (b) Al hinge contacts a poly-Si piezoresistor embedded in the oxide plate to pro-
tect it from the XeF2 etchant. (c) The piezoresistive accelerometer design shown enables rotation of the oxide plate out of 
the plane to detect orthogonal acceleration. (From Hoffman, E., B. Warneke, E. Kruglick, J. Weigold, and K. S. J. Pister. 1995. 
Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical  systems (MEMS ’95). Amsterdam, the Netherlands: IEEE. With permission.56)

[Page 201]
plate 200-µm square suspended over a Si etch pit, 
is shown. The etch pit underneath the suspended 
plate is nearly isotropic and exhibits a surface 
roughness of several microns. The conductivity 
of the Al metal was unaffected by the XeF2 etch. 
The hinge contacts a polysilicon strain gauge, 
sandwiched between oxide layers, to protect it from 
the XeF2 etchant (see Figure 3.40b). The flexible 
hinge enables rotation of the oxide plate out of the 
plane of the wafer. Hoffman et al.56 suggest that 
this contraption might function as a piezoresistive 
accelerometer, with hinges providing mechanical 
support and electrical connectivity between strain 
gauges embedded in the oxide plate proof mass and 
the wafer (see Figure 3.40c).
The rough Si surfaces of a XeF2 etch in principle 
may be avoided by using interhalogen gases such as 
BrF3 and ClF3 with xenon gas as diluent.57 The inter-
halogens are formed from single-element feed gases 
(e.g., bromine and fluorine) and result in perfectly 
isotropic etches and smooth silicon surfaces. Wang 
et al.58 measured etch rate ratios for thin films with 
respect to Si in BrF3 for several materials:
 
1. Si:LPCVD silicon dioxide = 3000:1
 
2. Si:silicon nitride = 400–800:1 (depending on 
the Si concentration)
 
3. Si:hard-baked AZ4400 and AZ1518 photo resist 
= 1000:1
 
4. Si:Al, Cu, Au, and Ni ≥ 1000:1
A first commercial instrument developed for 
XeF2 etching is the Xetch™ from Xactix (http://
www.xac tix.com).
Dry Etching Models—In Situ Monitoring
A serious impediment to more effective use of dry 
etching is the large number of parameters that affect 
the process.59 Just consider pressure and tempera-
ture. Pressure influences the ion-to-neutral ratio 
and fluxes of these particles, the sheath potentials 
and energy of the ions bombarding surfaces, elec-
tron energy, and the relative rate of chemical kinet-
ics. Temperatures, both of gas and surface, have a 
profound influence on discharge chemistry as well. 
Only the surface temperature is controllable and 
influences selectivity, etch rates, degradation of resist 
masks, and surface roughness (higher temperature 
leads to a rougher surface).
Also, electrode area ratio, RF frequency, and 
power will alter plasma and electrode potentials, 
thereby changing ion energies. At lower frequencies, 
where ions can respond directly to the oscillating 
field, ions can attain the maximum energy corre-
sponding to the maximum field across the sheath. 
As a result, for a constant sheath potential, ion bom-
bardment energies are higher at frequencies less 
than 50 kHz. Nonuniformity can be caused by gra-
dients in etchant concentration. Such gradients are 
responsible for the  dreaded bull’s eye etching pat-
tern, where the etch rate decreases monotonically 
from the wafer periphery to its center (see above). 
Pressure, power, and gas flow must be adapted until 
the specified uniformity is obtained.
Predicting the exact relation between the flux 
and the energy of particles striking a wafer surface 
and the etch rate still is not state of the art, largely 
because no equilibrium is attained in these dry 
etching reactors, and for most reactions the kinetics 
are not known. Consequently, in situ monitoring 
of the plasma to improve etching uniformity is an 
important area for further research.60,61 Besides 
measuring these controlling parameters, techniques 
such as optical emission spectroscopy (OES) to 
map in situ etchant concentration are coming to 
the foreground as sensitive and effective endpoint 
detectors. It is well known that the color of a plasma 
changes when etching different materials. Emissions 
can emanate from etchants, etch products, or their 
fragments. An optical spectrometer is set to the line 
of a reaction product of interest, and one follows its 
intensity during an etch cycle. Some etch endpoint 
wavelengths are summarized in Table 3.17.
Mass spectrometry allows one to monitor the 
concentration of a wide variety of species; it is 
limited, however, in that the results are obtained 
downstream from the real process in the reactor.62 
Laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) has been  used 
to measure ground–state ion and radical con-
centrations. LIF is more powerful than OES, but 
it is expensive and requires a lot of experimental 
expertise; consequently, it is used more in the 
research lab than on a production line.63 In imaging 
Dry Etching   201

[Page 202]
of radicals interacting with a surface (IRIS), light 
from a dye laser optically excites specific radicals 
in the incident and reflected molecular beam 
striking a surface. The light emission of radicals in 
incident and reflected beam is measured and used 
to extract information on their density. By taking 
the difference  of the emission data, it is possible 
to determine the intensity of scattered radicals and 
the reactivity of specific radicals with particular 
surfaces.3 Laser interferometry (for thin transparent 
films such as polysilicon, silicon dioxide, and sili-
con nitride) and laser spot reflectance (for opaque, 
highly reflecting metal films) are used to monitor 
film thickness and film disappearance, respectively. 
Also, the temperature of the wafer during reactive 
ion etching affects process quality in terms of 
photoresist integrity, selectivity, etch rate, and etch 
residues. An in situ temperature monitor enables 
one to improve the performance during the plasma 
etch.64 With Langmuir probes, one can, in principle, 
determine the complete electron energy distribution 
of a plasma. In such an experiment, a small wire 
probe is inserted into the plasma and biased with 
respect to some other electrode. By recording the 
current-voltage plot of the probe, charged particle 
densities and energies can be deduced. In practice, 
Langmuir and other electrostatic probes are difficult 
to apply, invasive, and perturb the plasma.
Bosch-Charpenay et al.50 integrated an FTIR 
sensor in an STS Multiplex ICP deep reactive ion 
etcher. This enabled in situ, real-time measurements 
of DRIE etch depth and eroding photoresist thick-
ness measurements of MEMS devices using infrared 
reflectance analysis. Typical capabilities of the sys-
tem are summarized in Table 3.18.
Examples
Several examples of dry-etched micromachines are 
presented below. They include deep dry etching to 
fabricate interconnects through single crystal Si, an 
example of single crystal reactive etching and metal-
lization (SCREAM), which relies on a combination 
of anisotropic and isotropic dry etching, a variant 
on the SCREAM process from the Carnegie Mellon 
University, dry etching of polymeric materials, and 
a cantilever micromachining process combining wet 
and dry etching.
202   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 3.17 Etch Endpoint Wavelength
Film
Etchant
Wavelength (Å)
Emitter
Al
Cl2, BCl3
2614
3962
AlCl
Al
Poly-Si
Cl2
2882
6156
Si
O
Si3N4
CF4/O2
3370
3862
7037
6740
N2
CN
F
N
SiO2
CF4 and CHF3
7037
4835
6156
F
CO
O
PSG, BPSG
CF4 and CHF3
2535
P
W
SF6
7037
F
TABLE 3.18 Summary of FTIR Sensor Capabilities
MEMS structures that can be measured
Pillars, holes, trenches, trench grids, honeycombs 
of etched width less than ~100 µm
Etch depth precision (reproducibility)
0.05–0.5 µm depending on the structure
Etch depth accuracy (as compared with SEM)
~1–2 µm (estimated)
Maximum measurable etch depth
>200 µm
Current spot size*
~800 µm diameter
Measurement time
~1 s
Measurement spot range†
±5 mm in both x- and y-direction
Probing IR wavelength
2–10 µm (1000–5000 cm–1)
*Optical diffraction limits preclude spot sizes smaller than ~400 µm. MEMS devices smaller than this minimum spot 
size can, however, still be measured, provided they are geometrically isolated from other DRIE etched features.
†Translation range of infrared spot over sample is strictly related to equipment geometry at the etch chamber—in 
this case a small overhead view port into the STS Multiplex ICP system.
Source: Bosch-Charpenay, S., J. Xu, J. Haigis, P. A. Rosenthal, P. R. Solomon, and J. M. Bustillo. 2000. Technical Digest 
Solid-state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: Transducers Research Foundation, Inc.50

[Page 203]
Example 3.1: Via Etching in Si
Fabrication of high-density electrical, through-
wafer interconnects on silicon substrates re mains 
a challenging proposition. In MEMS, through-
wafer interconnects greatly facilitate their 
integration with active electronics (see Making 
Vias through Silicon in Volume III, Chapter 4). 
Different approaches to fabricating those 3D 
contact lines are compared in Volume III, Chapter 
4 on packaging. Chow et al.49 use the Bosch pro-
cess to etch a high-aspect-ratio through-wafer 
via and subsequently coat an insulator and then 
fill in a signal-conducting layer.49 Etching the via 
is the first and most critical step. A 10-μm-thick 
photoresist (Shipley SPR220-7) is coated on both 
sides of the Si wafer, and a double-sided aligner 
is used to expose 20-µm circles on both sides 
(±1 µm accuracy). The authors let the wafers then 
sit for 8 hours to absorb water. The moisture, they 
claim, helps ensure a shorter development time 
(90 s in Shipley LDD26W), resulting in straighter 
resist walls. Using a high-density plasma etcher 
from STS, a Bosch etch procedure (such as shown 
in Table 3.16) is performed for 120 minutes from 
the front side of the wafer. Resist is then coated 
and baked again, and another 180-minute etch 
from the back is used to punch through the vias 
(Figure 3.41). The diameter of the resulting vias 
varies from 24 µm (top and bottom) to 18 µm in 
the middle. By etching from both sides of the 
wafer, the required aspect ratio is reduced from 
40:1 to 20:1, and it is possible to etch a 20-µm 
circle through a 400-µm-thick wafer. For electri-
cal isolation of the via, thermal silicon dioxide 
(2 µm) is grown at 1100°C. For signal conduc-
tion, low-pressure chemical vapor deposition 
(LPCVD) polysilicon is deposited into the via and 
doped by phosphorous diffusion. The resistance 
of the resulting via is 14 Ω, and its low capaci-
tance (<1 pF) makes it attractive for high-speed 
applications.
Example 3.2: Single Crystal Reactive 
Etching and Metallization
As a second example of dry etching in micro-
machining, we follow some of the work by the 
Cornell Nanofabrication Laboratory making later-
ally driven micromachines.65,66 In laterally driven 
micromachines, as illustrated in Figure 3.42a, 
beams and structures of various shapes should 
preferably be of a narrow and thick construction 
and able to move freely and in parallel to the sup-
porting substrate while being held rigidly above 
it. Increased thickness of beams permits greater 
driving power for a given voltage and increases 
stiffness of the device perpendicular to the plane 
of motion. Thin, suspended beams (e.g., 2 μm 
wide) are fabricated with a combination of dry 
and wet etching in polysilicon (surface microma-
chining, Chapter 7). However, thick single crystal 
beams greater than 20 μm in materials such as 
quartz, Si, and GaAs can best be made with dry 
etching, especially because thick lateral moving 
microstructures of arbitrary shape, given crystal-
lographic limitations, are very difficult to realize 
using wet bulk micromachining (Chapter 4). The 
monitoring of the resonant frequency variation 
of small resonator devices made this way (see 
Figure 3.42a) can be used to measure monolayer 
mass changes, as well as pressure, temperature, 
acceleration, and so on. In the measurement of 
mass, for example, the sensitivity of the device 
is a function of resonant frequency and mass of 
the resonating structure:
 
Sensitivity ~ Resonant frequency
Mass
 
(3.24)
Dry Etching   203
FIGURE 3.41 SEM cross-section after plasma etching vias 
through the wafer. (From Arnold, J. C., and H. H. Sawin. 
1991. Charging of pattern features during plasma etching. 
J Appl Phys 70:5314.24)

[Page 204]
To build the most sensitive detector, the mass 
must be minimized and the resonant frequency 
maximized. The mechanical resonant frequency 
of an ideal resonator is given by:
 
f
k
m
0 = ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
1
2 
(3.25)
with k the spring constant and m its mass; in 
other words, the resonant frequency is pro-
portional to (stiffness/mass)1/2. A large spring 
stiffness must be designed and m minimized to 
make f0 as high as possible. For some of the very 
stiff, low mass structures made at Cornell, f0 was 
5 MHz, with k = 55 N/m and m = 2.0 × 10–13 kg. 
The above simple considerations illustrate the 
power of micromachining in enabling more sen-
sitive detectors. For more details on building 
MEMS resonant beams, see Volume III, Chapter 8 
on actuators.
Lateral resonant structures as shown in Figure 
3.42a are used to make sets of comb electrodes, 
204   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 3.42 (a) Si-SCREAM process (see text). The cross-section of a typical beam made using the SCREAM process is 
illustrated in step 10. This drawing shows a suspended beam and its associated parallel-plate capacitor. The released 
beam is free to move, whereas the plate on the right is static and can be used to measure the motion of the beam. 
(From K. A. Shaw et al., Sensors Actuators A, 40:63–70 (1994). With permission.) (b) A representative SCREAM struc-
ture. SEM micrograph of a Si x,y stage with parallel-plate capacitive drives and springs. (From Yao, J. J., S. C. Arney, 
and N. C. MacDonald. 1992. Fabrication of high-frequency two-dimensional nanoactuators for scanned probe devices. 
J Microelectromech Syst 1:14–22. With permission.67)

[Page 205]
for example, to drive precision x-y microstages 
for accurate positioning or as comb drives in 
accelerometers. Scanning tunneling microscopes 
(STMs), 40 × 40 μm in size, have been manufac-
tured using SCREAM technology.67 In the lat-
ter case, field emitter tips were integrated on 
an x-y stage with moving beams with nominal 
cross-sectional dimensions of 250 nm in width 
and 1000 nm in height. Displacements in the 
x-y directions through parallel-plate capacitive 
drives measured ±200 nm for an applied voltage 
in the 50-V range. 
An elegant Cornell dry etching process that 
obtains such laterally driven, single crystal 
micromachines is called SCREAM. This tech-
nology uses reactive ion etching to both define 
and release structures. SCREAM portrays an 
important technique from several points of view. 
It is a self-aligned, single-mask process, run at 
temperatures lower than 300°C, completed in 
less than 8 hours, and can be carried out in 
the presence of active circuitry integrated on 
the same chip. The example given here is the 
fabrication of single crystal silicon-released 
beam structures (see Figure 3.42).67
The steps of the SCREAM process are illus-
trated in Figure 3.42b. As a starting substrate, 
an arsenic-doped, 0.005-Ωcm, n-type (100) sili-
con wafer is used. A masking layer of PECVD sil-
icon dioxide, 1–2 μm thick, is coated with resist 
(step 1). Photolithography on the photoresist 
layer creates the desired pattern (step 2) to be 
transferred onto the silicon dioxide using CHF3-
based, magneton reactive ion etching (MERIE) 
(step 3). The photoresist is then stripped in an 
oxygen barrel etcher (step 4). The silicon diox-
ide mask pattern is subsequently transferred 
to the silicon substrate using a Cl2/BCl3 aniso-
tropic etch. The etch depth, depending on the 
intended micromachine, ranges between 4 and 
20 μm (step 5). Following the silicon etch, silicon 
dioxide is conformably deposited using PECVD. 
This oxide, at a thickness of 0.3 μm, will serve 
as a protection for the sidewalls during release 
(step 6). The next step is interesting and cru-
cial to the process. The objective is to remove 
the oxide from the bottom and the top of the 
structure without removing the oxide from 
the sidewalls. This selective clearing of oxide 
is carried out in an anisotropic CF4/O2 etch at 
10 mTorr. It removes 0.3 μm of oxide from the 
mesas and the trench bottoms while leaving 
the sidewall oxide intact (step 7). In the next 
step, a second deep Si etch (BCl3/Cl2) deepens 
the trench further (3–5 μm deeper) to expose 
some Si sidewall underneath the oxide-cov-
ered part (step 8). The release is accomplished 
with an SF6 isotropic etch at 90 mTorr. The RIE 
step etches the Si out from underneath the 
beams, releasing them in the process (step 9). 
An etchant such as SF6 hardly etches the oxide 
at all and gives good selectivity to the process. 
A layer of aluminum is then  sputter-deposited 
using DC magnetron sputter deposition (see 
Chapter 9) (step 10). The Al can be contacted 
and used as a drive electrode in microme-
chanical resonator structures. Resonator ele-
ments with beam elements 0.5–5 μm wide and 
aspect ratios >10 have been achieved using this 
Si SCREAM process.
A variation of the CMOS-compatible Si SCREAM 
process is used at EG&G’s IC Sensors (Milpitas, 
CA; http://www.meas-spec.com/myMeas/sensors) 
for the manufacture of accelerometers. 
The SCREAM process can also be used to fab-
ricate GaAs micro- and nanomachines. Figure 
3.43a outlines the SCREAM process steps in the 
case of a GaAs-based device.66 Specifically, the 
process sequence for the fabrication of a can-
tilever beam structure identical to the Si one in 
Figure 3.42a is shown.68 Considering two iden-
tical structures enables us to better compare 
the degree of complexity of micromachining in 
those two materials. Single crystal GaAs, in some 
respects, is an attractive material for microme-
chanics because of its optoelectronic properties. 
With GaAs, one can envision the possibility of 
vertically etched mirrors, lenses, detectors, wave-
guides, and semiconductor lasers, all adding up 
to the possibility of a totally integrated opti-
cal bench. On the other hand, compared with 
silicon, GaAs possesses a low fracture strength 
(its yield strength is con siderably lower: 2 vs. 
7 GPa) and is more difficult to passivate than Si, 
as its own oxides are either leaky or chemically 
unstable. The process example illustrates the 
difficulty in passivating GaAs versus passivating 
Si (a dual-layer dielectric is required to passivate 
GaAs). A more complete comparison of silicon 
versus GaAs in micromachining is presented in 
Volume III, Chapter 5 on selected materials for 
MEMS and NEMS.
Dry Etching   205

[Page 206]
For creating a simple movable beam, CAIBE 
produces deep vertical trenches, and RIE laterally 
undercuts and releases the vertically etched struc-
tures from the GaAs substrate.68 This process pro-
duces aspect ratios of 25:1 with trenches of 20 µm 
vertical depth to 400 nm lateral width. PECVD-
SiNX:H (200 nm) and a second layer of SiOX:H (150 
nm) are used to mask the GaAs substrate (Figure 
3.43Aa). PECVD-SiNX:H on GaAs easily results in 
structural buckling and layer cracking, but nev-
ertheless is preferred as a conformable layer 
because the surface of PECVD-SiOX:H on GaAs is 
too rough as a result of the diffusion of gallium into 
 PECVD-SiOX:H. The PECVD-SiNX:H deposition tem-
perature of 100°C is selected to obtain simultane-
ously good dielectric properties and low residual 
stress in the film. To further protect the GaAs dur-
ing etching, an additional sacrificial PECVD-SiOX:H 
is deposited. The thermal expansion mismatch 
between the two dielectrics is less than between 
either of the dielectrics and the GaAs. The pattern-
producing freestanding beams in GaAs are then 
printed in a photoresist layer on top of the bilayer 
dielectric. Plasma etching with CHF3/O2 transfers 
this image into the dielectric layer. The pattern in 
the dielectric stack subsequently is transferred to 
206   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 3.43 (A) Formation of an SC-GaAs cantilever beam with aluminum electrodes adjacent to each side of the beam 
using PECVD-SINx:H for insulation and for the top and sidewall etch mask. (From Zhang, Z. L., G. A. Porkolab, and N. C. 
MacDonald. 1992. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ‘92). Travemunde, Germany: IEEE. With 
permission.68) (B) SEM micrograph showing SC-GaAs circular and angled straight-line features after the CAIBE step. (From 
Zhang, Z. L., and N. C. MacDonald. 1993. Fabrication of submicron high-aspect-ratio GaAs actuators. J Microelectromech 
Syst 2:66–73. With permission.66)

[Page 207]
the single crystal GaAs by CAIBE (Figure 3.43Ab) 
using a 500-eV, 0.1-mA/cm2 Ar ion beam and a 
Cl2 flow of 10 ml/min. After the CAIBE process, 
the remaining photoresist is stripped in oxygen 
plasma, and a 300-nm PECVD layer of SiNX:H is 
conformably deposited. Subsequently, using DC 
magnetron sputtering, a 400-nm  layer of alu-
minum is deposited (Figure 3.43Ac). Pho toresist 
is spun on the Al layer, and the aluminum side-
 electrode pattern is printed in the resist, devel-
oped (Figure 3.43Ad), and then transferred to 
the Al by a Cl2/BCl3 etch. The latter step removes 
the aluminum from the areas that have been 
cleared of resist. Before the Al deposition, contact 
windows are formed to allow electrical con tact 
with both the GaAs substrate and the movable 
GaAs beams. To clear the PECVD-SiNX:H (from 
the second deposition of this compound) from 
the bottom of the trenches and to retain the 
di electric elsewhere, a highly anisotropic CHF3/
O2 is applied (Figure 3.43Ae). Finally, the GaAs 
structures are released from the substrate using 
a chlorine-based RIE (Figure 3.43Af; the top and 
sidewalls of the GaAs structure remain protected 
by the PECVD-SiNX:H and PECVD-SiOX:H mask. At 
the end of the beam- releasing etch, the PECVD-
SiOX:H is consumed, that is, it acts as a sacrificial 
mask. Finally, the photoresist for the Al pattern-
ing is stripped in oxygen. In a simplification of the 
process described in Figure 3.43A, Zhang et al.66 
later discovered an improved PECVD-SiNxHy con-
formal coating enabling a single dielectric mask 
for the GaAs SCREAM process. Figure 3.43B dem-
onstrates circular and angled straight-line fea-
tures in single crystal-GaAs produced with the 
simplified process.
Example 3.3:  Post-CMOS Processing for 
High-Aspect-Ratio Integrated 
Silicon Microstructures
Fedder et al.69 demonstrated the use of a mask-
less SCREAM-like approach of combined aniso-
tropic and isotropic dry etching to fabricate 
thin laminated aluminum/silicon dioxide (or di -
electrics in general) mechanical structures using 
the top-level aluminum layer in standard CMOS 
as an etch mask for the underlying Si.69 In this 
process, an anisotropic silicon dioxide etch 
(CHF3/O2) is followed by an anisotropic Si etch 
(SF6/O2), and finally an undercutting isotropic Si 
etch is used to release the movable mechanical 
elements. This post-CMOS process is illustrated 
in Figure 3.44. The etching masks are the inter-
connect metals from preceding CMOS process-
ing, so no post-CMOS lithography is required, 
hence the name “maskless post-CMOS microma-
chining.” An aspect ratio of 4:1 can be achieved. 
The microstructures consist of up to three metal 
layers that are electrically isolated by dielectrics. 
Both lateral and vertical CMOS accelerometers 
with fully differential full-bridge capacitive 
interface circuits have been fabricated using this 
post-CMOS micromachining process, and a triax-
ial microstage has also been realized.51 A major 
drawback with this type of CMOS-MEMS is that 
the residual stress and thermal expansion coef-
ficient in the thin metal/dielectric layers cause 
curling or bending.
More recently, with the improvements in deep 
RIE, the same Carnegie Mellon University-based 
research group has revisited their  SCREAM-like 
Dry Etching   207
FIGURE 3.44 Cross-sectioned view of thin-film post-CMOS micromachining. Illustration of the process flow showing use 
of the uppermost metallization level as mask for silicon etching, first with an anisotropic etch and then an isotropic etch 
to free movable structures. 

[Page 208]
approach by incorporating a front and a back-
side anisotropic Bosch etch. The process flow 
is illustrated in Figure 3.45A. In step 1, a deep 
anisotropic etch leaves a 10–100-µm thick 
single- crystal Si membrane underneath the 
CMOS microstructural layer. The central idea is 
to leave a thick layer of single crystal backing 
the thin CMOS multilayer such that the mechani-
cal properties are dominated by the underlying 
single-crystal Si, and electrical connections con-
tinue to be provided by the CMOS microstruc-
ture layer. In step 2, a front-side anisotropic etch 
is carried out to etch through the thin CMOS 
dielectric layers. In step 3, the microstructure is 
released by an anisotropic Si etch instead of the 
isotropic etch typically used in the SCREAM pro-
cess. The resulting thick Si, which remains under-
neath the CMOS layer, results in a totally flat 
released microstructure (no curling). Moreover, 
the proof mass and comb-finger capacitance for 
CMOS-based inertial sensors are significantly 
increased because of the higher z-dimensions. A 
close-up of one corner of a comb-drive actua-
tor fabricated using the new process is shown in 
Figure 3.45B.
Example 3.4: Dry Etching of 
Polymeric Materials
As we learned so far, to obtain the optimum 
anisotropy in high-aspect-ratio devices, one 
cools the substrate, uses high RF power density, 
works at the lowest possible pressure, uses high 
gas flow rate, relies on sidewall-passivating addi-
tives, or, as in the Bosch process, one switches 
back and forth between etching and passiva-
tion. We give examples here of the anisotropic 
power of MERIE by Furuya et al.70
Furuya et al.,70 at NTT, made a fluorinated 
polyimide microgrid (Figure 3.46) by using 
MERIE  in oxygen plasma. The grid elements 
consist of 18 pole-shaped, gold-covered elec-
trodes connected at the base by a common 
electrode. Individual poles measure 15 µm in 
diameter and are 100 µm high. The microgrid 
is formed by pairs of grid elements facing 
each other. A voltage can be applied between 
opposing electrodes of the grid-element pairs. 
A microgrid like this, the authors suggest, can be 
used in an electrostatic ion drag micropump and 
in microelectrophoresis devices. The fluorinated 
polyimide used in this study etches rapidly (3–5 
µm/min) and with high selectivity (2600 over a Ti 
mask) because MERIE produces a high-density, 
low-energy plasma and because the fluorine in 
the polyimide produces a high concentration of 
oxygen radicals in the plasma. From the F/C rule 
presented above, we predict that a fluorocarbon/
oxygen atmosphere leads to a more aggressive 
and less selective etch. In the current case, by 
adding the fluorine to the polyimide instead 
of to the etchant gas, a faster etch rate occurs 
without losing the high selectivity.
The morphology of the fluorinated polyimide 
surface, as revealed by atomic force microscopy 
208   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
CMOS-region
Microstructural region
Dielectrics
Single crystal
Si membrane
Metal 3
Metal 2
Metal 1
Movable
microstructure
CMOS layer
SCS layer
Bonding support
(a)
(b)
(c)
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 3.45 (A) The process flow for the modified CMOS-MEMS micromachining process; in step (a) the CMOS chip 
with back-side etch is shown; in step (b) the anisotropic dielectric etch is illustrated; and in step (c) the anisotropic silicon 
etch for the release is demonstrated. (B) SEM of a corner of a comb-drive actuator fabricated in Hewlett-Packard 0.5-μm 
CMOS followed by post-CMOS Si DRIE micromachining. The upper 5-μm-thick composite layer is the CMOS three-
metal interconnect stack. The underlying Si is 25-μm thick and illustrates the sidewall scalloping caused by the Si DRIE. 
(Courtesy of Dr. G. Fedder, CMU.)

[Page 209]
is smooth at a high etching rate, that is, at high 
magnetic fields. The NTT fluorinated polyimide 
is chemically stable, and the fluorine content 
makes the material extremely transparent, 
so it can be used to make optical components 
such as optical waveguides and lenses. The 
optical quality (and the high-aspect ratio of the 
produced polyimide structures) could make this 
fabrication technology competitive for many 
x-ray lithography-based LIGA structures (see 
Chapter 10).
Example 3.5: Combination 
Wet and Dry Etching
Brugger et al.71 developed a micromachining 
process, combining wet and dry etching, to 
fabricate a meander-type cantilever with an 
Dry Etching   209
FIGURE 3.46 An array of polyimide posts made by cryogenic MERIE. (Furuya, A., F. Shimokawa, T. Matsuura, and 
R. Sawada. 1993. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL: IEEE. With 
permission.70)

[Page 210]
integrated high-aspect-ratio tip for microprobe 
applications. The crucial part of an atomic 
force microscope (AFM) or scanning tunneling 
microscope (STM) microprobe is the tip, which 
for some applications (e.g., IC trench probing) 
should have a curvature radius ideally in the 
range of 50 Å or less, an angle of aperture of 
about 5°, and a height of 10 µm. The mean-
der structure and integrated tip are presented 
in Figure 3.47, and the process sequence is in 
Figure 3.48.
First, a 30-µm thin Si membrane is aniso-
tropically etched in a double-sided polished 
280-µm-thick Si wafer (Figure 3.48a). The etch-
ing occurs at the back with 40% KOH at 60°C 
through an opening etched with buffered HF in 
a 1.5-µm thermal oxide. During the KOH etch, 
the front side is protected by a mechanical chuck. 
The front-side oxide is patterned into a two-step 
profile using two lithographic and two buffered 
HF etching steps. The 0.75 µm-thick oxide in the 
two-step profile acts as the mask for the can-
tilever, and a 1.5-µm-thick oxide serves as the 
mask for the tip (Figure 3.48a). The topside is 
etched with 15-µm- deep RIE using chlorine/flu-
orine gas mixtures (C2ClF5/SF6) to preshape the 
cantilevers (Figure 3.48b). By adjusting the RIE 
parameters, vertical sidewalls of the cantilever 
can be obtained. The 0.75-µm-thick oxide that 
covered the cantilever is completely removed 
afterward, and the remaining oxide cap, for-
merly 1.5 µm and now 0.75 µm thick, serves as 
a mask for the tip etching. Then a C2ClF5/SF6 gas 
mixture is applied again to RIE the tip (Figure 
3.48c). In the final step (Figure 3.48d), an isotropic 
210   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 3.47 Si cantilever with square cross-section, designed as a meander shape. (a) Meander cantilever with tip. 
(b) Close-up view of tips. (From Brugger, J., R. A. Buser, and N. F. de Rooij. 1992. Silicon cantilevers and tips for scanning 
force microscopy. Sensors Actuators A A34:193–200. With permission.71)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Silicon dioxide 1.5 µm
Membrane
Si
≈ 30 µm
15 µm
15 µm etch depth
15 µm
10 µm etch depth
FIGURE 3.48 Fabrication process for a silicon meander 
beam with integrated tip. (a) Patterning of oxide mask 
onto preprocessed 30-μm thin membrane. (b) Dry etching 
of rough cantilever shape. (c) Dry etching of the tip. (d) 
Final wet etching step releasing the cantilever, forming 
the tip and smoothing the surface. (From Brugger, J., R. 
A. Buser, and N. F. de Rooij. 1992. Silicon cantilevers and 
tips for scanning force microscopy. Sensors Actuators A 
A34:193–200. With permission.71)

[Page 211]
HNO3:HF:CH3COOH etch lasting 2 minutes forms 
the tips (using the oxide cap as mask), releases 
the cantilever by etching through the remaining 
Si membrane, smoothes the dry-etched rough 
surface, and cleans the remaining organic pho-
toresist. Mixtures of HNO3, HF, with CH3COOH 
and/or water etch the silicon isotropically and 
exhibit high etch rates (10–300 µm/min). The 
SiO2 mask withstands the three successive etch 
steps: cantilever RIE etching, tip RIE etching, and 
1–2-min wet etching with HF:HNO3:CH3COOH 
sharpening the tip. Tip heights up to 20 µm with 
opening angles of approximately 5–10° and tip 
radii estimated to be 40 nm can be obtained 
this way.
A postoxidation process yielding Si tips with 
curvature radii of less than 10 nm by several con-
secutive oxidation and HF etching steps, exploit-
ing an anomaly of the oxidation behavior at 
regions with high geometric curvature, has been 
demonstrated by Marcus et al.72,73 and by our 
own group74 (see also Volume I, Chapter 4, on the 
dependence of oxidation rate of Si on geometry). 
By applying this oxidation- sharpening tech nique 
to the tips produced in the current example, 
further sharpening would result. A rigid cantile-
ver structure rather than a meander structure as 
shown in Figure 3.48a would also be of more use 
in a practical STM.74
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Genis Turon, Robert Gorkin, and 
Xavier Casadevall.
Questions
 3.1:  How is a DC plasma created, and how does 
an RF plasma differ? Why is a plasma always 
positive with respect to the reactor vessel 
walls? In which etching setup would you pre-
fer to etch an insulator?
 3.2:  Detail the different dry etching profiles avail-
able and explain how they are obtained.
 3.3:  Consider a single electron in an electric 
field between two parallel plates located 
10 centimeters apart (d = 10 cm). Assume the 
po tential varies sinusoidally between 1000 V 
and –1000 V at a frequency of 13.5 MHz. 
Calculate the maximum kinetic energy of the 
electrons.
 3.4:  Using the figure below as a model, assume 
that the silicon wafer has a bias of –150 V. A 
reactive ion etch is used to etch 10 µm wide 
grooves. 
Mask
15 µm
11 µm
10 µm
 
  
 After 1 hour, the shape of the grooves is 
measured and found to have the following 
topology:
 
(a)  If the bias were increased to –200 V and 
the depth of the groove was maintained 
at 15 µm, would the width at the top of 
the groove be less than or greater than 
11 µm?
 
Explain.
 
(b)  If the same etch procedure was used 
to etch SiO2, qualitatively describe the 
shape of the grooves in the SiO2 if a 
–150 V bias is applied.
 3.5:  Explain the DC breakdown voltage vs. elec-
trode distance curve (Paschen’s law) and how 
it is relevant to dry etching. How is miniatur-
ization of an electrode set equivalent to creat-
ing a local vacuum?
 3.6:  Use SCREAM to fabricate a capacitive acceler-
ometer. You may rely on the newest deep dry 
etching technology.
 3.7:  Why is reactive ion etching (RIE) somewhat 
of a misleading name? In physical-chemical 
etching, there are at least three types of ion-
surface interactions which may promote dry 
etching. Detail each of them. 
 3.8:  Develop a process sequence to fabricate a 
capacitive pressure sensor using both wet and 
dry etching techniques.
Dry Etching   211

[Page 212]
 3.9:  Explain loading effects in wet and dry etch-
ing. How do you avoid the loading effect? 
What is the bull’s-eye effect? What is the dif-
ference between loading and micro-loading?
3.10:  Discuss the etch profiles in physical etching 
(ion sputtering). Also draw profiles exhibit-
ing faceting, ditching, and redepositioning.
3.11:  Explain the F/C ratio effect in dry etching and 
present a couple of means to influence it. How 
can cryogenic cooling lead to similar etching 
behavior as inhibitor-driven chemistry?
3.12:  Explain the ion energy versus pressure curve 
for a plasma and how different etching 
mechanisms are enabled by it. Describe the 
differences between high-pressure plasmas 
and reactive ion etching systems. Explain 
for what applications each is the preferred 
process.
3.13:  You have only a high-pressure plasma etch 
and an ion mill at your disposal. Select which 
one to use in the following applications. 
Justify your answer.
 
(a)  Etching a 5000 Å polysilicon layer that 
serves as the upper electrode of a large 
square capacitor. The capacitor dielectric 
is 50 Å of SiO2.
 
(b)  Anisotropic patterning of a thin layer of 
YBa2Cu3O7 on a thick insulating film.
 
(c)  Recessing the channel of a GaAs FET. For 
this application the residual etch damage 
must be minimized.
3.15:  Sketch the voltage distribution for an RF 
plasma discharge in equilibrium and con-
trast it with the voltage distribution in a DC 
plasma.
3.16:  How would you monitor a dry etching pro-
cess? Why does endpoint detection of a reac-
tant species require a loading effect?
3.17:  Why is the grounded electrode (anode) in an 
AC sputtering station made as large as possi-
ble? Use equations to illustrate your answer.
3.18:  Explain how magnetic coils enable higher ion 
density plasmas. Use equations to explain.
3.19: Compare dry versus wet etching techniques.
3.20:  How would you make the structure below 
with the least expensive equipment, the high-
est selectivity, and the fastest process?
Further Reading
Boxman, R. L., D. M. Sanders, and P. J. Martin. 1995. Handbook 
of vacuum arc science and technology. Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes 
Publications, Chapter 1. 
Brown, S. D. 1967. Basic data of plasma physics, 1966. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Cobine, J. D. 1958. Gaseous conductors. Mineola, NY: Dover 
Publications.
Nasser, E. 1971. Fundamentals of gaseous ionization and plasma elec-
tronics. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience.
Roth, J. R. 1995. Industrial plasma engineering. Bristol, UK: Institute 
of Physics Publication, Chapters 8–13.
References
 
1. Lehmann, H. W. 1991. Thin film processes II. Eds. J. L. Vossen, 
and W. Kern. Boston: Academic Press.
 
2. Jansen, H., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, M. Elwenspoek, 
and J. Fluitman. 1996. A survey on the reactive ion etching 
of  silicon in microtechnology. J Micromech Microeng 
6:14–28 and Jansen, H. V., M. de Boer, R. Legtenberg, 
and M. Elwenspoek. 1994. The black silicon method: a 
universal method for determining the parameter setting of 
a fluorine-based RIE in deep Si trench etching with profile 
control. Proceedings of micromechanics Europe (MME‘94), 
60–64.
 
3. Oehrlein, G. S., M. F. Doemling, B. E. E. Kastenmeier, 
P. J. Matsuo, N. R. Rueger, M. Schaepkens, and T. E. F. M. 
Standaert. 1999. Surface science issues in plasma etching. 
IBM J Res Dev 43:181.
 
4. Rossnagel, S. M. 1991. Thin film processes II. Eds. J. L. Vossen, 
and W. Kern. Boston: Academic Press.
 
5. Konuma, M. 1991. Film deposition by plasma techniques. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
 
6. Sugawara, M., B. L. Stansfield, S. Handa, K. Fujita, S. Watanabe, 
and T. Tsukamoto. 1998. Plasma etching funda mentals and 
applications. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
 
7. Coe, S. E., J. A. Stocks, and A. J. Tambini. 1993. An 
investigation of the cathode region of a fluorescent lamp. 
J Phys D Appl Phys 26:1203–10.
 
8. Coe, S. E., and G. G. Lister. 1992. Modeling of the negative 
glow and Faraday dark space of a low-pressure noble gas 
discharge. J Appl Phys 71:4781–87.
 
9. Raizer, Y. P., and M. N. Shneider. 1997. The nonmono-
tonicity of transition from Faraday dark space to positive 
column and the emergence of standing strata behind the 
cathode region of glow discharge. High Temperature 35: 
15–21.
 10. Bogaerts, A., and R. Gijbels. 1996. Mathematical description 
of a direct current glow discharge in argon. Fresenius J Anal 
Chem 355:853–57.
 11. Bogaerts, A., and R. Gijbels. 1996. Two-dimensional 
model of a direct current glow discharge: description of 
the electrons, argon ions, and fast argon atoms. Anal Chem 
68:2296–303.
 12. Bogaerts, A., and R. Gijbels. 1998. Fundamental aspects and 
applications of glow discharge spectrometric techniques. 
Spectrochim Acta (Part B) 53:1–42.
 13. Paschen, F. 1889. Ueber die zum Funkenübergang in Luft, 
Wasserstoff und Kohlensáure bei verschiedenen Drucken 
erforderliche Potentialdifferenz. Wied Ann 37:69–96.
212   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 213]
 14. Naidu, M. S., and V. Kamaraju. 1995. High voltage 
engineering. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 15. Meek, J. M., and J. D. Craggs. 1953. Electrical breakdown of 
gases. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
 16. Brodie, I., and J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrication. 
New York: Plenum Press.
 17. van Roosmalen, A. J. 1984. Review: dry etching of silicon 
oxide. Vacuum 34:429–36.
 18. Wolf, S., and R. N. Tauber. 1987. Silicon processing for the 
VLSI era. Sunset Beach, CA: Lattice Press.
 19. Comello, V. 1993. ICP etchers start to challenge ECR. R & 
D April:79–80.
 20. Singer, P. 1991. ECR: is the magic gone? Semicond Int 
July:46–48.
 21. van Roosmalen, A. J., J. A. G. Baggerman, and S. J. H. Brader. 
1991. Dry etching for VLSI. New York: Plenum Press.
 22. Taniguchi, N. 1989. Energy-beam processing of materials: 
advanced manufacturing using various energy sources. Oxford, 
UK: Clarendon Press.
 23. Schutz, R. J. 1988. VLSI technology. Ed. S. M. Sze. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
 24. Arnold, J. C., and H. H. Sawin. 1991. Charging of pattern 
features during plasma etching. J Appl Phys 70:5314.
 25. Elwenspoek, M., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, and A. Prak. 
1994. Micromechanics. Report No. 122830. Twente, the 
Netherlands: University of Twente.
 26. Ayon, A. A., X. Zhang, and R. Khanna. 2000. Solid-state sensor 
and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: Transducers 
Research Foundation, Inc.
 27. Jansen, H., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, M. Elwenspoek, and 
J. Fluitman. 1996. A survey on the reactive ion etching of 
silicon in microtechnology. J. Micromech Microeng 6:14–28.
 28. Editorial. 1996. Introducing plasma jet etching. San Jose, CA: 
IPEC Precision, Inc.
 29. Jeong, J. Y., S. E. Babayan, V. J. Tu, J. Park, I. Henins, R. F. Hicks, 
and G. S. Selwyn. 1998. Etching materials with an atmospher-
ic-pressure plasma jet. Plasma Sources Sci Technol 7:282–85.
 30. Kneissl, M., D. Hostetter, D. P. Bour, R. Donaldson, J. 
Walker, and N. M. Johnson. 1998. Dry-etching and char-
acterization of mirrors on III-nitride laser diodes from 
chemically assisted ion beam etching. J Crystal Growth 
189/190:846–49.
 31. Carlstrum, C. F., S. Anand, and G. Landgren. 1999. 
Extremely smooth surface morphologies in N2/H2/CH4 
based low energy chemically assisted ion beam etching of 
InP/GaInASP. Thin Solid Films 343–344:374–77.
 32. Li, Y. X., P. J. French, P. M. Sarro, and R. F. Wolffenbuttel. 
1995. Proceedings: IEEE electro mechanical systems conference. 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands: IEEE.
 33. Schwartz, G. C., and P. M. Schaible. 1979. Reactive ion 
etching of silicon. J Vac Sci Technol 16:410–13.
 34. Oehrlein, G. S. 1990. Reactive ion etching: handbook of plasma 
processing technology. Ed. S. M. Rossnagel. Park Ridge, NJ: 
Noyes.
 35. Juan, W. H., J. W. Weigold, and S. W. Pang. 1996. Dry etch-
ing and boron diffusion of heavily doped, high aspect 
ration SI trenches. Proceedings: SPIE. Austin, TX: SPIE.
 36. Flamm, D. L. 1992. Dry plasma resist stripping part I: over-
view of equipment. Solid State Technol 35:37–39.
 37. Mogab, C. J., A. C. Adams, and D. L. Flamm. 1979. Plasma 
etching of Si and SiO2: the effect of oxygen additions to CF4 
plasmas. J Appl Phys 49:3796–803.
 38. Heinecke, R. H. 1975. Control of relative etch rates of SiO2 
and Si in plasma etching. Solid State Electron 18: 1146–47.
 39. Peters, L. 1992. Plasma etch chemistry: the untold story. 
Semicond Int May:660–70.
 40. Moreau, W. M. 1988. Semiconductor lithography. New York: 
Plenum Press.
 41. Hess, D. W., and D. B. Graves. 1989. Microelectronics process-
ing: chemical engineering aspects. Eds. D. W. Hess, and K. F. 
Jensen. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.
 42. Flamm, D. L. 1992. Dry plasma resist stripping Part II: 
physical processes. Solid State Technol 35:40–42.
 43. Flamm, D. L. 1993. Feed gas purity and environmen-
tal concerns in plasma etching: part II. Solid State Technol 
November:43–50.
 44. Flamm, D. L. 1992. Dry plasma resist stripping part III: 
production economics. Solid State Technol 35:43–48.
 45. Klaassen, E. H., K. Petersen, J. M. Noworolski, J. Logan, 
N.  I. Maluf, J. Brown, C. Storment, W. McCulley, and 
G.  T.  A.  Kovacs. 1995. Proceedings: Eighth international 
conference on solid-state sensors and actuators, and 
Eurosensors IX. Stockholm, Sweden: IEEE.
 46. Kovacs, G. T. A., N. I. Maluf, and K. E. Petersen. 1998. Bulk 
micromachining of silicon. Proc IEEE 8:1536–51.
 47. Laermer, F., and A. Schilp. 1996. Method of anisotropically 
etching silicon. US Patent 5,501,893.
 48. Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechanical 
systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.
 49. Chow, E. M., A. Partridge, C. F. Quate, and T. W. Kenny. 
2000. Solid-state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head 
Island, SC: Transducers Research Foundation, Inc. 
 50. Bosch-Charpenay, S., J. Xu, J. Haigis, P. A. Rosenthal, P. R. 
Solomon, and J. M. Bustillo. 2000. Technical digest: solid-
state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: 
Transducers Research Foundation, Inc.
 51. Xie, H., L. Erdmann, X. Zhu, K. J. Gabriel, and G. K. 
Fedder. 2000. Technical digest: solid-state sensor and actua-
tor workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: Transducers Research 
Foundation, Inc.
 52. Ayon, A. A., R. Braff, C. C. Lin, H. Sawin, and M. A. Schmidt. 
1999. Characterization of a time multiplexed inductively 
coupled plasma etcher. J Electrochem Soc 146: 339–49.
 53. Ayon, A. A., R. Braff, R. Bayt, H. H. Sawin, and M. A. 
Schmidt. 1999. Influence of coil power on the etching 
characteristics in a high density plasma etcher. J Electrochem 
Soc 146:2730–36.
 54. Juan, W. H., S. W. Pang, A. Selvakumar, M. W. Putty, and 
K. Najafi. 1994. Technical digest: 1994 solid-state sensor and 
actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: Transducers 
Research Foundation, Inc.
 55. Chinn, J. D., I. Adesida, and E. D. Wolf. 1983. Chemically 
assisted ion beam etching for submicron structures. J Vac 
Sci Technol B1:1028–32.
 56. Hoffman, E., B. Warneke, E. Kruglick, J. Weigold, and K. 
S. J. Pister. 1995. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical 
systems (MEMS ’95). Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
 57. Köhler, U., A. E. Guber, W. Bier, M. Heckele, and T. Schaller. 
1996. Proceedings: SPIE miniaturized systems with micro-optics 
and micromechanics. San Jose, CA: SPIE, 18–22.
 58. Wang, X.-Q., X. Xang, K. Walsh, and Y.-C. Tai. 1997. 
Proceedings: Transducers ’97. Chicago.
 59. Mucha, J. A., and D. W. Hess. 1983. Introduction to micro-
lithography. Eds. L. F. Thompson, C. G. Willson, and M. J. 
Bowden. Washington, DC: ACS Symposium Series.
 60. Economou, D., E. S. Aydil, and G. Barna. 1991. In situ 
monitoring of etching uniformity in plasma reactors. Solid 
State Technol 34:107–11.
Dry Etching   213

[Page 214]
 61. Elta, M. 1993. Developing “smart” controllers for semicon-
ductor processes. Res Dev February:69–70.
 62. Oehrlein, G. S. 1986. Reactive-ion etching. Phys Today 
39:26–33.
 63. Deshmukh, V. G. I., and T. I. Cox. 1988. Physical 
characterization of dry etching plasmas used in semi-
conductor fabrication. Plasma Physics Controlled Fusion 30: 
21–33.
 64. Duek, R., N. Vofsi, M. Haemek, S. Mangan, and M. Adel. 
1993. Improving plasma etch with wafer temperature read-
ings. Semicond Int July:208–10.
 65. Zhang, Z. L., and N. C. MacDonald. 1991. Sixth international 
conference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). 
San Francisco, CA.
 66. Zhang, Z. L., and N. C. MacDonald. 1993. Fabrication of sub-
Fabrication of sub-
micron high-aspect-ratio GaAs actuators. J Microelectromech 
Syst 2:66–73.
 67. Yao, J. J., S. C. Arney, and N. C. MacDonald. 1992. Fab-
rication of high frequency two-dimensional nanoac-
tuators for scanned probe devices. J Microelectromech Syst 
1:14–22. 
 68. Zhang, Z. L., G. A. Porkolab, and N. C. MacDonald. 1992. 
Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ‘92). 
Travemunde, Germany.
 69. Fedder, G. K., S. Santhanam, M. L. Reed, S. C. Eagle, D. 
F. Guillou, M. S.-C. Lu, and L. R. Carley. 1997. Laminated 
high-aspect-ratio microstructures in a conventional CMOS 
process. Sensors Actuators A57:103–10.
 70. Furuya, A., F. Shimokawa, T. Matsuura, and R. Sawada. 
1993. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems 
(MEMS ‘93). Fort Lauderdale, FL: IEEE.
 71. Brugger, J., R. A. Buser, and N. F. de Rooij. 1992. Silicon 
cantilevers and tips for scanning force microscopy. Sensors 
Actuators A A34:193–200.
 72. Marcus, R. B., and T. S. Ravi. 1993. Method for making 
tapered microminiature silicon structures, Bell Communi-
cations Research. US Patent 5,201,992.
 73. Marcus, R. B., T. S. Ravi, T. Gmitter, K. Chin, D. Liu, W. 
J. Orvis, D. R. Ciarlo, C. E. Hunt, and J. Trujillo. 1990. 
Formation of silicon tips with <1 nm radius. Appl Phys Lett 
56:236–38.
 74. Editorial. 1991. Tips for STM. TSDC (Teknekron). Menlo 
Park, CA.
 75. Flamm, D. L. 1993. Feed gas purity and environmen-
tal concerns in plasma etching: Part I. Solid State Technol 
October:49–54.
 76. Manos, D. M., and D. L. Flamm, eds. 1989. Plasma etching: 
an introduction. Boston: Academic Press.
214   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 215]
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Historical Note
Chemical Etching
Wet Bulk Micromachining
Comparing Wet and Dry Etching 
of Si
Questions
References
4 
Wet Chemical 
Etching and Wet Bulk 
Micromachining—
Pools as Tools
Fear of things invisible is the natural seed of that which every one in 
himself calleth religion.
Thomas Hobbes
Leviathan (1651)
Ignorance more frequently begets confidence than does knowledge: it is 
those who know little, and not those who know much, who so positively 
assert that this or that problem will never be solved by science.
Charles Darwin
The Descent of Man (1871)
The human mind treats a new idea the way the body treats a strange 
protein; it rejects it.
P.B. Medawar
215
Pools as Tools, Nankoweap, by Jerome Grimmer

[Page 216]
Introduction
Chapter 4 is split in two parts: one part deals with 
wet chemical etching and the other with wet bulk 
micromachining. Both these subtractive manufac-
turing techniques cover purely chemical etching, 
photochemical etching, electrochemical etching, 
and combinations thereof. Wet bulk micromachin-
ing is derived from chemical etching, but wet etch-
ing and bulk micromachining are typically used in 
very different industrial settings. In chemical etch-
ing, one carves isotropic features, large (milling) 
and small (blanking), out of metals, glasses, poly-
mers, and ceramics. The technique is mostly used in 
more traditional industrial manufacturing settings 
such as aerospace, electronics, automotive, medical, 
computer, instrument manufacturing, and decorat-
ing. Wet bulk micromachining, on the other hand, 
is used to sculpt isotropic and anisotropic micro-
structures principally in semiconductors substrates. 
It is a technique championed in the integrated circuit 
(IC) industry and in micro- and nanomachining.
We start with a historical note covering both 
chemical etching and wet bulk micromachining.
Historical Note
The ancient Egyptians etched copper jewelry with 
citric acid as long ago as 2500 BC. The Hohokam 
people, of what is now Arizona, etched  snail-shell 
jewelry with fermented cactus juice around 1000 BC. 
The earliest use of wet etching of a substrate, using 
a mask (wax) and etchants (acid-base), appears 
in the late fifteenth or early sixteenth century for 
decorating armor (Figure 4.1).1,2 Engraving hand 
tools were not hard enough to work the armor, 
and more powerful acid-based processes took over. 
By the early seventeenth century, chemical etching 
to decorate arms and armor was a well-established 
process. Some pieces stemming from that period 
have been found with designs as small as 0.5 mm. 
This is remarkable as masking involved cutting the 
maskant (linseed oil paint) with a scribing tool and 
peeling the maskant off where etching (with vinegar) 
was desired. This purely chemical-driven etching 
process is today also called chemical milling (larger 
pieces) or chemical blanking (smaller pieces).
Harris1 describes in detail the improvements that, 
by the mid-1960s, made chemical milling a valu-
able and reliable method of manufacturing, espe-
cially popular in the aerospace industry (M. Sanz of 
North American Aviation patented chemical mill-
ing in 1953 for use on aerospace parts, and in 1956, 
Turco Inc. purchased the patent rights). The method 
enabled many parts to be produced more easily and 
cheaply than by other means and, in many cases, 
provided design and production configurations not 
previously possible.
Through the introduction of photosensitive 
masks by Niépce in 1822 (see Chapter 1), chemical 
milling in combination with lithography became 
a reality, and yet smaller feature sizes were within 
reach. This type of chemical etching is called photo-
chemical milling (PCM). In PCM, photomasks are 
used to mask parts typically smaller and thinner 
than those used in chemical milling. The inventor of 
the printed circuit board (PCB) is generally assumed 
to be the Austrian engineer Paul Eisler (1907–1995), 
who, working in England, made a printed cir-
cuit board in 1936 as part of a radio set (Eisler is 
sometimes referred to as the “father of the PCB”). 
In about 1943 the United States began to use the 
216   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.1 Armor pieces have been found where the 
chemical milling led to designs as small as 0.5 mm. A mas-
kant (wax) is cut with a scribing tool and peeled off where 
etching is desired. Elements of a Light-Cavalry Armor, 
ca. 1510 Italian (Milan). Steel, etched, and gilded; weight 
19 lb., 13 oz. (9 kg). Gift of William H. Riggs, 1913. The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art. http://www.metmuseum.
org/TOAH/hd/rarm/ho_14.25.716.htm.

[Page 217]
technology on a large scale to make rugged radios 
for use in World War II. After the war, in 1948, the 
United States released the invention for commercial 
use. Printed circuits did not become commonplace 
in consumer electronics until the mid-1950s. A PCB 
basically consists of a planar (flat) substrate that has 
electronic components mounted on it that are inter-
connected by conductive tracks. The high volumes 
required for this product provided strong impetus 
for the development of more sophisticated PCM 
methods, particularly in the design of better etching 
equipment. Today the two most important applica-
tions of lithography-based chemical milling remain 
the manufacture of PCBs and, by 1961, the fabrica-
tion of Si-integrated circuitry. The latter application 
of chemical milling became better known as wet bulk 
micromachining. In this case, the substrates are typi-
cally smaller yet (Si wafer size) than in PCM, and 
the etch profile can be isotropic or anisotropic. The 
method used to produce a “cut” when etching sili-
con integrated circuits (ICs) is the same as that used 
for photochemical milling of metals in the aero-
space industry, but the IC and microelectromechan-
ical system (MEMS)/nanoelectromechanical system 
(NEMS) industries have refined the technique to 
reach minimum feature sizes orders of magnitudes 
smaller and to obtain much higher aspect ratios 
(height-to-width ratio of the features as high as 400 
in anisotropic etching of Si). Whereas the device 
sizes in microfabrication are often much larger than 
in IC processing, the aspect ratios in MEMS/NEMS 
are generally much greater than in IC fabrication 
(see Figure 4.2).
Isotropic etching in silicon semiconductor pro-
cessing has been used since its introduction in the 
early 1950s. One finds representative work from 
that  period in an impressive series of papers by 
Robbins and Schwartz3−6 on chemical isotropic 
etching and in Uhlir’s early work on electrochemi-
cal isotropic etching.7 The usual chemical isotro-
pic etchant used for silicon was HF in combination 
with HNO3, with or without acetic acid or water as 
diluent. The early work on isotropic etching in an 
electrochemical cell (i.e., electropolishing) was carried 
out mostly in nonaqueous solutions to avoid black 
or red deposits that formed on the silicon surface in 
aqueous solutions.8 Turner9 showed that, if a criti-
cal current density is exceeded, silicon can be elec-
tropolished in aqueous HF solutions without the 
formation of those deposits.
In the mid-1960s, Bell Telephone Laboratories 
started work on anisotropic Si etching in mixtures 
of, at first, KOH, water, and alcohol and later in KOH 
and water. The need for high-aspect-ratio cuts in 
silicon arose in the fabrication of dielectrically iso-
lated structures in integrated circuits, such as those 
for beam leads. Both chemical and electrochemical 
anisotropic etching methods were pursued.10−20 In 
the mid-1970s, a new surge of activity in anisotropic 
etching was associated with the work on V-groove 
and U-groove transistors.21−23
In Volume I, Chapter 1, we mentioned that the 
first use of Si as a micromechanical element can 
be traced back to a discovery and an idea from the 
mid-1950s and early 1960s, respectively. The dis-
covery was the large piezoresistance in Si and Ge 
by Smith in 1954.24 The idea stemmed from Pfann 
et al., 25 who in 1961 proposed a diffusion technique 
for the fabrication of Si piezoresistive sensors for 
stress, strain, and pressure. This led eventually to 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   217
FIGURE 4.2 Aspect ratio (height-to-width ratio) typical in fabrication of integrated circuits (a) and microfabricated com-
ponents (b).

[Page 218]
the development of commercial Si micromechanical 
pressure sensors, accelerometers, and gyros made by 
wet bulk micromachining.
Chemical Etching
Introduction
Under chemical etching we review a number of dif-
ferent processes where material removal through 
etching of preferentially exposed (masked) surfaces 
produces stress-free parts in many types of substrates.
The energy source at the work piece in this subtrac-
tive process is purely chemical (chemical milling 
or CM), photochemical (photochemical milling or 
PCM and photofabrication), or electrochemical (all 
types of electrochemical removal processes).
In the simplest embodiment of chemical etch-
ing, i.e., chemical milling or chemical machining, 
the method relies on nonlithographic masking, in 
which a masking layer is physically carved out to 
open up a pattern. A scribing tool, of the surgical 
knife type, is used to cut through the maskant along 
the line defined by the edge of a template.
In PCM, photomasks are used to mask parts typi-
cally much smaller and thinner than those used in 
chemical milling. The process uses photolithography 
just as in the etching of Si and other semiconduc-
tors, in which case one refers to wet bulk microma-
chining (see below). Photofabrication is a type of 
photochemical milling where ultraviolet exposure 
through a mask results in a strong modification 
of the solubility in an optically clear solid layer. 
This permits the direct photochemical production 
of thick three-dimensional (3D) glass, plastic, or 
ceramic structures without the need for a separate 
pattern transfer to an underlying substrate.
Electrochemical removal techniques use an elec-
trical field in an electrolyte that destroys the atomic 
bonds of the material.26 Under electrochemical 
removal techniques, we will review electrochemi-
cal machining (ECM), including microelectro-
chemical machining (µ-ECM), electrochemical jet 
etching, laser-assisted electrochemical jet micro-
machining, scanning electrochemical microscope 
(SECM), and through-mask electrochemical micro-
machining and electrochemical grinding (ECG).
Chemical Milling
Chemical milling or chemical machining involves 
material removal through chemical etching of pre-
ferentially exposed (masked) surfaces, producing 
stress-free parts in many metals. It is the oldest 
among nontraditional machining processes and has 
been used to engrave metals and hard stones. The 
method is also referred to as immersion chemical 
blanking/milling, and it is a purely chemical process 
that dissolves material from the unmasked (unpro-
tected) areas of metallic parts immersed in a tank 
filled with heated and agitated chemical reagents. 
The term “blanking” denotes small, thin work pieces, 
and “milling” indicates relatively large work pieces. 
The method produces clean, sharp, well-defined 
edges with no burrs (often a source of fatigue fail-
ure in highly stressed parts). The work piece does 
not require finishing of the surface, and no electric 
current to remove material is involved. Although 
most common with aluminum and titanium, sev-
eral other metals have been successfully chemically 
milled, with different metals etched in different etch 
solutions. The method relies on nonlithographic 
masking, in which a masking layer is physically 
carved out to open up a pattern as illustrated in 
Figure 4.3.1 The mask, an organic layer—usually a 
tape or chemically resistant paint—covers a large 
area substrate that may be up to 2 cm thick. The etch 
factor, A/R, or eat-back ratio, is identified in Figure 
4.3a, with R the etch depth and A the overhang of 
the maskant. A scribing tool, of the surgical knife 
type, is used to cut through the maskant along the 
line defined by the edge of a template (Figure 4.3b). 
Lateral tolerances of ±0.25–0.5 mm are typical for 
chemical milling, an accuracy mainly determined by 
the manual scribing process. For the IC industry and 
micromachining, this lateral tolerance would be very 
poor performance, but for many industrial applica-
tions, this tolerance is adequate. Chemical machin-
ing of metals is isotropic in nature, and aspect ratios 
are low. Creating high-aspect-ratio structures (>1), 
e.g., to make deep channels in stainless steel sheets, 
would necessitate laminating several of these sheets. 
Obviously, this type of technology is better suited 
for etching shallow features in large, single-substrate 
devices. Chemical milling has at least two key 
218   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 219]
advantages over traditional mechanical milling. First, 
mechanical milling is difficult on thin metal sheets 
because the tool tends to pull the thin metal foil, 
severely damaging the work piece. Second, chemical 
milling can produce complexly shaped parts, such as 
the inside leading edge of an airplane wing, which a 
milling machine could not reach.
Chemical milling of metals is widely applicable, 
simple, and requires little operator skill. Practical 
cutting (etching) depths are generally limited to less 
than 2 cm because the etchant process is relatively 
slow, and undercutting occurs behind the edges 
of the protective mask. Industrial applications are 
mainly in the shaping of thin metal foils and large 
shallow areas. Most modern aerospace designs use 
chemical milling to remove about half the weight 
of their products. It is used extensively on commer-
cial and military airplanes, satellites, and the space 
shuttle. Large parts can be accommodated; alumi-
num airplane wing parts, for example, are chemi-
cally machined in 50-ft.-long tanks. In Figure 4.4 
we show a chemical milling tank and a piece that 
has been thinned using three consecutive masking 
steps. Example products made by chemical blanking 
are shown in Figure 4.5.
A good further review with many relevant details 
on wet etching as it relates to the IC and electronics 
industry is presented by Romankiw.27
Photochemical Milling
Photochemical milling (PCM) is an engineering 
production technique for the manufacture of burr-
free and stress-free flat metal components by selec-
tive chemical etching through a photographically 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   219
FIGURE 4.3 Chemical milling showing the effect on the 
work piece. (a) Undercut caused by chemical milling. (b) 
Scribing of the maskant. (From Harris, T. W. 1976. Chemical 
milling. Oxford: Clarendon Press. With permission.1)
FIGURE 4.4 (a) Schematic illustration of the chemical machining process. Note that no forces or machine tools are 
involved in this process. (b) Stages in producing a profiled cavity by  machining; note the undercut.
FIGURE 4.5 Various parts made by chemical blanking. 
Note the fine detail. (Courtesy of Buckabee-Mears St. Paul.)

[Page 220]
produced mask. In PCM of metals, illustrated in 
Figure 4.6, photomasks are used to mask parts 
typically much smaller (a maximum of about 
60 × 60 cm) and thinner (<0.5 mm) than those used 
in chemical etching (see above). The process uses 
photolithography just as in the etching of Si and 
other semi conductors as discussed in the section 
below on wet bulk micromachining. To ensure high 
accuracy, oversized drawings (100×) of a design are 
reduced photographically to actual size. The photo-
mask is then used to contact print the component 
image onto a metal sheet covered with a photosen-
sitive coating. The photosensitive layer may be a 
dry resist layer such as Etertec® 5600 from Eternal 
(http://www.eternal-group.com) or Riston CM206 
from DuPont (http://www2.dupont.com/Imaging_
Materials/en_US/tech_info/product_selector.html) 
(see also Chapter 1). Careful masking is crucial to 
achieve precise parts in both chemical and photo-
chemical cutting. However, because of the absence of 
scribing errors in photochemical milling, the photo-
sensitive maskant is extremely accurate and leads 
to far superior tolerances for small intricate parts. 
Photochemical milling was designed specifically 
to alleviate the lateral-accuracy problem of chemi-
cal milling, achieving it extraordinarily well; lateral 
accuracies (e.g., for printed circuit board production) 
are ±0.013 mm. Another reason why the tolerances 
in PCM are so much better than in chemical milling 
is related to the attempted etch depths. For example, 
the geometry of the cut produced with photoetching 
printed circuit boards or integrated circuits might be 
similar to the chemical-milling cut of the aerospace 
industry, but one must remember the many orders 
in magnitude difference in the depth of the cut.1 As 
the dimensions of the components decrease (i.e., 
from precision products to printed circuit boards 
and to integrated circuits), the necessity for chemi-
cal cleanliness of the material surfaces increases and 
requires clean-room manufacture in the case of IC 
fabrication.
Photoetching of metals is less generic than chemi-
cal milling but can be used, for example, with 
the  following metals (in order of increasing diffi-
culty): copper, nickel, carbon steel, stainless steel, 
aluminum, titanium, and molybdenum.28,29  Etching 
rates—with sodium hydroxide for aluminum, hydro-
chloric and nitric acids for steel, and iron chloride 
with nitric acid for copper—vary from 1.3–7.6 × 10–3 
cm/min. Some PCM etchants are listed in Table 4.1.
Photochemical etching of metals, like chemi-
cal etching, is isotropic, and aspect ratios are con-
sequently low. Normally, the diameter of a hole or 
width of a slot needs to be equal to or exceed the 
metal thickness. A rule of thumb for PCM toler-
ance is ±10% of the metal substrate thickness. This 
 guideline, however, does not express the ultimate 
capabilities of the PCM process because variable 
etch factors and reduced sheet size can enhance 
dimensional control.
Photoetching 
of 
metals 
requires 
moderate 
investments and competence in two fields: metal 
220   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.6 Photochemical milling (PCM) of metal parts.
TABLE 4.1 Example PCM Etchants and Materials That 
Are Etched by Them
Aqueous Etchants
Material Etched 
in the PCM Process
Acidified ferric 
chloride
Aluminum, Alloy 42, copper and 
copper alloys, HyMu, Inconels, 
Invar, Kovar, Permalloy, Monel, 
Mumetal, nickel, Nimonics, 
phosphor bronze, stainless steels 
and other steels, tin
Acidified cupric 
chloride
Beryllium copper, copper and 
copper alloys including brass 
and bronze, lead
Alkaline potassium 
ferricyanide
Aluminium, molybdenum, and 
tungsten
Sodium hydroxide
Aluminium, anodized aluminium
Hydrofluoric acid
Beryllium, columbium (niobium), 
titanium, zirconium, glasses, and 
ceramics
Source:  Allen, D. M. 2004. Photochemical machining: from ‘manu-
facturing’s best kept secret’ to a $6 billion per annum, 
rapid manufacturing process. Annals of the CIRP, 53: 
559–572.

[Page 221]
etching and lithography. PCM is a fast, efficient, 
cost-competitive, burr- and stress-free method of 
 producing metal components. Applying photo-
chemical etching to large surface areas is a very 
expensive proposition,30 and, in that case, chemical 
milling may be a better approach. Common indus-
tries served include aerospace, electronics, auto-
motive, computer, and instrument manufacturing. 
Major applications are lead frames, PCBs, shadow 
masks for color televisions, heat sinks, shields, covers, 
lids, gaskets, springs, encoders, disks, grids, screens 
connectors, panels, shims, bus bars, and combs.
In Table 4.2 we compare PCM on metals, glasses, 
and ceramics with PCM on printed circuit boards 
and ICs and chemical milling in Al, Ti, and aero-
space alloys.
A typical foundry for PCM in the United 
States 
is 
PhotoMachining, 
Inc. 
(http://www.
photomachining.com/apps.html). Good informa-
tion on Photochemical Milling is available at http://
www.pcmi.org. Standard tool production time in 
these foundries is 2–3 days but can be several hours 
if necessary. Tooling is produced and stored in an 
environmentally controlled facility to ensure accu-
racy and quality. Modern digital photography uses 
customer-supplied IBM/Mac-based programs, as well 
as all AutoCAD versions and DXF and GbR files. In 
Figure 4.7 some typical PCM products are shown.
Photofabrication
Introduction
Photofabrication is a subtractive process in which 
ultraviolet exposure through a mask results in a 
strong modification of the solubility in an optically 
clear solid layer. This permits the direct photochem-
ical production of thick 3D structures without the 
need for a separate pattern transfer to an underly-
ing substrate. In photofabrication, photo sensitive 
glasses, plastics, and ceramics are patterned into 
intricate 3D shapes. As opposed to most photoli-
thography processes, where photoresist is a sacrificial 
layer only, in photofabrication the photosensitive 
material  itself becomes a permanent part of the 
microdevice under construction. The photosensitive 
materials in photofabrication are permanent, and in 
the case of polymers this typically involves negative 
photoresists (see also Chapter 1). The method offers 
simple, inexpensive, high-aspect-ratio 3D microstruc-
tures for small to medium batch sizes without the 
need to resort to more expensive methods such as Si 
wet bulk micromachining or LIGA (see Chapter 10). 
The industrial application of photofabrication, cre-
ating sharp images in ceramics, plastics, and glasses, 
preceded the Si microfabrication era. Given the cur-
rent interest in high-aspect- ratio 3D structures, this 
technique is worth revisiting.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   221
TABLE 4.2 PCM and Chemical Milling Compared
Fabrication Method or 
End Product
Typical Material Etched
Thickness of 
Material Etched
Underlying 
Material or Support
Photochemical machining (PCM)
Metals, glasses, or ceramics
2 mm (typical maximum)
Not applicable
Printed circuit boards (PCBs)
Electroformed foil 
(a conductor)
17.5 μm (typical)
Rigid epoxy fiber glass or 
other insulator such as 
flexible polyimide
Integrated circuits (ICs)
Silicon dioxide or silicon 
nitride
0.01–0.1 μm (typical)
Silicon
Chemical milling
Aluminum, titanium, and 
aerospace alloys
0.1–10 mm (typical)
Not applicable
FIGURE 4.7 Mechanical metal parts produced by photo-
chemical milling: leaf springs, connector arrays, masks, 
free standing grids, laser and IR target apertures, preci-
sion pin holes, and encoders.

[Page 222]
For most photoplastics, aspect ratios do not exceed 
3:1, but, with photosensitive glasses and ceram-
ics, it is possible to make a 0.13-mm-diameter hole 
through a 2.7-mm-thick plate, with an aspect ratio of 
∼21:1; this is no small achievement. We will mostly 
detail photosensitive glasses here. A few words on 
photosensitive plastic sheets suffice because the 
topic of dry permanent resists was covered already 
in Chapter 1.
Note stereolithography, as discussed in Chapter 8, 
is an additive technique in which plastic shapes are 
generated by laser writing in a molten plastic mass; 
the technology is sometimes referred to as micropho-
toforming and should not be confused with the sub-
tractive photofabrication discussed here.
Photosensitive Glasses/Ceramics—
Photography in Glass
Electrochromic glasses temporarily change color 
when exposed to strong light. Photosensitive glasses, 
on the other hand, develop an invisible, perma-
nent “latent image” after UV illumination through 
a mask. Subsequent heat treatment can develop 
the latent image into a permanent structural and/
or color change with accompanying differences 
in solubility. In the mid-1940s, Donald Stookey 
invented both photosensitive and electrochromic 
glasses at Corning Glass Works (now Corning, Inc.) 
To read up on Stookey’s career, consult Profiles in 
Ceramics (http://www.ceramicbulletin.org/months/
Mar00/StookeyProfile.pdf)31 and Explorations in Glass: 
An Autobiography S. Donald Stookey.32 A typical pho-
tosensitive glass composition, FotoForm® glass, 
developed by Corning Glass Works, was SiO2, 81.5; 
Li2O, 12.0; K2O, 3.5; Al2O3, 3.0; CeO2, 0.03; and 
Ag, 0.02 (all in weight percent). On exposure to UV 
light, photoelectrons released by cerium, the pho-
tosensitizing ingredient, are trapped at specific sites 
in the silicate-glass network to form a latent image. 
By heating the exposed glass to around 500°C, the 
electrons are released from the traps, and silver 
ions are reduced to silver atoms, which aggregate 
into minute colloidal islands. The minute silver 
clumps serve as nuclei on which crystals, such as 
lithium metasilicate, sodium bromide, or sodium 
fluoride, precipitate. If sufficient numbers of fairly 
large crystals form (∼4 µm), an opalescent image 
results, whereas the masked regions remain glassy 
and transparent. In HF, opal regions etch 15–30 
times faster than the unexposed glass. No mask-
ing is required during the etching process. In this 
way, by exposing a photosensitive glass plate to UV 
and etching in HF after heat treatment, a wide vari-
ety of microstructures can be made. Through-holes 
in photosensitive glass were experimentally found 
to have a sidewall taper of only 2–3°; this means 
that substantially parallel holes may be cut, having 
a very high depth-to-diameter ratio. The sloping 
effect can be reduced even further if the HF etch-
ing occurs from both sides of the glass simultane-
ously. Etching from both sides produces a profile 
with two truncated cones and gives a minimum 
overall increase of hole diameter. Although etch-
ing of holes with diameters appreciably less than 
one-tenth of the thickness of the glass is not rec-
ommended, aspect ratios of 20 are possible. In 
contrast, in photoetching of metal, as we have seen 
above, holes cannot be made with a diameter less 
than the thickness of the sheet. If sidewall taper in 
photosensitive glass is desired, it can be increased 
to 20–30°.
Further heat treatment of the finished photosen-
sitive glass pieces, Stookey discovered by accident 
in 1957, converts the glass to a stronger, partially 
crystalline material, e.g., Fotoceram®. Stookey left a 
sample of lithium silicate glass containing silver in 
an oven at too high a temperature. He expected to 
find a puddle of glass once he realized his mistake, 
but instead found a piece of white ceramic because 
the glass had crystallized with a fine grain size.
The maximum sheet thickness of FotoForm glass 
available was 0.6 cm, but several pieces can be ther-
mally bonded, forming excellent seals and convert-
ing the glass to Fotoceram glass. One disadvantage 
of the bonding process is that it causes the photo-
glasses to become dark, which makes the approach 
less attractive for optical applications.
Corning’s photosensitive FotoForm glass found 
an important application in fluidic logic in the 
mid-1960s (see for example Figure 4.8), but as that 
 application started fading the production of FotoForm 
glass and Fotoceram unfortunately was discontinued.31
Fluidic components, providing functions such as 
flip-flops, logic elements such as OR-NOR and AND 
222   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 223]
gates, proportional amplifiers, and fluid resistors, 
exemplified the capabilities of photofabrication with 
FotoForm glass in the mid-1960s. The fluidic-control 
device in Figure 4.8 shows the individual layers of 
an AND device after through-etching.1
Fusion of stacks of photosensitive glass plates 
provided a permanently sealed and rugged unit, 
complete with the necessary input and output 
vents. Through-etching provides the connection 
between the different planes. The geometrical accu-
racy of these fluidic devices was maintained within 
±0.025 mm, and the tolerance that may generally be 
expected on this type of etched glass product was 
±0.05 mm on etched edges up to 12.7 mm in length. 
With hole spacings up to 25 mm apart, accuracy to 
within 0.025 mm center to center was possible.
Few of the Si and plastic microfluidic structures 
produced today have reached the degree of com-
plexity achieved with photofabrication methods of 
almost four decades ago when they were applied 
to fluidic logic (see Figure 4.8). “Fluidic” elements 
made in the 1960s could achieve many of the func-
tions of an electronic circuit, and they were robust, 
simple to fabricate, and suited to operating in a 
hostile environment. Of course, they were much 
slower (milliseconds instead of nanoseconds) and 
much larger than their electronic counterparts. The 
latter spelled the eventual demise of microfluidic 
“computing” in the late 1960s. In the 1990s, sev-
eral micromachined fluidic devices were developed 
for analytical/biomedical applications, without ref-
erence to this earlier sophisticated work in photo-
sensitive glasses. Early in the development of these 
analytical/biomedical applications, many fluidic 
devices were attempted in Si. However, the relatively 
large size of fluidic elements, the need for a robust 
environment, the relatively low numbers of required 
devices, and the fact that electronics usually do not 
need to be integrated render the use of silicon for 
this application hardly justifiable. The photofabri-
cation machining approach, which is inexpensive 
and simple, coupled with the chemical inertness of 
glass, represents a more attractive approach. Fluidic 
oscillators, fabricated using the more expensive and 
hardly accessible LIGA technique, are even more dif-
ficult to justify when compared with  photoformed 
devices.33,34 The latter misapplication of miniatur-
ization tools was eventually recognized, and photo-
formed glass was reintroduced as the best solution 
for this application by one of the inventors of 
LIGA technology35 (see Volume III, Figure 1.2). In 
July 1996 the commercial entity “Mikroglas” was 
founded out of the Institute of Microtechnology in 
Mainz, Germany. Mikroglas obtained the exclusive 
rights for the use of Foturan™ glass from Glaswerk-
Schott (http://www.us.schott.com/english). In 1999, 
Mikroglas started with the development of microflu-
idic components for chemical and biotechnological 
applications. Products include chemical microreac-
tors and whole equipment to use these microreac-
tors (http://www.mikroglas.com/index_e.html).
Unlike ceramics, Foturan is pore-free, has higher 
temperature stability and chemical resistance than 
plastics, and has a higher breaking strength than 
silicon. Processing of Foturan consists of exposure 
to ultraviolet light, crystallization through heat 
treatment, and etching as illustrated in Figure 4.9a. 
In Figure 4.9b we show example hole plates made 
this way. The thermal expansion coefficient of the 
processed Foturan can be precisely varied between 
8 and 16 ppm/°C. Variously shaped recesses can 
readily be formed on both sides of the “wafer,” as 
well as 40:1 aspect ratio through holes. In addi-
tion, the surfaces can be metallized and patterned 
by conventional techniques. The material can be 
processed in sheets of up to 250 mm × 200 mm. 
Besides for  making  photosensitive glass ornaments, 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   223
FIGURE 4.8 Fluidic-control device using chemically milled 
photosensitive glass. The individual layers of an AND 
device after through-etching with HF. (From Harris, T. W. 
1976. Chemical milling. Oxford: Clarendon Press. With 
permission.1) See also Volume III, Figure 1.2.

[Page 224]
photosensitive glass has been used to make micro-
lenses (±100 µm in diameter), fluidic elements (see 
Figure 4.8), spacers in photomultiplier tubes, color 
filters, integrated optics cell sheets in gas-discharge 
displays, and charge plates and nozzles in ink-jet 
printers. 
In a very intriguing further development of pho-
tosensitive glasses, it was found that the different 
properties of opal and glass areas on photosensitive 
glass enable the direct formation of electrical circuit ry 
on glass. Immersing a sample with an opal pattern in 
a molten salt bath and heating it in a hydrogen atmo-
sphere forms a conducting silver film on the opal 
regions. The film that forms on the glassy regions 
remains nonconducting.31 This discovery could be 
used in the construction of DC and AC electrokinetic 
devices with complex patterns of metal electrodes 
on a glass substrate (see Volume I, Chapter 7).
Suggestion: A most useful new MEMS material 
would be a Foturan-type photosensitive glass with 
a thermal expansion coefficient matching that of 
Si (like Corning 7740 glass used in anodic bond-
ing). Such a product would enable the packaging of 
all types of Si sensors (see Volume III, Figure 4.9) 
combining a Si micromachined sensing element 
with a photofabricated glass package.
Photosensitive Plastics
Although dry photoresists and photosensitive 
plastics are covered in Chapter 1 and Volume III, 
Chapter 4, some additional photosensitive plastics 
are briefly covered here. In the early 1960s, DuPont 
started developing a photosensitive nylon sold in 
sheet form, either bonded to a substrate such as car-
bon steel, aluminum, or a  polyester Cronar film, 
or freestanding. The alcohol-soluble nylon is made 
photosensitive by adding a cross-linking agent such 
as methylene bis-acrylamide and an activator such 
as benzophenone. On exposure to UV, the benzo-
phenone forms free radicals, which react with both 
of the other compounds, hence insolubilizing the 
nylon; in other words, the material acts as a negative 
tone resist. The unexposed areas are then washed 
away with a dilute aqueous sodium hydroxide spray, 
forming channels and cavities. By using the ben-
zophenone in a low concentration, about 5% by 
weight, a layer with a relatively low absorption coef-
ficient results, and thick layers can be insolubilized. 
224   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.9 (a) The photofabrication process in Foturan. (b) Hole plates shapes, round or rectangular; diameter of holes, 
down to 50 μm; thickness of plates, 0.1 up to 2.5 mm and up to 100 holes/mm2 (http://www.mikroglas.com).

[Page 225]
Stencils with 1-mm-high vertical sidewalls with a 
taper of 2° can be produced this way, and 25-µm-
deep, 25-µm-wide channels do not show any under-
cutting. The aspect ratio did not exceed 3:1, and the 
operating temperature range is limited to –100 and 
+200°F. To seal cavities or channels (e.g., for the fab-
rication of fluidic devices), the first nylon sheet can be 
laminated with another Cronar film (http://www2.
dupont.com/Products/en_RU/Cronar_en.html).28
Riston®, Fodel®, and VACREL® photopolyer 
films are other DuPont dry photoresists (see Figure 
1.33). These complex photosensitive systems are 
designed to polymerize and harden when exposed 
to ultraviolet light. Fodel can pattern 75-µm vias on 
a 150-µm pitch, and conductors can be patterned 
with 50-µm lines on a 100-µm pitch. Fodel extends 
the density capability of the thick film process to 
allow densities typically achievable using more 
costly thin film processes. 
Negative-tone photosensitive resins such as SU-8 
are particularly suited for high-aspect ratio, high-
thickness photofabrication. As we saw in Chapter 1, 
SU-8 is an epoxy-type, near-UV photoresist based on 
EPON SU-8 epoxy resin (from Shell Chemical) that 
was originally developed and patented by IBM. The 
main advantage of photosensitive resins over glasses 
and plastics is the fact that they are deposited in liq-
uid form, thus conforming better to existing 2D and 
3D structures. Other advantages include exquisite 
control over the thickness of the layer, higher attain-
able aspect ratios, higher feature density, and easier 
alignment to existing features.
Conclusions
Photofabrication is an attractive alternative for 
microfabrication of all types of high-aspect-ratio, 
passive elements, especially for intricate shapes 
that are >1 cm2 in size and are only produced in 
modest volumes. The current interest in microma-
chined fluidic elements for analytical purposes is 
reviving interest in photosensitive glasses, plastics, 
and resins. Photosensitive glasses are also being 
considered for the fabrication of photonic crystals 
(see Volume I, Chapter 5). It certainly makes more 
sense to use photofabrication of insulators than to 
fabricate fluidic elements from Si because the latter, 
after etching, must be passivated. This passivation 
may undergo electrical breakdown, especially in an 
aqueous environment. We expect dry photoresist 
formulations to continue to improve, with tolerances 
approaching those of traditional spin-on photore-
sists (see Chapter 1). Applications such as RF-MEMS 
and fluidics might also lead to the introduction of 
novel photoformable ceramics and glasses.
Electrochemical Removal Techniques
Introduction
The term electrochemical machining is used to describe 
electrochemical removing and forming processes 
with or without masking the substrate. Both pro-
cesses involve electrochemical energy. Despite 
per formance, speed, and cost advantages, electro-
chemical milling (ECM) is used little in the IC field 
when other techniques, especially dry processes, 
are available. This seems to be connected in part 
with the overall trend toward dry processing and 
the disproportionately large number of electri-
cal engineers versus chemical and electrochemical 
engineers in the IC world. LIGA and other replica-
tion techniques described in Chapter 10 have rein-
vigorated interest in electrodeposition, however. 
Both electrochemical removing and forming tech-
niques are of extra ordinary importance in miniatur-
ization science—without electrochemical removal 
there would have been, for example, no porous Si 
(PS) work, and without electroplating of Ni master 
molds, there would be no plastic micromolding. 
Here we will review subtractive electrochemical 
processes only. Additive electrochemical processes 
are covered in Chapter 8. In electrochemical mate-
rial removal, an electrical field in an electrolyte 
destroys the atomic bonds of the material.26 Under 
electrochemical removal techniques, we will review 
electrochemical grinding (ECG), ECM including 
µ-ECM, electrochemical jet etching, laser-assisted 
electrochemical jet micromachining, scanning elec-
trochemical microscope (SECM), and through-mask 
electrochemical micromachining.
Electrochemical Grinding
Introduction Grinding usually constitutes a mec-
hanical machining process that removes small 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   225

[Page 226]
amounts of material from a metallic work piece in 
the form of tiny chips through the contact of small, 
hard, sharp, nonmetallic particles often embed-
ded in a grinding wheel (see Chapter 6). In electro-
chemical grinding (ECG), the abrasive action of an 
electrically conductive wheel, the cathode, accounts 
only for 10% of the metal removal; the remainder is 
 electrochemical. This technique should not be con-
fused with electrolytic in-process dressing or ELID, 
where the material removal process (any type of 
material in this case) is purely mechanical but an 
electrochemical dissolution process of the metal 
matrix dresses the abrasive wheel continuously (see 
Chapter 6).
Electrochemical Grinding Operating Principles In 
ECG, an electrically conductive abrasive wheel, the 
cathode, and an anode work piece are connected to a 
low-voltage DC power source (Figure 4.10).36
An electrolyte is flushed onto the abrasive wheel, 
and the abrasive particles in the wheel’s surface 
remove electrochemically dissolved material, always 
keeping the surface fresh for further electrochemical 
attack. Very low DC voltages (usually between 3 and 
15 V) are used in ECG; therefore, spark discharge is 
minimized and little or no heat is developed in the 
cut. All hard conductive materials are candidates for 
ECG (e.g., sharpening of tungsten-carbide tool bits). 
The method is also good for fragile parts that would 
be damaged by conventional mechanical grinding. 
The method produces parts free of residual stresses 
and heat damage and surface finishes ranging from 
0.1–0.5 µm. The surfaces are also free of scratches 
and burrs. This process provides not only burr-free 
machining but also considerably less cutting wheel 
wear. ECG is similar to electrochemical machining 
(see below) except that the cathode is a specially 
constructed grinding wheel instead of a tool shaped 
like the contour to be machined.
Compositron Corporation is a service company 
providing an electrochemical grinding homepage 
(http://www.evercut.com), and Everite Machine Pro-
ducts Co. sells ECG equipment (e.g., Everite Model 
EG618; http://www.everite.net).
Electrochemical Machining
Electrochemical machining (ECM) historically fol-
lowed electrochemical grinding (ECG). In ECM 
one uses a cathode electrode shaped to provide the 
complementary structure in an anode work piece 
(Figure 4.11). A highly conductive electrolyte stream 
separates the cutting tool from the work piece, and 
metal removal is accomplished by passing a DC cur-
rent of up to 100 A/cm2 through the salt solution cell. 
As the cathode tool approaches the anode work piece 
it erodes its complementary shape in it. Thus, com-
plex shapes may be made from a material such as 
226   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.10 (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical grinding process. (b) Thin slot produced on a round nickel 
alloy tube by this process.
FIGURE 4.11 Schematic illustration of the electrochemical 
machining process. This process is the reverse of electro-
plating, described in Chapter 8.

[Page 227]
soft copper and used to produce negative duplicates 
of it. The process is also called electrochemical sink-
ing. Machines having current capacities as high as 
40,000 A and as low as 5 A are available. The pressur-
ized electrolyte (concentrated solutions of inorganic 
salts such as sodium chloride, potassium chloride, 
and sodium nitrate) passes at high speed (10–60 m/s) 
through the gap (about 0.1–0.6 mm) between the 
work piece and the tool to prevent metal ions from 
plating onto the cathode tool and to remove the 
heat that is generated as a result of the high current 
flow. The cathode is advanced into the anode work 
piece at a rate matching the dissolution rate, which is 
between 0.5 and 10 mm/min when applying current 
densities of 10–100 A/cm2. The supply voltage com-
monly used in ECM ranges from 5–20 V; the lower 
values are used for finish machining (creating a final 
smooth surface), and the higher voltages are used 
for rough machining. The rate of material removal 
is the same for hard or soft materials, and surface fin-
ishes are between 0.3 and 1 µm. These cutting speeds 
and surface finishes are comparable with those of 
electrical discharge machining (EDM; a thermal sub-
tractive technique described in Chapter 5).
The cathode tool must have these four character-
istics: be machinable, be rigid (high Young’s modu-
lus), be a good conductor, and have good corrosion 
resistance. The three most common cathode mate-
rials used are copper, brass, and stainless steel. 
The outside of the electrode is insulated to prevent 
machining actions on the sides. This makes the 
fabrication of these tools challenging. Because there 
is no contact between the tool and the work, the 
tool does not have to be harder than the work, as in 
traditional machining methods. Hence, this is one 
of  the few ways to machine very hard material; 
another is spark-discharge machining (see Chapter 5).
The advantages of ECM are that it has relatively 
low running costs, as there is little scrap, no tool 
wear, and unskilled labor or automatic machine 
operation can be used. Because shear is not 
involved in this process, the surface of the work is, 
as in chemical milling, free from imperfections and 
burrs. It is also used in deburring already machined 
components. A very good surface finish is usu-
ally obtained. The disadvantages of ECM are that 
the machine is initially very expensive—several 
times the cost of an EDM machine; large systems 
may cost up to $600,000 (about the same as mul-
tiaxis milling machines). The tool is also difficult 
to make because its sides have to be insulated. The 
electrolyte has to be well contained, and the most 
common electrolyte, sodium chloride, corrodes the 
equipment, tool, and work. Another issue is that the 
electrochemical erosion reduces sharp surfaces and 
profiles so the method is not suited for making prod-
ucts with sharp edges. Also, irregular cavities may 
not be produced to the desired shape with accept-
able dimensional accuracy, and designs should 
make provisions for small taper for holes and cavi-
ties to be machined. Overall, the technique is best 
suited for mass production of high-precision, small, 
and complex shapes in hard-to-machine materials 
(accuracy better than 10 µm).37 To date, ECM has 
found its widest acceptance in the aircraft, auto-
motive, and business machine industries. In the 
aircraft industry, ECM is used extensively for shap-
ing turbine blades. In the automotive industry, the 
technique is used to make connecting rods, pistons, 
and fuel-injection nozzles. Some example products 
are shown in Figure 4.12.
The fact that metal removal in ECM is not achieved 
by mechanical shearing (as in mechanical machin-
ing) or by melting and vaporization of the metal (as 
in EDM or laser machining; see Chapter 5) means 
that, as with chemical machining, no thermal dam-
age occurs and no residual stresses are produced on 
the worked surface. For this reason, ECM is often 
selected for highly stressed or fatigue-sensitive appli-
cations in the aerospace industries.
Pulsed electrochemical machining (PECM) is a 
refinement of ECM, where current pulses are used 
instead of DC currents. This improves fatigue life 
and eliminates the recast layer left on die and mold 
surfaces by EDM (see Chapter 5).
Sometimes, chemical and electrochemical removal 
machining are in competition. Chemical machining 
might be preferred when very large work pieces have 
to be machined because of the large currents involved 
in ECM, and also for ultrasmall parts, where the elec-
tric connection causes problems for ECM.
Typical ECM service providers are Köppern 
(http://www.koeppern.com/en_ecm_set.htm) and 
Raycon/AMCHEM (Ann Arbor, MI). A handbook 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   227

[Page 228]
covering ECM is the Non-Traditional Machining 
Handbook by Carl Sommer.38
Electrochemical Micromachining or 
Microelectrochemical Machining
Introduction The application of ECM in thin film 
processing and in the fabrication of microstruc-
tures is referred to as electrochemical micromachining 
(EMM) or microelectrochemical machining (µ-ECM).39 
Different from ECM, the cathode does not neces-
sarily have the shape of the contour desired in the 
anode work piece. The 3D shaping in EMM may 
involve maskless or through-mask material removal, 
and we will examine examples of both approaches. 
The tool may also be connected to a CNC machine 
to produce even more complex shapes with a single 
tool as illustrated in Figure 4.13.
In conventional ECM, the gap between cathode 
tool and anode work piece is typically about 150 µm; 
in µ-ECM, the gap is closer to 15–20 µm, and fea-
ture sizes change from 150–200 µm to 15–20 µm as 
we move from the ECM to the µ-ECM domain. The 
major challenge in moving from the conventional 
ECM to the µ-ECM domain is to control the size 
of the reaction region. Methods to accomplish this 
include:
 
1. Reduce the size of electrodes—µ-EDM is used.
 
2. Shield the electrode—for stray currents.
 
3. Gap control strategies.
 
4. Use ultrashort-pulsed voltages having time 
duration in the ranges of nanoseconds.
228   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.12 Typical parts made by electrochemical machining. (a) Turbine blade made of a nickel alloy, 360 HB. (From 
Metal handbook, 9th ed., vol. 3. Materials Park, OH: ASM International, 1980, p. 849). (b) Thin slots on a 4340-steel roller-
bearing cage. (c) Integral airfoils on a compressor disk. (d) Because of the low forces on the work piece, ECM can be used to 
make holes at very large angle to a surface; in the example, we show turbine nozzle holes (http://www.barber-nichols.com).
FIGURE 4.13 The ECM microcathode is connected to a CNC 
machine to produce more complex shapes with a single tool.

[Page 229]
With EMM, most metals, alloys, and conduct-
ing ceramics of interest in the microelectronics and 
MEMS/NEMS industry can be anodically dissolved 
in a variety of neutral salt electrolytes, such as 
sodium nitrate, sulfate, or chloride. The dissolved 
metal ions  form hydroxide precipitates in these 
 electrolytes and remain suspended in solution so 
they may easily be filtered out. The latter minimizes 
safety problems and waste disposal. With hydro-
gen evolution generally as the main cathodic reac-
tion, metal plating on the cathode is avoided. EMM 
is currently receiving considerable attention in the 
electronics and other high-technology industries, 
particularly as an alternative, “greener” method of 
processing metallic parts.39 Compared with chemi-
cal etching, the EMM process offers better control, 
less aggressive chemicals, and thus minimizes safety 
and environmental concerns.39
Electrochemical Jet-Etching and Laser-Assisted 
Electrochemical Jet-Etching Thin film patterning 
by maskless EMM may be accomplished by highly 
localized material removal induced by the impinge-
ment of a fine electrolytic jet emanating from a 
small nozzle.39 Investigation of jet EMM at IBM 
demonstrated that neutral salt solutions can be 
effectively used for high-speed micromachining of 
many metals and alloys. An example of such an 
investigation, using a nozzle diameter of 200 µm 
and a 5 M sodium nitrate solution, is shown in 
Figure 4.14. Through-slots were micromachined in 
a 50-µm-thick stainless steel foil to create the IBM 
logo, which demonstrates the feasibility of using an 
electrolytic jet for generating complicated patterns 
in metallic foils and substrates.
An interesting variation on electrochemical jet 
etching is a combination of a fluid-impinging jet 
and laser illumination (see Figure 4.15). In laser-
enhanced electrochemical jet etching, properly 
chosen lasers, whose energy is not absorbed by the 
etching solution but is absorbed by the solid, cause 
local heating of the substrate (up to 150°C), result-
ing in highly increased etching. The jet is used as 
a light pipe for the laser and at the same time as a 
means for the local high rate of supply of ions. For 
stainless steel, etch rates of 10 µm/s have been dem-
onstrated using laser-enhanced electrochemical jet 
machining.
For more background on electrochemical jet 
etching and laser-enhanced jet etching, refer to 
Romankiw et al.27 and references therein and Datta 
et al.40 Several of these techniques offer tremendous 
opportunities for the development of alternative 
micromachining methods.
Water jet etching is a mechanical process, and as 
such it is covered in Chapter 6 on mechanical energy-
based removing. Water jet-guided laser etching 
without the electrochemical component is a purely 
thermal technique and is covered in Chapter 5. In 
this important method we will see that a fine water-
jet again guides the laser beam, provides cooling for 
the work piece, and expels the molten material.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   229
FIGURE 4.14 IBM logo made by jet EMM. Through-slots 
machined in a 50-μm-thick stainless sheet using a 5 M 
sodium nitrate electrolyte jet. The jet nozzle diameter is 
200 μm. (Courtesy of Datta, M. J., 1995. Fabrication of an 
array of precision nozzles by through-mask electrochemi-
cal micromachining. Electrochem Soc 142:3801–05.44)
FIGURE 4.15 Schematic representation of laser-enhanced 
electrochemical jet etching/plating showing the coinci-
dent laser beam and solution jet with the jet acting as the 
waveguide. (From Romankiw, L. T., and T. A. Palumbo. 
1987. Proceedings: symposium on electrodeposition 
technology, theory and practice. Pennington, NJ: The 
Electrochemical Society, Inc. With permission.27)

[Page 230]
Scanning Electrochemical Microscope The scan-
ning electrochemical microscope (SECM) is a scanned 
probe microscope (SPM) related to the familiar 
 scanning tunneling (STM) and atomic force micro-
scopes (AFM) (see Volume III, Chapter 6). All SPMs 
operate by scanning or “rastering” a small probe 
tip over the surface to be imaged. In SECM, imag-
ing occurs in an electrolyte solution with an elec-
trochemically active tip. In most cases, the SECM 
tip is an ultramicroelectrode (UME), and the tip 
signal is a Faradaic current from an electrochemi-
cal reaction at the surface. In some SECM experi-
ments, the tip is an ion-selective electrode (ISE). In 
Chapter 1, we saw how a scanning tunneling micro-
scope may induce electrochemical anodization 
reactions (an oxidation) on surfaces such as Si and 
GaAs. An SECM can also be used for local etching 
and deposition with high resolution in the x, y, and 
z dimensions, basically forming a high-resolution 
ECM setup (Figure 4.16).
Metal and semiconductor surfaces can be etched 
by the generation of a suitable etchant at the tip, 
for example Br2, which will etch holes in GaAs.41 In 
many cases, dissolution of semiconductors can be 
further enhanced by irradiation of the surface, creat-
ing holes in the valence band, which react with the 
lattice of the semiconductor. Besides electrochemi-
cal micromachining, SCEM is also used for  chemical 
microscopic imaging and the measurement of physi-
cochemical constants and coefficients.
In 2008, a review on the technology appeared in 
the Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry.42 For  an 
update on SECM on the Internet, visit http://www. 
msstate.edu/Dept/Chemistry/dow1/secm/secm.
html  and  http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/
chemistry/cim/research/electrochemistry/research/
secm.
Through-Mask 
Electrochemical 
Micromachining 
Through-mask electrochemical micromachining 
(EMM) involves selective metal dissolution from 
un protected areas of a one- or two-sided photoresist-
patterned work piece that is made the anode in an 
electrolytic cell.39,43 The technique is faster than 
chemical milling and provides better control on a 
micro- and macroscale of shape and surface texture 
of anodically dissolved materials. The performance 
of through-mask EMM depends largely on the suc-
cessful control of voltage distribution in the cell, 
hydrodynamics, and surface kinetics.43 In wet iso-
tropic chemical etching, the material is removed 
both vertically and laterally at the same rate, and 
the etch boundary usually recedes at a 45° angle 
relative to the surface. In EMM, however, the met-
al-removal rate in the lateral direction may be sig-
nificantly reduced through proper manipulation of 
mass transport and current distribution.39
Datta44 described a cost-effective, high-speed  pro-
cess for the fabrication of precision nozzles for ink-jet 
printer heads using through-mask EMM. The process 
involves fabrication of a series of rombezoidal nozzles 
in a metal foil and is applicable to a variety of mate-
rials, including high-strength,  corrosion-resistant 
materials such as conducting ceramics. For the 
230   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.16 (a) A schematic setup for SECM (http://www.msstate.edu/Dept/Chemistry/dow1/secm/secm.html) and 
(b) a typical commercial product (http://www.princetonappliedresearch.com/products/SurfaceScanning.cfm).

[Page 231]
fabrication of the example nozzles in Figure 4.17, a 
cleaned 25-µm-thick stainless steel foil was lami-
nated on both sides with 25-µm-thick dry photore-
sist. On one side, the photoresist was then exposed 
and developed, and the photoresist on the back 
remained as a protective insulating layer. The photo-
resist pattern was an array of circular openings 55 µm 
in diameter. Direct- and pulsed-voltage experiments 
were then performed with a neutral salt solution of 
sodium chloride and glycerol mixture as the electro-
lyte. Pulsating-voltage EMM was found to be more 
effective in providing dimensional etching unifor-
mity over the whole nozzle array. This result is based 
on the application of extremely high peak currents 
(voltages), which, in addition to giving directional-
ity, enables breakdown and elimination of inhibiting 
layers, thus facilitating activation of all the open-
ings at the same time. A desired nozzle angle of 27° 
was produced with an etch factor (ratio of straight-
through etch to undercut) of 2 (see Figure 4.17). This 
way, Datta demonstrated the feasibility of fabricating 
arrays of hundreds to thousands of precision nozzles 
with microsmooth surfaces in copper and stainless 
steel foils. Alternate ink-jet nozzle fabrication tech-
niques in silicon are shown in Figure 4.45.
Through-mask EMM has also been used to fabri-
cate controlled topographies on titanium to improve 
its biocompatibility.45 Arrays of very smooth, high-
precision cavities 30 µm in diameter were fabricated. 
Such structures affect attachment and growth of 
both soft and hard tissues. Bio compatibility has been 
linked to surface structures in the micro meter and 
nanometer range (see also Volume III, Chapter 4).46
Summary The driving force for metal dissolution 
reactions in EMM is derived from an external current; 
as a consequence, the electrolyte does not have to 
be as aggressive as in chemical etching. In fact, even 
neutral salt solutions are applicable. Metal-removal 
rates in EMM are determined by the machining cur-
rent, which can be very high if proper hydrodynamic 
conditions prevail within the electrochemical cell; 
hence EMM etch rates are generally orders of mag-
nitude higher than those in chemical etching. More 
importantly, through manipulation of mass trans-
port and current distribution, metal-removal rate in 
the lateral direction can be significantly influenced, 
thus providing better wall slope control in EMM. 
Other EMM benefits include minimized safety and 
environmental concerns. All the listed features make 
the EMM process a cost-effective, environmentally 
friendly processing technology. Newly emerging 
technologies such as advanced microelectronic 
packaging, microsensors, and MEMS/NEMS provide 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   231
FIGURE 4.17 (a) One-side through-mask EMM with angular sidewall. (b) SEM of nozzles fabricated in 25-µm-thick 
stainless steel. (Courtesy of Datta, M. J., 1995. Fabrication of an array of precision nozzles by through-mask electrochemi-
cal micromachining. Electrochem Soc 142:3801–05.44)

[Page 232]
ample opportunities for further investigation of 
EMM. With a better understanding of the principles 
involved in manipulating high-rate anodic dissolu-
tion of metals from narrow and deep cavities, EMM 
will become an increasingly important processing 
technology for micro- and nanofabrication.39
In Table 4.3 we compare electrochemical machin-
ing (ECM) with microelectrochemical machining 
(µ-ECM).
µ-ECM has some features in common with 
microelectrical discharge machining (µ-EDM), 
a  thermal technique covered in Chapter 5. In 
Table 5.2 µ-ECM is compared with µ-EDM.
Wet Bulk Micromachining
Introduction
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, 
wet bulk micromachining is chemical etching used 
to sculpt isotropic and anisotropic 3D microfeatures 
in single crystal semiconductor substrates. Removal 
of material from the surface of a crystalline mate-
rial (such as Si), immersed in an alkaline or acidic 
solution, occurs as a result of complicated chemical 
reactions between the surface atoms and the etchant 
molecules (see Figure 4.18a). The isotropy or anisot-
ropy of the etching refers to the orientation depen-
dency of the etch rate: for the isotropic case, there is 
no orientation dependence; for the anisotropic case, 
there is orientation dependence (see Figure 4.18b).
Wet bulk micromachining is a technique cham-
pioned in the IC industry and in micro- and nano-
machining. In this section, we are mostly concerned 
with lithography-based chemical etching for the 
IC industry and micro- and nanofabrication. In 
this application, lithography is used to create a 
mask through which an etchant can etch away the 
underlying crystalline substrate. A major difference 
between the IC and MEMS fields in this regard is 
in the aspect ratio (height-to-width ratio) of the fea-
tures crafted. In the IC industry, one deals mostly 
with very small, flat structures with aspect ratios of 
1–2 (see Figure 4.2). In the microfabrication field, 
structures typically are somewhat larger, and aspect 
ratios (height-to-width ratio) may be as high as 400. 
In wet bulk micromachining, features are sculpted 
in the bulk of materials such as silicon, quartz, 
SiC, GaAs, InP, and Ge by orientation-independent 
(isotropic) or orientation-dependent (anisotropic) 
wet etchants. The technology uses pools of liquid 
as tools,1 instead of the (dry) plasmas studied in 
232   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 4.3 Comparison of Electrochemical Machining (ECM) with Microelectrochemical 
Machining (μ-ECM)
Major Machining Characteristics
ECM
μ-ECM
Voltage
10–30 V
<10 V
Current
150–10,000 A
<1 A
Current density
20–200 A/cm2
75–100 A/cm2
Power supply, DC
Continuous/pulsed
Pulsed
Frequency
Hz–KHz range
KHz–MHz range
Electrolyte flow
10–60 m/s
<3 m/s
Electrolyte type
Salt solution
Natural salt or dilute acid/
alkaline solution
Electrolyte temperature
24–65 ºC
37–50 ºC
Electrolyte concentration
>20 g/L
<20 g/L
Size of the tool
Large to medium
Micro
Interelectrode gap
100–600 μm
5–50 μm
Operation
Maskless
Mask/maskless
Machining rate
0.2–10 mm/min
5 μm/min
Side gap
>20 μm
<10 μm
Accuracy
±0.1 mm
±0.02–0.1 mm
Surface finish
Good: 0.1–1.5 μm
Excellent: 0.05–0.4 μm
Problems caused by waste disposal/
toxicity
Low
Low to moderate

[Page 233]
Chapter 3. In Figure 4.19 we show some examples of 
high-aspect-ratio MEMS structures created using wet 
anisotropic etching of properly masked <100>- and 
<110>-oriented silicon wafers.
A vast majority of wet bulk micromachining 
work is based on single-crystal silicon and glass as 
a companion material [7740 Jena glass (Pyrex) is 
often used for packaging; see Volume III, Chapter 
4], mostly for mechanical-type sensors such as pres-
sure, acceleration, and gyros. There has been some 
work on quartz, crystalline Ge, SiC, and GaAs, and 
a minor amount on GaP and InP.
Wet bulk micromachining, together with surface 
micromachining (Chapter 7), form the two principal 
commercial Si micromachining tool sets used today. 
A third technique, micromolding—often from a 
lithography-defined master—also is becoming more 
commercially viable (Chapter 10).
The emphasis in this chapter is on the wet etch-
ing process itself. Other machining steps typically 
used in conjunction with wet bulk micromachining 
include many of the alternative subtractive tech-
niques described elsewhere in Part II, the additive 
processes described in Part III, and the bonding pro-
cesses that are part of the packaging processes dealt 
with in Volume III, Chapter 4.
A historical note on Si wet bulk micromachining, 
clarifying the importance of Si as a sensor material, 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   233
FIGURE 4.18 (a) Schematic illustration of the dissolution process during wet etching. (b) Wet etching can be isotropic 
or anisotropic. (Gonsalvez, M. 2003. Atomistic modelling of anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon. PhD diss., Helsinki 
University of Technology.47)
FIGURE 4.19 Examples of structures created using wet anisotropic etching in a Si <100> wafer and in a Si <110> wafer. 
The significance of boron doping will be clarified further below.

[Page 234]
heads this chapter (an expanded treatise on this sub-
ject can be found in Volume I, Chapter 1). We start 
the current section with a review of some empiri-
cal data on wet etching of single-crystal Si, discuss 
mask alignment with the correct crystallographic 
direction, review the various etchants and masking 
material approaches, and then launch into describ-
ing different etch stop techniques, which catapulted 
micromachining into an industrially accepted man-
ufacturing method. Subsequently, we review mod-
els explaining wet isotropic and anisotropic etching 
and pick up the discussion anew of anodic polish-
ing, photoetching, and formation of porous Si in 
HF solutions. Next comes a discussion of the tech-
nical issues encountered in bulk micromachining, 
such as IC incompatibility and extensive real-estate 
usage. We conclude with some example applications 
of wet bulk micromachining.
The first MEMS modeling software was developed 
around wet bulk micromachining processes and 
mechanical MEMS structures. Such programs are 
reviewed in Volume III, Chapter 6.
Empirical Data on Wet Etching 
of Single-Crystal Si
Isotropic and Anisotropic Etched 
Shapes in Single-Crystal Si
In Figure 4.20, we compare a wet isotropic etch 
(Figure 4.20a) with examples of anisotropic etches 
on masked flat pieces of single-crystal Si (Figure 
4.20b–e). In the anisotropic etching examples, a 
square (Figure 4.20b and c) and a rectangular pat-
tern (Figure 4.20d) are defined in an oxide mask with 
sides aligned along the family of <110> directions 
on a [100]-oriented silicon surface. For a refresher 
on the use of < >, [], and () (the Miller indices), see 
Volume I, Chapter 2 (Table 2.2). The square openings 
are precisely aligned (within 1° or 2°) with the [110] 
directions on the (100) wafer surface to obtain pits 
that conform exactly to the oxide mask rather than 
undercutting it. Most [100] silicon wafers have a main 
flat parallel to a [110] direction in the crystal, allow-
ing for a rough alignment of the mask (see Volume 
I, Figure 4.3). Etching with the square pattern results 
in a pit with well-defined {111} sidewalls (at angles 
of 54.74° to the surface) and a (100) bottom. Volume I, 
Equation  4.2, W
W
0
2
54 74
2
=
−
=
−
m
m
zcot
.
W
z
º
 
allows one to calculate the dimensions of the hole 
at the bottom of the pit. For a larger square opening 
in the mask, the point where the {111} sidewalls of 
the pit intersect lays deeper inside the crystal. If the 
oxide opening is wide enough, that is, W0 > √2 l (with 
l = 600 µm for a typical 6-in. wafer, this means W0 > 
849 µm), the {111} planes do not intersect within the 
wafer. The etched pit in this particular case extends 
all the way through the wafer, creating a small square 
opening on the bottom surface (see Volume I, Figure 
4.8). As shown in Figure 4.20b–d, no underetching 
of the etch mask is observed as a result of the perfect 
alignment of the concave oxide mask opening with 
the [110] direction. In Figure 4.20a, an undercutting 
isotropic etch (acidic) is shown. In the case of an 
anisotropic etch, misalignment results in pyramidal 
pits, but the mask will be severely undercut. A rect-
angular pattern aligned along the <110> directions 
on a <100> wafer leads to long V-shaped grooves (see 
Figures 4.20d and 4.21) or an open slit, depending 
on the width of the opening in the oxide mask.
Using a properly aligned mask (see Volume I, 
Chapter 4) on a [110] wafer, grooves with four 
234   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.20 Isotropic and anisotropic etched features in 
[100] and [110] wafers. (a) Isotropic etch. (b–e) Anisotropic 
etch. (a–d) [100]-oriented wafers. (e) [110]-oriented wafer.

[Page 235]
vertical and two slanted {111} planes result (see 
Figures 4.20e and 4.22a). Even a slight mask misori-
entation leads to all skewed sidewalls instead (Figure 
4.22b). Before the emergence of slanted {111} bot-
tom planes, the groove is defined by four vertical 
(111) planes and a horizontal (110) bottom (Figure 
4.19, bottom right), and between there is a competi-
tion between {110} and {100} bottom planes. Self-
stopping occurs when the tilted end {111} planes 
intersect at the bottom of the groove (Figure 4.22d). 
It is easy to etch very long, narrow grooves deeply 
into a [110] silicon wafer (Figure 4.23). However, it 
is impossible to etch a short, narrow groove deeply 
into it48 because the narrow dimension of the groove 
is quickly limited by slow- etching {111} planes that 
subtend an angle of 35.26° to the surface and cause 
etch termination. At a groove of length L = 1 mm on 
the top surface, etching will stop when it reaches a 
depth of 0.289 mm, that is, Dmax = L/2√3. For very 
long grooves, the tilted end planes are too far apart 
to intersect in practical cases, making the end effects 
negligible compared with the remaining trench-
shaped part of the groove. Tuckerman and Pease49 
demonstrated the use of such trenches as liquid 
cooling fins for integrated circuits. The set of long, 
narrow grooves in a <110> wafer shown in Figure 
4.23 can also be used as a test pattern to help in the 
alignment of the mask; final alignment is done with 
the groove that exhibits the most perfect long per-
pendicular walls (see also Figure 4.25).
The orientation of the wafer is of extreme impor-
tance, especially when machining surface structures 
by undercutting. Consider, for example, the forma-
tion of a bridge in Figure 4.24a.50 When using a (100) 
surface, a suspension bridge cannot form across 
the etched V-groove; two independent truncated 
V-grooves flanking a mesa structure result instead. 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   235
FIGURE 4.21 Long V-shaped grooves in a (100) Si wafer.
FIGURE 4.22 Anisotropic etching of [110] wafers. (a) 
Closely spaced grooves on correctly oriented (110) surface. 
(b) Closely spaced grooves on misoriented [110] wafer. (c) 
Orientations of the {111} planes looking down on a (110) 
wafer. (d) Shallow slanted (111) planes eventually form the 
bottom of the etched cavity.
FIGURE 4.23 Test pattern of U-grooves in a <110> wafer 
to help in the alignment of the mask; final alignment is 
done with the groove that exhibits the most perfect long 
perpendicular walls.

[Page 236]
To form a suspended bridge, the V-groove must be 
oriented away from the [110] direction. Contrast this 
with a (110) wafer where a microbridge crossing a 
V-groove with a 90° angle will be undercut. Convex 
corners will be undercut by etchant, allowing for-
mation of cantilevers as shown in Figure 4.24b. 
The diving board shown in Figure 4.20b forms by 
undercutting, starting at the convex corners. For 
more details, Table 4.4 is in the section on selection 
of [100]- or [110]-oriented silicon wafers, where we 
compare the main characteristics of etched features 
in [100]- and [110]-oriented wafers.
Alignment Patterns—Wagon-
Wheel Masking Patterns
We just learned how a mask pattern may be aligned 
with the wafer flat to obtain a specific desired aniso-
tropic etched feature. When alignment of a pattern 
along a certain crystallography direction is more 
critical, pre-etch alignment targets become useful 
to delineate the planes of interest because the wafer 
flats often are aligned to ±1° only. To find the proper 
alignment for the mask, a test pattern of closely 
spaced lines can be etched (see Figure 4.23). As dis-
cussed above, the groove with the best vertical walls 
determines the proper final mask orientation. Along 
this line, Ciarlo51 made a set of lines 3 mm long and 
8 µm wide, fanned out like spokes in a wagon wheel 
at angles 0.1° apart. This target was printed near 
the perimeter of the wafer and then etched 100 µm 
into the surface. Again, by evaluating the undercut 
in this target, the correct crystal direction could be 
determined. Alignment with better than 0.05° accu-
racy was accomplished this way.
The wagon-wheel pattern technique has also been 
used to obtain detailed experimental data on crystal 
orientation dependence of etch rates. For example, 
Seidel et al.52 used a wagon-wheel or star-shaped 
mask (e.g., made from CVD-Si3N4, SiH4, and NH3 
at 900°C), consisting of radially divergent segments 
with an angular separation of 1° (Figure 4.25a). By 
selectively masking the wafer surface material with 
material that is inert to the etchant (in this case, 
Si3N4) the removal of material is forced to occur ver-
tically at the nonmasked areas and laterally under the 
masking spokes (Figure 4.25b). Beautiful patterns 
are formed as a result of the sidewalls being etched at 
different rates (Figure 4.25c). The etch rate for each 
sidewall in the wheel (distance r) is obtained from 
the lateral underetch rate (distance w) from r = wsinθ 
(Figure 4.25b).
Seidel et al.52 found an etch pattern emerging on 
a <100>-oriented wafer covered with wagon-wheel 
mask as shown in Figure 4.26a. The blossom-like 
figure is the result of the total underetching of the 
passivation layer in the vicinity of the center of the 
wagon wheel, leaving an area of bare, exposed Si. 
The radial extension of the bare Si area depends on 
the crystal orientation of the individual segments, 
leading to a different amount of total underetching. 
The observation of these blossom-like patterns is 
used for qualitative guidance of etching rates only. 
To establish quantitative numbers for the lateral 
etch rates, the width, w, of the overhanging passi-
vation layer is measured with an optical line-width 
measurement system. Laser beam reflection is used 
to identify the crystal planes, and ellipsometry is 
used to monitor the etching rate of the mask itself. 
236   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
(110)
(110)
Si
Cantilever beam during etching:
Cantilever beam after etching:
(a)
(b)
Si
FIGURE 4.24 How to make a suspension bridge from a 
[100] Si wafer (a) and a diving board from a [110] Si wafer 
(b). (Barth, P. W., P. J. Shlichta, and J. B. Angel. 1985. Third 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actua-
tors. Philadelphia.50)

[Page 237]
Lateral etch rates determined in this way on <100>- 
and <110>-oriented wafers at 95°C in EDP (470 mL 
water, 1 L ethylene-diamine, 176 g pyrocatechol) 
and at 78°C in a 50% KOH solution are shown in 
Figure 4.27 (these two etchants are detailed further 
below). Etch rates shown are normal to the crystal 
surface and are conveniently described in a polar 
plot in which the distance from the origin to the 
polar plot surface (or curve in two dimensions) indi-
cates the etch rate for that particular direction. Note 
the deep minima at the {111} planes. It can also be 
seen that, in KOH, the peak etch rates are more pro-
nounced. A further difference is that with EDP the 
minimum at {111} planes is steeper than with KOH. 
For both EDP and KOH, the etch rate depends lin-
early on misalignment. All the above observations 
have important consequences for the interpretation 
of anisotropy of a given etch (see below). The dif-
ference between KOH and EDP etching behavior 
around the {111} minima has the direct practical 
consequence that it is more important for etching 
in EDP to align the crystallographic direction more 
precisely than in KOH.53
When determining etch rates without using 
underetching masks but using vertical etching of 
beveled silicon samples, results are different from 
working with masked silicon.54 The etch rates on 
open areas of beveled structures are much larger 
than in underetching experiments with masked 
silicon, and different crystal planes develop. Herr 
et al.54 conclude that crevice effects may play an 
important role in anisotropic etching. The model 
of Elwenspoek et al.,55,56 analyzed below, is the 
only model that predicts such a crevice effect. The 
authors explain why etching rates slow down and 
increase anisotropy when etchants are in a small 
restricted crevice area and are not refreshed fast 
enough.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   237
FIGURE 4.25 (a) Wagon-wheel masking pattern on silicon before etching. (b) Vertical etching (distance d) and lateral 
underetching (distance w). (c) Flower pattern generated during anisotropic etching. (Gonsalvez, M. 2003. Atomistic mod-
elling of anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon. PhD diss., Helsinki University of Technology.47)
(a)
Laser beam
SiO2(Si3N4)
Reﬂection
(b)
d
w
Si
FIGURE 4.26 (a) Etch pattern emerging on a wagon wheel-masked, <100>-oriented Si wafer after etching in an EDP 
solution. (b) Schematic cross-section of a silicon test chip covered with a wagon wheel-shaped masking pattern after 
etching. The measurement of w is used to construct polar diagrams of lateral underetch rates as shown in Figure 4.27. 
(From Seidel, H., L. Csepregi, A. Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 1990. Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon in alka-
Seidel, H., L. Csepregi, A. Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 1990. Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon in alka-
Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon in alka-
line solutions–part I: orientation dependence and behavior of passivation layers. J Electrochem Soc 137:3612–26. With 
permission.52)

[Page 238]
Selection of [100]- or [110]-
Oriented Silicon Wafers
In Table 4.4, we compare the main characteristics of 
etched features in [100]- and [110]-oriented wafers. 
This table may help in the decision which orienta-
tion to use for a specific microfabrication applica-
tion at hand.
From this table, it is obvious that for membrane-
based sensors, [100] wafers are preferred, but an 
understanding of the geometric considerations with 
[110] wafers is important as well to fully appreciate 
all the possible single-crystal silicon micromachined 
shapes and to better understand corner compensa-
tion schemes (see below). Moreover, processes for 
providing dielectric isolation require that the sili-
con be separated into discrete regions. To achieve 
a high component density with anisotropic etches 
on [100] wafers, the silicon must be made very thin 
because of the aspect ratio limitations as a result of 
the sloping walls (see above). With vertical sidewall 
etching in a [100] wafer, the etch mask is undercut 
in all directions to a distance approximately equal 
to the depth of the etching. Vertical etching in [110] 
surfaces relaxes the etching requirement dramati-
cally and enables more densely packed structures 
such as beam leads or image sensors. Kendall48,57 
describes and predicts a wide variety of applica-
tions for [110] wafers, such as fabrication of trench 
238   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.27 Lateral underetch rates as a function of orientation for (a) EDP (470 ml water, 1 l ED, 176 g pyrocatechol) at 
95°C and (b) KOH (50% solution) at 78°C. Left, <100>- and right, <110>-oriented Si wafers. (From Seidel, H., L. Csepregi, 
A. Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 1990. Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon in alkaline solutions–part I: orientation 
dependence and behavior of passivation layers. J Electrochem Soc 137:3612–26. With permission.52)

[Page 239]
capacitors, vertical multijunction solar cells, diffrac-
tion gratings, infrared interference filters, large area 
cathodes, and filters for bacteria.
Laser Spoiling
A laser can be used to melt or “spoil” the shallow 
{111} surfaces, making it possible to etch deep 
 vertical-walled holes through a [110]-oriented wafer 
as shown in Figure 4.28a.50,58,59 The absorbed energy 
of a neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet 
(Nd:YAG) laser beam causes a local melting or evap-
oration zone, enabling etchants to etch the shallow 
{111} planes in the line of sight of the laser. Etching 
proceeds until “unspoiled” (111) planes are encoun-
tered. Some interesting resulting possibilities, in -
cluding partially closed microchannels, are shown 
in Figure 4.28c.58,60 Note that with this method it is 
possible to use [111] wafers for micromachining. The 
light of the Nd:YAG laser is very well suited for this 
micromachining technique as a result of the 1.17 eV 
photon energy, just exceeding the bandgap energy 
of Si. Details on this laser machining process can be 
found, for example, in Alavi et al.60,61
Wet Isotropic and Anisotropic Etching
Introduction
Besides for the shaping of 3D microstructures, wet 
etching is used for cleaning, removing surface dam-
age, polishing, and characterizing structural and 
compositional features.7 The most important para-
meters in wet chemical etching are bias (undercut), 
tolerance, etch rate, anisotropy, selectivity, overetch, 
feature size control, and loading effects. These con-
trolling parameters are very similar to the param-
eters controlling dry chemical etching (see Chapter 3). 
The emphasis in this chapter is on wet etching of 
single-crystal Si. Wet chemical etching of Si pro-
vides a higher degree of selectivity than dry etching 
techniques. Wet etching is usually also faster: a few 
microns to tens of microns per minute for isotropic 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   239
(a)
35°
<110>-Si
{111}
Laser-light-
damaged
or ‘spoiled’ zone
Masking
layer
Laser light
(b)
70.53°
(c)
35.25°
54.74°
70.53°
FIGURE 4.28 Laser/KOH machining. (a) Holes through a (110) Si wafer created by laser spoiling and subsequent KOH 
etching. The two sets of (111) planes making an angle of 70° are the vertical walls of the hole. The (111) planes making 
a 35.26° angle with the surface tend to limit the depth of the hole, but laser spoiling enables one to etch all the way 
through the wafer. (b) After laser spoiling, the line-of-sight (111) planes are spoiled, and etching proceeds until unspoiled 
(111) planes are reached. (c) Some of the possible features rendered by laser spoiling. (From Schumacher, A., H.-J. Wagner, 
and M. Alavi. 1994. Mit Laser und Kalilauge. Technische Rundschau 86:20–23. With permission.58)
TABLE 4.4 Matrix for Optimal Selection of Wafer Type
[100] Orientation
[110] Orientation
Inward sloping walls (54.74°)
Vertical {111} walls
The sloping walls cause a lot of real estate loss
Narrow trenches with high-aspect ratio are possible
Flat bottom parallel to surface is ideal for membrane 
fabrication
Multifaceted cavity bottom ({110} and {100} planes) makes for 
a poor diaphragm
Bridges perpendicular to a V-groove bound by (111) 
planes cannot be underetched
Bridges perpendicular to a V-groove bound by (111) planes 
can be undercut
Shape and orientation of diaphragms convenient and 
simple to design
Shape and orientation of diaphragms awkward and more 
difficult to design
Diaphragm size, bounded by nonetching {111} planes, is 
relatively easy to control
Diaphragm size is difficult to control (the <100> edges are not 
defined by nonetching planes)

[Page 240]
etchants and about 1 µm/min for anisotropic wet 
etchants versus 0.1 µm/min in typical dry etching. 
More recently, however, rates of up to 6 µm/min 
were achieved using high-density plasmas for dry 
etching of Si (see Chapter 3).
Modification of the nature of the wet etchant and/
or operating temperature can also alter the selectiv-
ity to the silicon dopant concentration and type and, 
especially when using alkaline etchants, to crystal-
lographic orientation. Etching proceeds by reactant 
transport to the surface (1), surface reaction (2), and 
reaction product transport away from the surface 
(3) (see Figure 4.29). If (1) or (3) is rate determin-
ing, etching is diffusion limited, and etching is con-
trolled by the hydrodynamics of the system; thus, 
the process may be enhanced by stirring. Mass trans-
port-determined etching, being isotropic, gives rise 
to rounded features. This also means that the sur-
face reactions (2) are fast and that the etch rate is not 
sensitive to the nature of the surface, e.g., its crys-
tallographic orientation or morphology. Diffusion-
limited processes have lower activation energies 
(in the order of a few kilocalories per mole) than 
reaction rate-controlled processes and therefore are 
relatively insensitive to temperature variations. If a 
surface reaction (2) is the slowest step and thus con-
stitutes the rate-determining step, etching is reaction 
rate limited and depends strongly on the tempera-
ture, the crystallographic orientation, and/or mor-
phology of the etching material, as well as solution 
composition. In other words, with surface kinetics 
important the etch rate is very likely to be sensitive 
to surface orientation. In general, reaction rate limi-
tation is preferred because it is easier to reproduce 
a temperature setting than a stirring rate. The best 
generic etching apparatus has both a good tempera-
ture controller and a reliable stirring facility.62,63
Preferential or selective etching (also structural etch-
ing) is a type of etching that is usually isotropic but 
exhibits some anisotropy.64 These etchants are used 
to produce a difference in etch rate between differ-
ent materials or between compositional or structural 
variations of the same material on the same crystal 
plane. These types of etches are often the fastest and 
simplest techniques to delineate electrical junctions 
and to evaluate the structural perfection of a single 
crystal in terms of, for example, slip and stacking 
faults. The artifacts introduced by the defects etch 
into small pits of characteristic shape. Most of the 
etchants used for this purpose are acids with an oxi-
dizing additive.65–69
Isotropic Etching
Usage of Isotropic Etchants When etching silicon 
with aggressive acidic etchants, rounded isotropic 
patterns form. The method is widely used for: 
 
1. Removal of work-damaged surfaces
 
2. Rounding of sharp anisotropically etched cor-
ners (to avoid stress concentration)
 
3. Removing of roughness after dry or anisotropic 
etching
 
4. Creating structures or planar surfaces in single-
crystal slices (thinning)
 
5. Patterning single-crystal, polycrystalline, or 
amorphous films
 
6. Delineation of electrical junctions and defect 
evaluation (with preferential isotropic etchants)
For isotropic etching of silicon, the most com-
monly used etchants are mixtures of nitric acid 
(HNO3) and hydrofluoric acids* (HF). In the case of 
HNO3, water can be used as a diluent, but acetic acid 
(CH3COOH) is preferred because it prevents the dis-
sociation of the nitric acid better and thus preserves 
the oxidizing power of HNO3, which depends on 
the undissociated nitric acid species for a wide range 
of dilution.4 The etchant is called the HNA system; 
we will return to this etch system below.
* Be careful when working with HF; it is deceptive because it looks 
like water, and even when not a strong acid, it penetrates the skin 
(adsorption) and slowly attacks bones.
240   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
1
1
2
2
3
3
Reactant transport to surface
Selective and controlled reaction of etchant
with the ﬁlm to be etched
Transport of by-products away from surface
FIGURE 4.29 Wet etching processes.

[Page 241]
Simplified Reaction Scheme In acidic media, the 
Si etching process involves hole injection into the Si 
valence band by an oxidant, an electrical field, or 
photons. Nitric acid in the HNA system acts as an 
oxidant; other oxidants such as H2O2 and Br2 also 
work.70 The holes attack the covalently bonded Si, 
oxidizing the material, followed by a reaction of the 
oxidized Si fragments with OH– and subsequent 
dissolution of the silicon oxidation products in 
HF. It was Kooij et al.71 who, from electro chemical 
measurements on the Si/HF/HNO3 system, con-
cluded that the holes, in the absence of photons 
and an applied field, are introduced by HNO3:
 
HNO3 + H2O + HNO2 → 2HNO2 + 2OH− + 2h+ 
 
 
Reaction 4.1
The holes (h+) in Reaction 4.1 are generated in 
an autocatalytic process; HNO2 generated in the 
above reaction re-enters into the further reaction 
with HNO3 to produce more holes. With a reaction 
of this type, there is an induction period before 
the oxidation reaction takes off until a steady-state 
concentration of HNO2 has been reached. This 
induction period has been observed at low HNO3 
concentrations.70 After hole injection, OH− groups 
attach to the oxidized Si species to form SiO2, 
liberating hydrogen in the process:
 
Si4+ + 4OH− → SiO2 + H2 
Reaction 4.2
HF dissolves the SiO2 by forming the water-
 soluble H2SiF6. The overall reaction of HNA with Si 
is then:
 Si + HNO3 + 6HF → H2SiF6 (water-soluble) + 
 
HNO2 + H2O + H2 (bubbles) 
Reaction 4.3
The simplification in the above electrochemical 
component of the reaction scheme is that only holes 
are taken into account. In the actual Si acidic corro-
sion reaction, both holes and electrons are involved. 
The question of hole and/or electron participation in 
Si corrosion will be considered after the introduction 
below of the model for the Si/electrolyte interfacial 
energetics. We will learn from that model that the 
rate-determining step in acidic etching involves hole 
injection in the valence band, whereas in alkaline 
anisotropic etching, it involves electron injection in 
the conduction band by surface states. The reactivity 
of a hole injected in the valence band is significantly 
greater than that of an electron injected in the con-
duction band. The observation of isotropy in acidic 
etchants and anisotropy in alkaline etchants centers 
on this difference in reactivity.
Isotropic etching can be performed chemically, 
in very aggressive solutions containing HF and an 
oxidizing agent such as HNO3, or electrochemically, 
in much less aggressive fluoride-containing solu-
tions.  Both methods offer the possibility of form-
ing porous Si. Porous Si formation is easier to 
control using the electrochemical method. For 
electrochemical etching, an electrical contact must 
be made to the back side of the sample, which limits 
the possibilities of the process (see below).
Iso-Etch Curves By the early 1960s, the isotropic 
HNA silicon etch was well characterized. Schwartz 
and Robbins published a series of four very detailed 
papers on the topic between 1959 and 1976.3–6 Most 
of the material presented below is based on their 
work.
HNA etching results, represented in the form of 
iso-etch curves, for various weight percentages of the 
constituents are shown in Figure 4.30. For this work, 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   241
HNO  (69.51%)
3
90        80          70         60        50          40          30        20          10
40
40
50
50
60
60
70
70
80
80
90
90
20
10
10
20
30
30
7.6
38
190
Composition in weight %
Etch rates in µm/min
HF (49.23%)
H2O diluent 
HC2H3O2 diluent 
Diluent
FIGURE 4.30 Iso-etch curves. (Robbins, H., and B. 
Schwartz. 1960. Chemical etching of silicon-II: the system 
HF, HNO3, H2O, and HC2C3O2. J Electrochem Soc 107:108–11,4 
recalculated for one-sided Si etching and expressed in 
microns per minute.)

[Page 242]
normally available concentrated acids of 49.2 wt% 
HF and 69.5 wt% HNO3 are used. Water as diluent 
is indicated by dashed-line curves, whereas acetic 
acid is noted by solid-line curves. Acetic acid is less 
polar than water and helps prevent the dissociation 
of HNO3, thereby allowing the formation of more of 
the species directly responsible for the oxidation of 
Si. A typical formulation for HNA is 250 mL of  HF, 
500 mL of HNO3, and 800 mL of CH3COOH. When 
used at room temperature, this formulation results 
in an etch rate of about 4–20 µm/min, increasing 
with agitation.72 In Figure 4.30 we have recalculated 
the curves from Robbins and Schwartz4 to express 
the etch rate in microns per minute and divided the 
authors’ numbers by 2 as we are considering one-
sided etching only. The highest etch rate is observed 
around a weight ratio HF-HNO3 of 2:1 and is nearly 
100 times faster than anisotropic etch rates. Adding 
a diluent slows down the etching. From these curves, 
the following characteristics of the HNA system can 
be summarized:
 
1. At high HF and low HNO3 concentrations, 
the iso-etch curves describe lines of   constant 
HNO3 concentrations (parallel to the HF- diluent 
axis); consequently, the HNO3 concen tration 
controls the etch rate. Etching at those con-
centrations tends to be difficult to initiate 
and exhibits an uncertain induction period 
(see above). In addition, it results in relatively 
unstable silicon surfaces proceeding to slowly 
grow a layer of SiO2 over time. The etch is lim-
ited by the rate of oxidation; therefore, it tends 
to be orientation-dependent and affected by 
dopant concentration, defects, and catalysts 
(sodium nitrate is often used). In this regime, 
the temperature influence is more pronounced, 
and activation energies for the etching reaction 
of 10–20 kcal/mol have been measured.
 
2. At low HF and high HNO3 concentrations, 
iso-etch curves are lines parallel to the nitric-
diluent axis; that is, they are at constant HF 
composition. In this case, the etch rate is con-
trolled by the ability of HF to remove the SiO2 as 
it is formed. Etches in this regime are isotropic 
and truly polishing, producing a bright surface 
with anisotropies of 1% or less (favoring 
the <110> direction) when used on <100> 
wafers.73 An activation energy of 4 kcal/mol is 
indicative of the diffusion-limited character 
of the process; consequently, in this regime, 
temperature changes are less important.
 
3. In the region of maximal etch rate, both 
reagents play an important role. The addition 
of acetic acid, as opposed to the addition of 
water, does not reduce the oxidizing power 
of the nitric acid until a fairly large amount 
of diluent has been added. Therefore, the rate 
contours remain parallel with lines of constant 
nitric acid over a considerable range of added 
diluent.
 
4. In the region around the HF vertex, the surface 
reaction rate-controlled etch leads to rough, 
pitted Si surfaces and sharply peaked corners 
and edges. In moving toward the HNO3 vertex, 
the diffusion-controlled reaction results in the 
development of rounded corners and edges, 
and the rate of attack on (111) planes and (110) 
planes becomes identical in the polishing 
regime (anisotropy less than 1%; see point 2).
In Figure 4.31, we summarize how the topology 
of the Si surfaces depends strongly on the composi-
tion of the etch solution. Around the maximum etch 
rates the surfaces appear flat with rounded edges, and 
very slow etching solutions lead to rough surfaces.6
242   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
HF (49.25%)
H O
2
HNO   (69.51%)
3
  8 edges
Peaked corners
  8 edges
Squared corners
  8 edges
Rounded corners
FIGURE 4.31 Topology of etched Si surfaces. (From 
Schwartz, B., and H. Robbins. 1976. Chemical etch-
ing of silicon-IV: etching technology. J Electrochem Soc 
123:1903–9. With permission.6)

[Page 243]
Arrhenius Plot for Isotropic Etching Schwartz and 
Robbins5 studied the effect of temperature on the reac-
tion rate in the HNA system in detail. An Arrhenius 
plot for etching silicon in 45% HNO3, 20% HF, and 
35% HC2H3O2, culled from their work, is shown in 
Figure 4.32. Increasing the temperature increases 
the reaction rate. The graph shows two straight-line 
segments, indicating higher activation energy at less 
than 30°C and a lower one above this temperature. 
In the low temperature range, etching is preferential, 
and the activation energy is associated with the oxi-
dation reaction. At higher temperatures, the etching 
leads to smooth surfaces, and the activation energy 
is lower and associated with diffusion-limited dis-
solution of the oxide.5
Loading Effects in Isotropic Etching Two HNA 
solutions that etch silicon isotropically at a reason-
able rate (around 2 µm/min) and leave smooth walls 
[roughness in the order of 5 nm, as determined from 
scanning electron microscope (SEM) pictures] are 
shown in Table 4.5.74 The etch rates given in this 
table are averages because the etch rate depends on 
the mask opening size and structure density on the 
wafer, resulting from the diffusion-controlled nature 
of the etching process.
With isotropic etchants, the etchant moves down-
ward and outward from an opening in the mask, 
undercuts the mask, and enlarges the etched pit 
while deepening it (Figure 4.33). The resulting iso-
tropically etched features show more symmetry and 
rounding when agitation accompanies the etching 
(the process is diffusion limited). This agitation 
effect is illustrated in Figure 4.33. With agitation, 
the etched feature approaches a more ideal round 
cup; without agitation, the etched feature resembles 
a rounded box.75 However, the flatness of the bot-
tom of the rounded box generally is poor because 
the flatness is defined by agitation. Therefore, some-
times solutions are on purpose not stirred during 
etching because stirring enhances the etch rate in 
the direction of fluid flow, yielding badly shaped 
channels.
As we saw above, the etching of silicon in HF/
HNO3 solutions involves two processes: the oxi-
dation of the silicon surface and the subsequent 
removal of the oxidized silicon by the fluoride in the 
solution. In the case of isotropic etching, the rate of 
the latter process is determined by the transport of 
fluoride ions to the surface (diffusion limited). This 
can lead to loading effects as illustrated during the 
isotropic etch of a spiral in Figure 4.34a.
We observe that the channels on the rim of the 
spiral have a larger diameter than the channels 
in the middle of the spiral. This is because on the 
rim of the spiral there is no silicon that etches and 
consumes fluoride ions so the ions above the mask 
material next to the outermost channels can diffuse 
to these channels. This leads to nonuniformities in 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   243
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
1000/T (K–1)
200
100
80
40
20
10
8
4
2
50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15
Temperature (ºC)
45% HNO3, 20% HF, 35% HC2H3O2
Reaction rate (µm/min)
Reaction kinetics
diﬀusion dominated-
smooth surface
Reaction kinetics
diﬀusion dominated-
etching is
preferential
FIGURE 4.32 Etching an Arrhenius plot. Temperature 
dependence of the etch rate of Si in HF:HNO3:CH3:COOH 
(1:4:3). (From Schwartz, B., and H. Robbins. 1961. Chemical 
etching of silicon-III: a temperature study in the acid sys-
tem. J Electrochem Soc 108:365–72. With permission.5)
TABLE 4.5 Compositions of Two Typical Isotropic HNA 
Solutions
Vol % HF 
(50%)
Vol % HNO3 
(69%)
Vol % 
Water
Etch Rate 
(µm/min)
Sol 1
11
22
67
3
Sol 2
5
15
80
2
Source: Tjerkstra, R. W. 1999. Isotropic etching of silicon in fluoride 
containing solutions as a tool for micromachining. PhD 
diss., Univer sity of Twente, Twente, the Netherlands.74

[Page 244]
the widths of the channels on the rim of the spiral. 
Stirring the solution during etching does not neces-
sarily help because, as we just saw, that enhances the 
etching in the direction of fluid flows, yielding badly 
shaped channels. In an attempt to solve the loading 
effect problem, the spiral may be surrounded with 
sacrificial channels with the same width and the 
same distance from each other as the channels in 
the spiral (“compensation structures”) as illustrated 
in Figure 4.34b. The etching of these extra structures 
takes away the extra fluoride that would otherwise 
cause the broadening of the outer channels. From 
work by Kuiken et al.,76 Tjerkstra74 concluded that 
for short etch times (etch times in the order of sec-
onds) the bulk concentration is reached at a distance 
of around 3(Dt)½, in which D is the diffusion coef-
ficient and t the time.
The enhanced etching of structures at the rim of 
the spiral in Figure 4.34 may also be a temperature 
effect. Etching is the result of an exothermic reac-
tion; thus, the temperature of the solution increases 
during etching. This causes the appearance of fluid 
flow, as shown in Figure 4.35. The channels at the 
rim of the spiral may get an extra supply of fresh 
solution and thus etch faster.
In Chapter 3 we encountered loading effects also 
when we discussed dry etching, where they are more 
prevalent because the etchant concentration is much 
lower in the gas phase.
Masking for Isotropic Silicon Etchants Acidic etch-
ants are very fast; for example, an etch rate for Si of 
244   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
F diﬀusion
F diﬀusion
-
-
F diﬀusion
-
Extra
Rim of spiral
Extra structures
3
Dt
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.34 Side view of anisotropically etched spiral, 
illustrating the loading effect. (a) The fluoride ions in the 
area next to the etching spiral can diffuse to the outer 
channels. These channels etch faster than the other chan-
nels because of the extra supply of fluoride. (b) To reduce 
this effect, extra structures are placed around the spiral 
that reduce the extra supply of fluoride. This results in a 
uniform channel width (Tjerkstra, R. W. 1999. Isotropic 
etching of silicon in fluoride containing solutions as a 
tool for micromachining. PhD diss., University of Twente, 
Twente, the Netherlands.74)
Extra F-
Extra F-
FIGURE 4.35 Enhanced etching caused by fluid flow result-
ing from the increased temperature of the etching solu-
tion. (Tjerkstra, R. W. 1999. Isotropic etching of silicon in 
fluoride containing solutions as a tool for micromachining. 
PhD diss., University of Twente, Twente, the Netherlands.74)
Isotropic etching with agitation
(a)
(b)
Isotropic etching without agitation
(c)
FIGURE 4.33 Isotropic etching of silicon with (a) and without (b) etchant solution agitation; (c) Examples of isotropic 
etching in Si. Left groove with agitation, right groove no agitation.

[Page 245]
up to 50 µmin–1 can be obtained with 66% HNO3 
and 34% HF (volumes of reagents in the normal 
concentrated form).64,77 Isotropic etchants are so 
aggressive that the activation barriers associated 
with etching the different Si planes are not differen-
tiated; all planes etch equally fast, making masking 
a real challenge.
Although SiO2 has an appreciable etch rate of 
300–800 Å/min in the HF:HNO3 system, thick lay-
ers of SiO2 are often used as a mask, especially for 
shallow etching, as the oxide is so easy to form and 
pattern. A mask of nonetching Au or Si3N4 is needed 
for deeper etching. Photoresists do not stand up to 
strong oxidizing agents such as HNO3, and neither 
does Al.
Silicon itself is soluble to a small extent in pure 
HF solutions; for a 48% HF, at 25°C a rate of 0.3 Å/
min was observed for n-type, 2-Ω-cm (111)-Si. It 
was established that Si dissolution in HF is not the 
result of oxidation by dissolved oxygen. Diluted HF 
etches silicon at a higher rate because the reaction 
in aqueous solutions proceeds by oxidation of Si 
by OH–  groups.78 A typically buffered HF (BHF) 
solution, also called buffered oxide etch, has been 
reported to etch Si at radiochemically measured 
rates of 0.23–0.45 Å/min, depending on doping type 
and dopant concentration.79 In BHF, HF is buffered 
with NH4F to control the pH value (−log[H+]) at 
constant level and to replenish the depletion of 
fluoride ions to maintain a stable etch performance. 
BHF is the preferred SiO2 etch:
 
SiO2 + 4HF + 2NH4F → (NH4)2 SiF6 + 2H2O
 
SiO2 + 3HF−
2 + H+ → SiF6
2+ + 2H2O 
Reaction 4.4
By reducing the dopant concentration (n or p) to 
less than 1017 atoms/cm3, the etch rate of Si in HNA 
is reduced by ~150.80 The doping dependence of the 
etch rate provides yet another means of patterning 
a Si surface (see next section). A summary of masks 
that can be used in acidic etching is presented in 
Table 4.6.
A simple way to detect the end-point for BHF* 
etching of a layer of SiO2 on Si is to monitor the wet-
ting properties of the surface. Whereas SiO2 wets, Si 
is hydrophobic.
Dopant Dependence of Silicon Isotropic Etch -
ants The isotropic etching process is fundamen-
tally a charge-transfer mechanism. With isotropic 
etching Si at open circuit, we will learn further 
below, the chemical etch may have both chemical 
and electrochemical components. In the latter case, 
mobile charge carriers are injected or extracted from 
the solid, making the reaction sensitive to an applied 
potential. This also explains the etch rate depen-
dence on dopant type and dopant concentration. 
Typical etch rates with an HNA system (1:3:8) for 
n- or p-type dopant concentrations more than 1018 
cm3 are 1–3 µm/min. As presented in the preceding 
section, a reduction of the etch rate by 150 times 
* HF is inert in contact with skin but attacks bone.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   245
TABLE 4.6 Masking Materials for Acidic Etchants 
Etchants
Masking
Piranha
(4:1, H2O2: H2SO4)
Buffered HF 
(5:1NH4F: conc.HF)
HNA
Thermal SiO2
0.1 μm/min
300–800 Å/min. Limited etch time, thick layers often 
are used because of ease of patterning 
CVD (450°C) SiO2
0.48 μm/min
0.44 μm/min
Corning 7740 glass
0.063 μ/min
1.9 μ/min
Photoresist
Attacks most 
organic films
OK for a short 
while
Resists do not stand up to strong oxidizing agents like 
HNO3 and are not used
Undoped Si 
polysilicon
Forms 30 Å of SiO2
0.23–0.45 Å/min
0.7–40 μm/min at RT [at a dopant concentration 
<1017 cm−3 (n or p)]
Black wax
Usable at room temperature
Au/Cr
OK
OK
OK
LPCVD
Si3N4
1 Å/min
Etch rate is 10–100 Å/min; preferred masking material
The many variables involved necessarily means that the given numbers are approximate only.

[Page 246]
is obtained in n- or p-type regions with a dopant 
concentration of 1017 cm–3 or smaller.81 This pre-
sumably is because of the lower mobile carrier 
concentration available to contribute to the charge 
transfer mechanisms. In any event, heavily doped sili-
con substrates with high conductivity can be etched 
more readily than lightly doped materials. Dopant-
dependent isotropic etching can also be exploited 
in an electro chemical setup as described in the next 
section. Although doping changes the chemical etch 
rate, attempts to exploit these differences for indus-
trial production have failed.81 This situation is differ-
ent in the case of electrochemical isotropic etching 
(see next section).
Preferential Etching A variety of additives to the 
HNA system, mainly oxidants, can be included to 
modify the etch rate, surface finish, or isotropy, 
rendering the etching baths preferential. It is clear 
that the effect of these additives will only show up 
in the reaction-controlled regime. Only additives 
that change the viscosity of the solution can mod-
ify the etch rate in the diffusion-limited regime, 
thereby changing the diffusion coefficient of the 
reactants.70,82 We will not review the effect of these 
additives any further; refer to Table 4.7 and the cited 
literature for more information.65–69
Problems Associated with Isotropic Etchants There 
are several problems associated with isotropic 
etching of Si. First, it is difficult to mask with high pre-
cision using a desirable and simple mask such as SiO2 
(etch rate is 2–3% of the silicon etch rate). Second, 
the etch rate is very agitation sensitive in addition to 
being temperature sensitive. This makes it difficult to 
control lateral and vertical geometries. Electrochemical 
isotropic etching (see below) and the development of 
anisotropic etchants in the late 1960s (see below) were 
able to overcome many of these problems.
A comprehensive review of isotropic etchants 
solutions can be found in Kern et al.,64 including a 
review of different techniques practiced in chemical 
etching such as immersion etching, spray etching, 
electrolytic etching, gas-phase etching, and molten 
salt etching (fusion techniques). Table 4.7 lists some 
isotropic and preferential etchants and their specific 
applications.
Electrochemical 
Isotropic 
Silicon 
Etch—First 
Example of an Etch Stop For the electrochemi-
cal etching of Si, holes are needed at the substrate 
surface. In p-type Si, these holes are automatically 
present in the material. In n-type Si or with intrinsic 
Si, holes can be generated by, for example, illumi-
nating the substrate with photons having energies 
larger than the bandgap (1.1 eV). The thus-created 
holes can be forced to the surface by applying a 
potential to an ohmic contact to the Si. In this case, 
a high-temperature or extremely aggressive chemi-
cal etching process is replaced by an electrochemical 
procedure using a much milder solution, thus allow-
ing even a simple photoresist mask to be used.64 In 
electrochemical acidic etching, with or without 
illumination of the corroding Si electrode, an elec-
trical power supply is used to drive the chemical 
reaction by supplying holes to the silicon surface 
[working electrode (W-EL), see Figure 4.36a]. A volt-
age is applied across the silicon wafer, and a counter 
electrode (C-EL, usually platinum) is arranged in 
the same etching solution. Oxidation is promoted 
by a positive bias applied to the silicon, causing an 
accumulation of holes in the silicon at the silicon/ 
electrolyte interface. Under this condition, oxida-
tion at the surface proceeds rapidly while the oxide 
is readily dissolved by the HF solution. No oxidant 
such as HNO3 is needed to supply the holes; excess 
electron-hole pairs are created by the electrical field 
at the surface and/or by optical excitation, thereby 
increasing the etch rate. This technique proved suc-
cessful in removing heavily doped layers, leaving 
behind the more lightly doped membranes in all 
possible dopant configurations: p on p+, p on n+, n 
on p+, and n on n+.87,88 This electrochemical etch-
stop technique is demonstrated in Figure 4.36b.89 
A 5% HF solution is used; the electrolyte cell is 
kept in the dark at room temperature; and the dis-
tance between the Si anode and the Pt cathode in 
the electrochemical cell is 1–5 cm. Instead of using 
HF, one can substitute NH4F (5 wt%) for the elec-
trochemical etching as described by Shengliang.90 
Shengliang reports a selectivity of n-type silicon to 
n+-type silicon (0.001 Ω cm) of 300 with the latter 
etchant. In Figure 4.36b, the current density versus 
applied voltage across the anode and cathode during 
246   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 247]
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   247
TABLE 4.7 Isotropic and Preferential Defect Etchants and Their Specific Applications
Etchant
Application/Material
Remark/Reference
HF 8 vol%, HNO3 75 vol%, and 
CH3COOH 17 vol%
n- and p-type Si, all planes, general 
etching
Planar etch; e.g., 5 μm/min at 25°C
1 part 49% HF, 
1 part (1.5M-CrO3) (by volume)
Delineation of defects on (111), (100), 
and (110) Si without agitation
Yang etch65
5 vol parts nitric acid (65%),
3 vol parts HF (48%),
3 vol parts acetic acid (96%),
0.06 parts bromine
Polishing etchant used to remove 
damage introduced during lapping 
So-called CP4 etchant; Heidenreich, US 
Patent 2619414
HF 48% 
SiO2
Etch rate is 20–2000 nm/min;
etch rate for Si is 0.3 Å/min for n-type 
2 Ω cm (111); etch rate for Al is 
5 nm/min 
HF:NH4F (buffered HF 28 ml HF, 170 ml 
H2O, 2113 g NH4F)
SiO2
Etch rate is 100–500 nm/min at 25°C
1HF, 3HNO3, 10 CH3COOH
Delineates defects in (111) silicon; 
etches p+ or n+ and stops at p− or n−
Dash etch83; p- and n-type Si at 
1300 Å/min in the [100] direction 
and 46 Å/min in the [111] direction 
at 25°C 
1HF, 1(5M-CrO3)
Delineates defects in (111); needs 
agitation; does not reveal etch pits on 
(100) well
Sirtl etch84
HF:H2O2
Titanium
880 nm/min
2HF,1(0.15M-K2Cr2O7)
Yields circular (100) Si dislocation etch 
pits; agitation reduces etch time
Secco etch69
60 ml HF, 30 ml HNO3, 30 ml (5M-CrO3), 
2 g Cu(NO3)2, 60 ml CH3COOH, 60 ml 
H2O
Delineates defects in (100) and (111) 
Si; requires agitation
Jenkins etch85
H2O2
Tungsten
20–100 nm/min
34 g KH2PO4, 13.4 g KOH, 33 g 
K3FE(CN)6 and H2O to make up 1 L
Tungsten
160 nm/min
1 ml HCl, 9 ml saturated CeSO4 
solution
Chromium
80 nm/min
1 ml HCl, 1 ml glycerine
Chromium
80 nm/min
2HF, 1(1M-CrO3)
Delineates defects in (100) Si without 
agitation; works well on resistivities 
0.6–15.0 Ω cm n- and p-types)
Schimmel etch86 
2HF, 1(1M-CrO3), 1.5 H2O
Works well on heavily doped (100) Si
Modified Schimmel
HF/KMnO4/CH3COOH
Epitaxial Si
3 ml HCl, 1 ml HNO3
Gold
25–50 μm/min
Aqua regia
4 g KI, 1 g I2, and 40 ml H2O
Gold
0.5–1 μm/min
H3PO4 Etchants
Si3N4
Etch rate is 5–10 nm/min
160–180°C
KOH + alcohols
Polysilicon
85°C
H2SO4/H2O2
Organic layers
>1000 nm/min
Acetone
Organic layers
>4000 nm/min
H3PO3/
HNO3/HC2H3O2
Aluminum
Etch rate is 660 nm/min
40–50°C
HNO3/BHF/water
Si and polysilicon
0.1 µm/min for single-crystal Si

[Page 248]
dissolution is plotted (I-V). The current density is 
related to the dissolution rate of silicon. It can be 
seen that p-type and heavily doped n-type materials 
can be dissolved at relatively low voltages, whereas 
n-type silicon with a lower doping level does not 
dissolve at the same low voltages. Experiments in 
this same setup with homogeneously doped silicon 
wafers show that n-type silicon of about 3 × 1018 
cm–3 (<0.01 Ω cm) completely dissolves in these 
etching conditions, whereas n-type silicon of donor 
concentrations lower than 2 × 1016 cm–3 (>0.3 Ω cm) 
barely dissolves.  For p-type silicon, dissolution is 
initiated when the acceptor concentration is higher 
than 5 × 1015 cm–3 (<3 Ω cm), and the dissolu-
tion rate further increases with increasing acceptor 
concentration.
For more precise electrochemical isotropic etch-
ing work, the two-electrode system from Figure 
4.36a is replaced with a three-electrode system and 
a potentiostat. The latter is an instrument used to 
control the potential of the semiconductor working 
electrode precisely with respect to a third electrode, 
the so-called reference electrode (REF) (for example, 
see Figure 4.46 for a three-electrode and potentio-
stat setup, and for more theoretical electrochemistry 
background see Volume I, Chapter 7). The  current I 
passing between the W-EL and the C-EL is recorded as 
a function of the potential. No current passes through 
the reference electrode. The potential voltage of the 
W-EL can be scanned over a given potential range at 
a certain rate (mV/s). A typical I-V curve, also called 
a cyclic voltammogram, for a p-type silicon sample 
in an HF solution is shown in Figure 4.37, where the 
reference electrode used is an Ag/AgCl electrode.
The shape of the curve shown here is determined 
by the speed at which reactions occur at the silicon 
surface, and the rate of transport of reacting par-
ticles. In general the I-V curve for a Si electrode in 
an HF solution can be divided into three ranges: the 
cathodic range, the porous range, and the electropol-
ishing range. In the cathodic range, i.e., the poten-
tial range negative to the open-circuit potential, the 
surface hole concentration in the Si electrode is low; 
therefore, no etching can take place. For p-type Si 
electrodes in the dark there is also no hydrogen evo-
lution for lack of electrons. If an n-type Si electrode 
were used, copious hydrogen evolution would be 
observed in this same voltage range because n-type 
electrodes have plenty of electrons in the conduc-
tion band. The porous range is the potential range 
248   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Ω cm p
0.010 Ω cm n
0.3 Ω cm n
(b)
Id
0.2
0.1
5
10
15
+η V
amp/cm2
(a)
N2
H2O
H2O
KOH
C-EL
W-EL
Water
Q
I
V
y
t
FIGURE 4.36 (a) Electrochemical etching apparatus. W-EL, working electrode (Si); C-EL, counter electrode (e.g., Pt); Q, 
heat supplied. (b) Current-voltage (I-V) curves in electrochemical etching of silicon of various doping. Etch rate depen-
dence on dopant concentration and dopant type for HF-anodic etching of Si. (From van Dijk, H. J. A., and J. de Jonge. 
1970. Preparation of thin silicon crystals by electrochemical thinning of epitaxially grown structures. J Electrochem Soc 
117:553–54. With permission.89)

[Page 249]
before the potential of the first current peak (Vp in 
Figure 4.37) where porous Si forms. During the for-
mation of porous Si, hydrogen gas is evolved, and 
the morphology of the porous Si depends, among 
other factors, on the doping density of the wafer, 
the HF concentration, and the current density. The 
potential range after the first current peak (Vp) is 
called the electropolishing range. Here, the current 
density exceeds the so-called critical current den-
sity, Ip, marked by the first peak in the I-V curve. The 
silicon etches, leaving behind a smooth (electropol-
ished) surface. Porous Si does not form in this range. 
The critical current density depends on the fluoride 
concentration in the electrolyte solution, the dop-
ant concentration in the semiconductor, the hydro-
dynamics of the system, and the temperature.75 For 
a given Si electrode, the critical current density is 
given as91:
 
I
Ac
e
p
1.5
E
kT
a
=
−
 
(4.1)
where the constant, A, is 3300 A cm−2 (wt% HF)−1.5, 
c is HF concentration, the activation energy Ea is 
0.345 eV, k is Boltzmann constant, and T is the tem-
perature. When the current density is lower than Ip, 
a porous layer is formed on the Si substrate.
Many researchers have investigated the electro-
chemical etching of silicon in HF solutions, and 
initially the following reaction mechanisms were 
suggested as9:
 
Si
2HF
2h
SiF
2H
2
+
+
+
+
+
→
 
Reaction 4.5
In this scenario, in the porous Si range, two holes 
are necessary to dissolve each silicon atom. Thus, it 
was assumed that the silicon dissolves as an Si(II) 
species, after which it is further oxidized by water 
or disproportionates to an Si(IV) and Si(0) species. 
One ends up with the soluble SiF6
2− complex [Si(IV)] 
and porous Si [Si(0)]. The porous Si deposited on 
the surface was assumed to be amorphous because 
it stemmed from the disproportionation reaction of 
SiF2. The hydrogen evolution in the porous Si range 
was believed to be caused by a reaction of the silicon 
subfluoride:
 
SiF
2H O
SiO
2HF
H
2
2
2
2
+
+
+
→
 
Reaction 4.6
However, porous Si was shown to be monocrystal-
line, and this theory had to be discarded.92,93 It was 
also discovered that the freshly etched Si surface is 
H-terminated, making the Si surface hydrophobic.94 
Current reaction mechanisms are generally based 
on the assumption that the presence of a fluoride ion 
close to the substrate surface causes the Si-Si back-
bonds to be polarized, thus facilitating the breaking 
of these bonds.95–97 The backbonds are broken one 
at a time, leaving an H-terminated surface and an 
SiHxFy compound that reacts with water and HF to 
form SiF6
2− and H2. The overall reaction is then:
 
Si
2H
h
Si(IV)
H2
+
+
+
+
+
2
→
 
Reaction 4.7
At pH < 3, fluoride is mainly present in the form 
of HF or HF−
2, so these components are also assumed 
to be involved in the reactions. It is generally 
assumed that the electropolishing of silicon takes 
place in two steps. In the first step an oxide layer 
is formed, and this oxide layer is subsequently dis-
solved by HF. Dissolution rates and thickness of the 
oxide layer have been studied using infrared98 and 
current-time measurements.96,99–102 The second peak 
in the I-V curve in Figure 4.37 is thought to mark 
a change from one type of oxide to another.103 The 
overall reaction of the dissolution of Si in the polish-
ing range is:
 
Si
2H O
h
SiO
H
2
2
+
+
→
+
4
4
+
+ 
Reaction 4.8
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   249
0                 1                 2                 3                 4                 5
200
100
Vp
V (V vs. Ag/AgCl)
i (mA/cm2)
ip
FIGURE 4.37 I-V curve of a p-type silicon wafer in a 5% 
HF solution. Resistivity of the wafer 0.01–0.018 Ωcm, scan 
rate 500 mV/s. (From Tjerkstra, R. W. 1999. Isotropic etch-
ing of silicon in fluoride containing solutions as a tool for 
micromachining. PhD diss., University of Twente, Twente, 
the Netherlands.74)

[Page 250]
 
SiO
6HF
SiF
2H O
2H
2
6
2–
2
+
+
+
+
→
 Reaction 4.9
For the dissolution of n-type silicon, holes have 
to be generated by illuminating the sample with 
photons having energy larger than the bandgap. If 
the photon flux is high enough, an I-V curve simi-
lar to that shown in Figure 4.37 can be obtained. 
If the photon flux is lower than the critical current 
density, porous Si forms and a potential- independent 
photocurrent is observed (see further below).
The acidic electrochemical technique has not 
been used much in micromachining and is primar-
ily used to polish surfaces. Because the etching rate 
increases with current density, high spots on the 
surface are more rapidly etched, and very smooth 
surfaces result. This method of isotropic electro-
chemical etching has some major advantages that 
could make it a more important micromachining 
tool in the future. Such advantages include very 
smooth etched surfaces (e.g., with an average rough-
ness Ra of 7 nm), room temperature and IC compat-
ible process, usage of simpler resist schemes because 
the process is much milder than etching in HNA, 
and etching can be controlled simply by switching 
a voltage on or off. We will pick up the discussion 
of anodic polishing, photoetching, and formation 
of porous Si in HF solutions after gathering more 
insight into various etching models.
Anisotropic Etching
Introduction Anisotropic etchants shape, also 
“machine,” desired structures in crystalline mate-
rials by etching much faster in one direction than 
another. When carried out properly, anisotropic 
etching results in geometric shapes bounded by 
the slowest etching and perfectly defined crystallo-
graphic planes. Anisotropic wet etching techniques, 
dating back to the 1960s at the Bell Laboratories, 
were developed mainly by trial and error. Figure 
4.38 shows the cross-section of a variety of shapes 
formed in single-crystal Si using anisotropic etch-
ing. The thinned membrane shown in Figure 4.38a 
with diffused resistors may be used for a piezoresis-
tive pressure sensor. In this application, the wafer 
is selectively thinned from a starting thickness of 
300–500 µm to form a diaphragm having a final 
thickness of 10–20 µm with precisely controlled lat-
eral dimensions and a thickness control of the order 
of 1 µm or better. A typical procedure involves the 
steps summarized in Table 4.8.53
The development of anisotropic etchants solved 
the lateral dimension control lacking in isotropic 
etchants. Lateral mask geometries on planar pho-
toengraved substrates can be controlled with an 
accuracy and reproducibility of 0.5 µm or better, 
and the anisotropic nature of the etchant allows this 
accuracy to be translated into control of the vertical 
250   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.38 Anisotropic wet etching in bulk Si. Membranes for (a) pressure sensors, (b) bridges for flow sensors, (c) can-
tilevers for accelerometers, and (d) via holes for pressure duct are shown.

[Page 251]
etch profile. Different etch stop techniques, needed 
to control the thickness of an active sensor compo-
nent (such as the membrane or cantilever structures 
in Figure 4.38), are available. The invention of etch 
stop techniques truly made the application of the 
bulk micromachined structures shown in Figure 
4.38 commercially manufacturable and viable.
Although anisotropic etchants solve problems of 
lateral control associated with isotropic etching, they 
are not problem-free. These etchants are slow—even 
in the fast etching <100> direction—with etch rates 
of about 1 µm/min or less. That means that etching 
through a wafer is a time-consuming process: to etch 
through a 300-µm-thick wafer, one needs 5 hours. 
They also must be run hot to achieve these etch 
rates (80–115°C), precluding many simple masking 
options. Like the isotropic etchants, their etch rates 
are temperature sensitive; however, they are not 
 particularly agitation sensitive, which is considered 
to be a major advantage.
A wide variety of etchants have been used for 
anisotropic etching of silicon, including alkaline 
aqueous solutions of KOH, NaOH, LiOH, CsOH, 
RbOH, NH4OH, and quaternary ammonium hydr-
oxides, with the possible addition of alcohol. 
Alkaline organics such as ethylene-diamine, cho-
line (trimethyl-2-hydroxyethyl ammonium hydrox-
ide), hydrazine, and sodium silicates with additives 
such as pyrocatechol and pyrazine are used as well. 
Etching of silicon is possible without the application 
of an external voltage and is dopant insensitive over 
several orders of magnitude; however, in a curious 
contradiction to its suggested chemical nature, it has 
been shown to be bias-dependent.104,105 This contra-
diction will be explained with the help of the etch-
ing models presented below.
Alcohols such as propanol and isopropanol 
butanol typically slow the attack on Si.106,107 The 
role of pyrocatechol108 is to speed up the etch rate 
through complexation or chelation of the reaction 
products. Additives such as pyrazine and quinone 
have been described as catalysts by some,109 but 
this is contested by others.110 The etch rate in 
anisotropic etching is reaction rate controlled and 
thus temperature-dependent. The etch rate for all 
planes increases with temperature, and the surface 
roughness decreases with increasing temperature; 
thus, etching at higher temperatures gives the best 
results. In practice, etch temperatures of 80–85°C are 
used to avoid solvent evaporation and temperature 
gradients in the solution.
Selected Anisotropic Etchant Systems
Overview In choosing an anisotropic wet etch-
ant, a variety of issues must be considered:
 
◾Ease of handling
 
◾Toxicity
 
◾Etch rate
 
◾Desired topology of the etched bottom surface
 
◾IC compatibility
 
◾Etch stop availability
 
◾Etch selectivity over other materials
 
◾Mask material and thickness of the mask
The principal characteristics of four different 
anisotropic etchants are listed in Table 4.9. The 
most commonly used are KOH10–23,52,110–118 and 
 ethylenediamine pyrocatechol + water (EDP)108,109,119; 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   251
TABLE 4.8 Summary of the Process Steps Required for 
Anisotropic Etching of a Membrane in Si
Process
Duration
Process 
Temperature (°C)
Oxidation
Variable (h)
900–1200
Spinning resist at 
5000 rpm
20–30 s
Room temperature
Prebake
10 min
90
Exposure
20 s
Room temperature
Develop
1 min
Room temperature
Postbake
20 min
120
Strippping of oxide
(BHF:1:7)
±10 min
Room temperature
Stripping resist
(acetone)
10–30 s
Room temperature
RCA1
(NH3 (25%)+ 
H2O+H2O2:1:5:1)
10 min
Boiling
RCA2
(HCl+H2O+ 
H2O2:1:6:1)
10 min
Boiling
HF-dip
(2% HF)
10 s
Room temperature
Anisotropic etch
From minutes 
up to 1 day
70–100
Source: Elwenspoek, M., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, and A. Prak. 
1994. Micromechanics. Report No. 122830. Twente, the 
Netherlands: University of Twente.53

[Page 252]
hydrazine-water is rarely used.120,121 Quaternary 
ammonium hydroxide solutions such as tetramethyl 
ammonium hydroxide-water (TMAHW) and tetra-
ethyl ammonium hydroxide-water (TEAHW) have 
become popular.122,123 Each has its advantages and 
problems. NaOH is not used much anymore.124
Potassium Hydroxide The simple KOH water 
system is the most popular Si anisotropic etchant. 
A KOH etch, in near-saturated solutions (1:1 in 
water by weight) at 80°C, produces a uniform 
and bright surface. Williams and Muller125 used 
50 wt% KOH at 80°C for a reported (100) etch rate 
of 1.4  µm/min. Nonuniformity of etch rate gets 
considerably worse at more than 80°C. An abun-
dance of bubbles are seen emerging from the Si 
wafer while etching in KOH. The etching selectiv-
ity between Si and SiO2 is not very good in KOH 
because it etches SiO2 too quickly. KOH is also 
incompatible with the IC fabrication process (e.g., 
aluminum bond pads are quickly attacked and 
damaged) and can cause blindness when it gets in 
contact with the eyes. The etch rate for low index 
planes is maximal at around 4 M (see Figure 4.39a 
and c from Peeters126 and Lambrechts et al.127) 
Herr54 found that the high-index crystal planes 
exhibit the highest etch rates for 6 M KOH and that 
for lower concentrations the etch bottoms disinte-
grate into microfacets. In 6 M KOH, the etch-rate 
order is (311) > (144) > (411) > (133) > (211) > (122). 
These authors could not correlate the particular 
etch rate sequence with the measured activation 
energies. This is in contrast to lower activation ener-
gies corresponding to higher etching rates for low 
index planes as shown further below in Figure 4.40. 
Their results obtained on large open-area structures 
differ significantly from previous ones obtained by 
underetching special mask patterns. The vertical 
etching rates obtained here are substantially higher 
than the underetching rates described elsewhere, 
and the etch rate sequence for different planes is 
also significantly different. These results suggest 
that crevice effects may play an important role in 
anisotropic etching.
To create vertical (100) faces, as shown in 
Volume I, Chapter 4 (Figure 4.10), in general only 
KOH works (not EDP or TMAHW), and it has to be 
carried out in high-selectivity conditions (low tem-
perature, low concentration: 25 wt% KOH, 60°C). 
Interestingly, high-concentration KOH (45 wt%) at 
higher temperatures (80°C) produces a smooth side-
wall, controllable and repeatable at an angle of 80°. 
EDP produces 45° angled planes, and TMAHW usu-
ally makes a 30° angle.129
252   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 4.9 Principal Characteristics of Four Different Anisotropic Etchants
Etchant/ Diluent/ 
Additives/ 
Temperature
Etch Stop
Etch Rate 
(100) μm/min
Etch Rate 
Ratio
Remarks
Mask (Etch Rate)
KOH (water) 85°C 44 
g/100 ml
B > 1020 cm−3 
reduces etch 
rate by 20
1.4
400 for (100)/
(111) and 600 
for (110)/(111)
IC incompatible, 
avoid in eyes, 
etches oxide fast, 
lots of H2 bubbles
Photoresist (shallow 
etch at room 
temperature); Si3N4 
(<1 nm/min) SiO2 
(28 Å/min)
Ethylenediamine 
pyrocatechol 
(water) 115°C
750 ml/120 g/240 ml
≥7 × 1019 cm−3 
reduces the 
etch rate by 50
1.25
35 for (100)/
(111) 
Toxic, ages fast, O2 
must be excluded, 
few H2 bubbles, 
silicates may 
precipitate
SiO2 (2–5 Å/min), Si3N4 
(1 Å/min), Ta, Au, 
Cr, Ag, Cu are not 
attacked, Al at a 
0.33 µm/min
Tetramethyl 
ammonium 
hydroxide (TMAH) 
(water) 90°C 
>4 × 1020 cm−3 
reduces etch 
rate by 40
1
From 12.5–50
(100)/(111) 
IC compatible, easy 
to handle, smooth 
surface finish, few 
studies
SiO2 etch rate is four 
orders of magnitude 
lower than (100)
LPCVD Si3N4
N2H4 (water, 
isopropyl alcohol) 
100°C 100 ml/100 ml
>1.5 × 1020 cm−3 
practically stops 
the etch
2.0
10
(100)/(111) 
Toxic and explosive, 
OK at 50% water 
SiO2 (<2 Å/min) and 
most metallic films; 
does not attack 
aluminum
Given the many possible variables, the data in the table are only typical examples.

[Page 253]
Besides KOH,129 other hydroxides have been used, 
including NaOH,104,124 CsOH,130 and NH4OH.130 
A major disadvantage of KOH is the presence of 
alkali ions, which are detrimental to the fabrica-
tion of sensitive electronic parts.
Ethylenediamine Pyrocatechol With ethylenedi-
amine pyrocatechol (EDP; sometimes referred to as 
EPW, for ethylenediamine, pyrocatechol, and water), 
a variety of masking materials (e.g., SiO2, Si3N4, Au, 
Cr, Cu, Ag, and Ta) can be used. EDP is less toxic 
than hydrazine (see below), no sodium or potassium 
contamination occurs, and the etch rate of SiO2 is 
much slower than with KOH. The ratio of etch rates 
of Si and SiO2 using EDP can be as large as 5000:1, 
corresponding to about 2 Å/min of SiO2 compared 
with 1 µm/min of Si, which is much larger than the 
ratio for Si to SiO2 in KOH, which is at the highest 
400:1.131 Importantly, the etch rate slows down at a 
lower boron concentration than with KOH. A typi-
cal fastest-to-slowest hierarchy of Si etch rates with 
EDP at 85°C according to Barth132 is (110) > (411) > 
(311) > (511) > (211) > (100) > (331) > (221) > (111). 
Petersen uses 750 ml of ethylenediamine, 120 g of 
pyrocatechol, and 100 ml of water. This cocktail, at 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   253
Aqueous KOH 80°C
KOH concentration [M]
2          3         4          5         6         7          8
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
Nonuniformity of etch rate [%]
Etch rate [µm/min]
Aqueous KOH 80°C
Surface roughness Ra [nm]
(a)
KOH concentration [M]
(b)
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(c)
0        10       20       30       40  weight % 60
KOH concentration
<100> Silicon etch rate
Molarity
2         4      6     8    10   12 mol/l 16
µm/h
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
R~ [H2O]4
R~ [H2O]4. [KOH]1/4
T = 72°C
FIGURE 4.39 Anisotropic etching of silicon. (a) Silicon (100) etch rate (line) and nonuniformity of etch rate (column) in 
KOH at 80°C as a function of KOH concentration. The etch rate for all low index planes is maximal at around 4 M. (b) 
Silicon (100) surface roughness (Ra) in aqueous KOH at 80°C as a function of concentration for a 1-hour etch time (thin 
line) and for an etch depth of 60 µm (thick line). (c) Silicon (100) etch rate as a function of KOH concentration at a tem-
perature of 72°C. (a and b from Peeters, E. 1994. Process development for 3D silicon microstructures, with application 
to mechanical sensor design. Ph.D. diss., Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium. With permission. c from Seidel, H., L. 
Csepregi, A. Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 1990. Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon in alkaline solutions–part I: 
orientation dependence and behavior of passivation layers. J Electrochem Soc 137:3612–26. With permission.126,52)
2.5     2.6     2.7      2.8     2.9     3.0      3.1 ×10    K    3.3
–3
–1
1/T
10–2
10–1
100
101
102 120  ºC 100  90     80   70     60     50       40      30
µm/h
E  = 0.33 eV
a
E  = 0.40 eV
a
E  = 0.52 eV
a
Temperature
Etch rate
<       >
110
<       >
100
<       >
111
FIGURE 4.40 Vertical etch rates as a function of tempera-
ture for different crystal orientations: (100), (110), and 
(111). Etch solution is EDP (133 ml H2O, 160 g pyrocatechol, 
6 g pyrazine, and 1 l ED). (From Seidel, H., L. Csepregi, A. 
Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 1990. Anisotropic etching 
of crystalline silicon in alkaline solutions–part I: orien-
tation dependence and behavior of passivation layers. 
J Electrochem Soc 137:3612–26. With permission.52)

[Page 254]
115°C, results in an etch rate of 0.75 µm/min, with 
an (100)/(111) etch-rate ratio of 35:1.75
Ethylenediamine in EDP reportedly causes aller-
gic respiratory sensitization, and pyrocatechol is 
described as a toxic corrosive. The material is also 
optically dense, making end-point detection harder, 
and it ages quickly; if the etchant reacts with oxy-
gen, the liquid turns a red-brown color, and it loses 
its useful properties. If cooled down after etching, 
precipitation of silicates in the solution will occur. 
Sometimes, precipitation during etching can happen, 
spoiling the results. When preparing the solution, 
the last ingredient added should be water because 
water addition causes the oxygen sensitivity. All the 
above make the etchant difficult to handle. 
In terms of etching and masking layers, amine 
gallates are similar to EDP but perhaps safer.133 
Amine gallate etchants are not used much but 
appear promising. They are composed of a mix-
ture of ethanolamine, gallic acid, water, pyrazine, 
hydrogen  peroxide, and a surfactant. Etch rates as 
high as 2.3 µm/min have been measured on a (100) 
Si plane, and etch stops at lower boron concentra-
tion than it takes to stop EDP have been observed 
(>3 × 1019 cm−3). Pyrazine and peroxide can be added 
to increase the etch rate, but they affect the surface 
roughness negatively.
Ammonium Hydroxide-Water and Tetramethyl 
Ammonium 
Hydroxide-Water Efforts continue 
to find anisotropic etchants that are more compat-
ible with complementary metal oxide semiconduc-
complementary metal oxide semiconduc-
semiconduc-
tor (CMOS) processing than alkali hydroxides and 
that are neither toxic nor harmful. Two examples 
are ammonium hydroxide-water (AHW) mix-
tures130 and tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide-
water (TMAHW) mixtures (Tabata et al.123 and 
Schnakenberg et al.130). Kern77 used AHW (9.7% in 
water) and achieved 0.11 µm/min etch rates on (100) 
Si at temperatures of 85–92°C. Schnakenberg et al.130 
reported their best AHW results with a 3.7  wt% 
solution at 75°C for  well-stirred etching baths. For 
the same solution, these authors demonstrated a 
boron-dependent etch stop at 1.3 × 1020 cm−3 with 
a selectivity of 1:8000 (see also under Etch-Stop 
Techniques, this chapter). Ammonia-based etchants 
have not become widely used for several reasons, 
including their slow etch rate, tendency to lead to 
rough surfaces (hillocks), and rapid evaporative 
losses.72 A TMAHW [(CH3)4NOH] solution, on the 
other hand, is one of the more useful wet etchants 
for silicon. TMAHW does not decompose at tem-
peratures less than 130°C, a very important feature 
from the viewpoint of production; it is nontoxic, 
not expensive, and can be handled easily. TMAHW 
solutions also exhibit excellent selectivity to silicon 
oxide and silicon nitride masks. The etchant is so 
selective for Si over SiO2 that it is advisable to remove 
the thin native oxide of Si in HF before attempting 
a TMAHW etch. The solution is often already present 
in the clean room because it is used in many positive 
photoresist  developers. At a solution temperature of 
90°C and 22 wt% TMAH, a maximum (100) silicon 
etch rate of 1.0 µm/min is observed, 1.4  µm/min 
for (110) planes [this is higher than those observed 
with EDP, AHW, hydrazine water, and tetraethyl 
ammonium hydroxide (TEA), but slower than 
those observed for KOH] and an anisotropy ratio, 
AR(100)/(111), of between 12.5 and 50.134 A disad-
vantage is that TMAHW occasionally results in the 
formation of pyramidical hillocks at the bottom of 
the etched cavity. From the viewpoint of fabricating 
various silicon sensors and actuators, a concentra-
tion greater than 22 wt% is preferable because lower 
 concentrations result in more pronounced rough-
ness on the etched surface. However, higher concen-
trations give a lower etch rate and lower etch ratio 
(100)/(111). Tabata135 also studied the etching char-
acteristics of pH-controlled TMAHW. To obtain a low 
aluminum etching rate of 0.01 µm/min, pH values 
less than 12 for 22 wt% TMAHW were required. At 
those pH values the Si (100) etching rate is 0.7 µm/ 
min. The aluminum etch rate can also be reduced 
by adding silicon powder to the etchant.136 The etch 
rate for TMAHW begins to slow down for boron 
doping levels above approximately 1 × 1019 cm−3 and 
decreases by a factor of 40 for 2 × 1020 cm–3.137
Hydrazine (H2N4) Etch rates with hydrazine-
 water mixtures are on the order of 2 µm/min, and 
similar masking materials can be used as with EDP.75 
The (100)/(111) etch ratios are lower than those for 
KOH or EDP. Hydrazine-water is very reducing and 
explosive at high hydrazine concentrations (rocket 
254   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 255]
fuel), is a suspected carcinogen, and is difficult to 
dispose so its use should be avoided for safety rea-
sons. However, a 50 wt% hydrazine-water solution 
is stable and is commonly used, and, according to 
Mehregany,121 excellent surface quality and sharply 
defined corners are obtained in Si. Also on the posi-
tive side, the etchant has a very low SiO2 etch rate 
and will not attack most metal masks except for Al, 
Cu, and Zn. According to Wise, on the other hand, 
Al does not etch in hydrazine either, but the etch 
produces rough Si surfaces.138
Arrhenius Plots for Anisotropic Etching A typical 
set of Arrhenius plots for <100>, <110>, and <111> 
silicon etching in an anisotropic etchant (e.g., EDP) 
is shown in Figure 4.34.52 It is seen that the tempera-
ture dependence of the etch rate is large and that the 
slope differs for the different planes, that is, (111) > 
(100) > (110). Lower activation energies in Arrhenius 
plots correspond to higher etch rates. The anisotropy 
ratio (AR) derived from this figure is:
 
AR
(hkl) etch rate
(hkl) etch rate
1
2
=
 
(4.2)
The AR is approximately 1 for isotropic etchants 
and can be as high as 400:200:1 for (110)/(100)/
(111) in 50 wt% KOH/H2O at 85°C. Generally, 
the activation energies of the etch rates of EDP are 
smaller than those of KOH. Price found that (111) 
planes always etch slowest, and the selectivity with 
respect to (100) in KOH etching can be greatly 
increased by adding isopropyl alcohol (IPA), a 
less polar diluent, used to saturate the solution.107 
The sequence for (100) and (110) etching rate can 
be reversed, for example, to 50:200:8 in 55 vol% 
ethylene/diamine/H2O (also at 85°C). The (110) Si 
plane etches eight times slower and the (111) eight 
times faster in KOH/H2O than in ED/H2O, whereas 
the (100) etches at the same rate.111 Working with 
alcohols and other organic additives often changes 
the relative etching rate of the different Si planes. 
Along this line, Seidel et al.52,110 found that the 
decrease in etch rate by adding isopropylalcohol 
to a KOH solution was 20% for the <100> planes 
but almost 90% for <110> planes. As a result of the 
much stronger decrease of the etch rate on a (110) 
surface, the etch ratio of (100)/(110) is reversed.
Misalignment will change the etch rate greatly; a 
1° misalignment on the [111] direction may increase 
the etch rate on (near) the (111) surface by 300%.139
Si Surface Roughness in Anisotropic  Etching Aniso
-tropic etchants frequently leave too rough a Si sur-
face behind, and a slight isotropic etch is used to 
“touch up” the surface. The average surface rough-
ness, Ra, of Si continuously decreases with increas-
ing KOH concentration as can be gleaned from 
Figure 4.39b. The silicon etch rate, R, as a function 
of KOH concentration is shown in Figure 4.39a and 
c.52 Because the difference in etch rates for different 
KOH concentrations is small, a highly concentrated 
KOH (e.g., 7 M) is preferred in obtaining a smooth 
surface on low index planes. Except at very high con-
centrations of KOH, the etched (100) plane becomes 
rougher the longer one etches. This is thought to be 
because of the development of hydrogen bubbles, 
which hinder the transport of fresh solution to the sil-
icon surface, causing “micromasking,” which results 
in hillock formation.72,140 Average roughness, Ra, is 
influenced strongly by fluid agitation. Stirring can 
reduce the Ra values more than an order of magni-
tude, probably caused by the more efficient removal 
of hydrogen bubbles from the etching surface when 
stirring.141 Ohwada et al.142 noted that the use of 
ultrasonic agitation essentially eliminated surface 
roughness in KOH etching. Baum et al.143 investi-
gated the surface finish of (100) Si in KOH etching 
with an atomic force microscope and confirmed 
that mild ultrasonic agitation improved the surface 
finish considerably. Hillock formation may also be 
suppressed by the addition of a suitable oxidizing 
agent that competes with hydrogen evolu tion, such 
as by adding ferricyanide or peroxydisulfate ions. 
Bressers et  al.144 report a drastic reduction in hil-
lock  formation when adding 18 mM K3Fe(CN)6 to 
a 4 M KOH solution at 70°C, and Klaassen et al.145 
accomplish the same by adding 5 g/L ammonium 
peroxydisulfate to a 5-wt% TMAHW solution. Baum 
et al.143 found that the inclusion in the KOH bath 
of oxygen and/or isopropanol results in root mean 
square roughness values smaller than 20 nm. The 
effectiveness of these additives has been related to 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   255

[Page 256]
changes of the contact angle between the liquid/gas/
etching interface.
A distinction must be made between macroscopic 
and microscopic roughness (Figure 4.41). Macroscopic 
roughness, also referred to as notching or pillowing, 
results when centers of exposed areas etch with a 
seemingly lower average speed compared with the 
borders of the areas; therefore, the corners between 
sidewalls and (100) ground planes are accentuated. 
Thus, membranes or double-sided clamped beams 
(microbridges) tend to be thinner close to the clamped 
edges than in the center of the structure. This differ-
ence can be as large as 1–2 µm, which is considerable 
if one is etching 10–20-µm-thick structures. Notching 
increases linearly with etch depth but decreases with 
higher concentrations of KOH. The microscopic 
smoothness of originally mirror-like polished wafers 
can also be degraded into microscopic roughness. It 
is this type of short-range roughness we referred to in 
discussing Figure 4.39b above. For more background 
on metrology techniques to measure surface rough-
ness, see Volume III, Chapter 6.
Masking for Anisotropic Etchants Etching through 
a whole wafer (400–600 µm) takes several hours 
(a typical wet anisotropic etch rate is 1.1 µm/min), 
definitely not a fast process. When using KOH, SiO2 
cannot be used as a masking material for features 
requiring that long an exposure to the etchants. The 
SiO2 etch rate as a function of KOH concentration 
at 60°C is shown in Figure 4.42. There is a distinct 
maximum at 35 wt% KOH of nearly 80 nm/h. The 
shape of this curve will be explained further below 
based on Seidel et al.’s etching model. Experiments 
have shown that even a 1.5-µm-thick oxide is not 
sufficient for the complete etching of a 380-µm-thick 
wafer (6 hours) because of pinholes in the oxide.128 
The etch rate of thermally grown SiO2 in KOH-H2O 
somewhat varies and apparently depends not only 
on the quality of the oxide but also on the etching 
container and the age of the etching solution, as 
well as other factors.48 The Si/SiO2 selectivity ratio 
at 80°C in 7 M KOH is 30 ± 5. This ratio increases 
with decreasing temperature; reducing the tempera-
ture from 80 to 60°C increases the selectivity ratio 
from 30 to 95 in 7 M KOH.57 Thermal oxides are 
under strong compressive stress because in the oxide 
layer one silicon atom takes nearly twice as much 
space as in single-crystalline Si (see also Volume I, 
Chapter 4). This might have severe consequences; for 
example, if the oxide mask is stripped on one side of 
the wafer, the wafer will bend. Atmospheric pressure 
chemical vapor-deposited (APCVD) SiO2 tends to 
exhibit pinholes and etches much faster than ther-
mal oxide. Annealing of APCVD oxide removes the 
pinholes, but the etch rate in KOH remains greater 
by a factor of 2–3 than that of thermal oxide. Low-
pressure chemical vapor-deposited (LPCVD) oxide 
is a mask material of comparable quality as thermal 
oxide. The etch rate of SiO2 in EDP is smaller by two 
orders of magnitude than in KOH.
For prolonged KOH etching, a high-density sili-
con nitride mask has to be deposited. An LPCVD 
nitride generally serves better for this purpose than 
256   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
"Notching" e ect
"Roughness" e ect
D
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.41 (a) Macroscopic roughness (notching effect) 
and (b) microscopic roughness on a Si membrane.
FIGURE 4.42 The SiO2 etch rate in nanometers per hour 
as a function of KOH concentration at 60°C. (From Seidel, 
H., L. Csepregi, A. Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 1990. 
Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon in alkaline solutions–
part I: orientation dependence and behavior of passivation 
layers. J Electrochem Soc 137:3612–26. With permission.52)

[Page 257]
less-dense plasma-deposited nitride.146 With an etch 
rate of less than 0.1 nm/min, a 400-Å layer of LPCVD 
nitride suffices to mask against KOH etchant. The 
etch selectivity Si/Si3N4 was found to be better than 
104 in 7 M KOH at 80°C. The nitride also acts as 
a good ion-diffusion barrier, protecting sensitive 
electronic parts. Nitride can easily be patterned 
with photoresist and etched in CF4/O2-based plasma 
or, in a more severe process, in H3PO4 at 180°C 
(10 nm/min).147 Nitride films are typically under a 
tensile stress of about 1 × 109 Pa. If, in the overall 
processing of the devices, nitride deposition does 
not pose a problem, KOH emerges as the preferen-
tial anisotropic wet etchant. For dopant-dependent 
etching, EDP is the better etchant and generally 
better suited for deep etching because its oxide etch 
rate is negligible (<5 Å/min).
Summarizing, oxide and nitride films mask for 
anisotropic etchants to varying degrees with both 
mask types being used. When these layers are used 
to terminate a Si etch in the [100] direction, a low 
etch rate of the mask layer allows overetching of sili-
con to compensate for wafer thickness variations. 
A KOH solution etches SiO2 at a relatively fast rate 
of 1.4–3 nm/min; therefore, Si3N4 or Au/Cr must 
be used as a mask against KOH for deep and long 
etching.
Back-Side Protection of Silicon Wafer during Etch-
ing In many cases it is necessary to protect the 
back of a wafer from an isotropic or anisotropic 
etchant. The back is either mechanically or chemi-
cally protected. In the mechanical method, the 
wafer is held in a holder, often made from Teflon®. 
The wafer is fixed between Teflon-coated O-rings 
that are carefully aligned to avoid mechanical stress 
in the wafer. In the chemical method, waxes or 
other organic coatings are spun onto the back of the 
wafer. Two wafers may also be glued back to back 
for faster processing.
Etch-Stop Techniques
Introduction
In many cases, it is desirable to stop etching in 
silicon when a certain cavity depth or a certain 
membrane thickness is reached. Nonuniformity 
of etched devices  resulting from nonunifor mity of 
the silicon wafer thickness can be high. Taper of 
double-polished wafers, for example, can be as high 
as 40 µm!127 Even with the best wafer quality, the 
wafer taper is still around 2 µm. The taper and 
variation in etch depth lead to intolerable thickness 
variations for many applications. High-resolution 
 silicon micromachining relies on the availabil-
ity of effective etch-stop layers. It is the existence 
of  impurity-based etch stops in silicon that has 
allowed micromachining to become a high-yield 
commercial production process. Etch-rate control 
typically requires monitoring and stabilization of 
the following parameters:
 
◾Etchant composition
 
◾Etchant aging
 
◾Stabilization with N2 sparging (especially with 
EDP and hydrazine)
 
◾Taking account of the total amount of material 
etched (loading effects)
 
◾Etchant temperature
 
◾Diffusion effects (constant stirring is required, 
especially for EDP)
 
◾Stirring also leads to a smoother surface 
through bubble removal
 
◾Trenching (also pillowing) and roughness 
decrease with increased stirring rate
 
◾Light may affect the etch rate (especially with 
n-type Si)
 
◾Surface preparation of the sample can have a 
big effect on etch rate (the native oxide retards 
etch start; a dip in dilute HF is recommended)
With a good temperature, etchant concentration, 
and stirring control, the variation in etch depth 
typically is 1% (see Figure 4.43).127 A good pretreat-
ment of the surface to be etched is a standard RCA 
clean (see Volume II, Chapter 1, Wafer Cleaning and 
Contaminants) combined with a 5% HF dip to remove 
the native oxide immediately before etching in KOH.
In the early days of micromachining, one of the 
following techniques was used to etch a Si struc-
ture anisotropically to a predetermined thickness. 
In the simplest mode, the etch time was monitored 
(in Table 4.9 we listed some etch rates for different 
etchants) or a bit more sophisticated; the infrared 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   257

[Page 258]
transmittance through the etching membrane was 
followed. For thin membranes, the etch stop can-
not be determined by a constant etch time method 
with sufficient precision. The spread in etch rates 
becomes critical if one etches membranes down to 
thicknesses of less than 20 µm; it is almost impos-
sible to etch structures down to less than 10 µm 
with a timing technique. In the V-groove technique, 
V-grooves with precise openings (see Volume I, 
Equation 4.2, W
W
zcot
.
W
z
m
m
0
2
54 74
2
=
−
=
−

) 
were used such that the V-groove stopped etching 
at the exact moment a desired membrane thickness 
was reached (see Figure 4.44).148
One can also design wider mask openings 
on the wafer’s edge so that the wafer is etched 
through at those sites at the moment the mem-
brane has reached the appropriate thickness. 
Although Nunn and Angell149 claimed that an 
accuracy of about 1  µm could be obtained using 
the V-groove method, none of the mentioned tech-
niques are found to be production worthy. Nowadays 
the above methods are almost completely replaced 
by etch-stop techniques based on a change in etch 
rate-dependent on doping level or the chemical 
nature of a stopping layer.
Boron Etch Stop
The most widely used etch-stop technique is based 
on the fact that anisotropic etchants, especially EDP, 
do not attack heavily boron-doped (p++) silicon lay-
ers. Selective p++ doping is typically implemented 
using gaseous or solid boron diffusion source with a 
mask (such as silicon dioxide). The maximum prac-
tical depth achievable is 15 µm. The boron etch-stop 
effect was first noticed by Greenwood in 1969.150 
He assumed that the presence of a p-n junction was 
responsible. In 1971 Bogh151 found that an impurity 
concentration of about 7 × 1019/cm−3 resulted in the 
etch rate of Si in EDP decreasing sharply (see also Table 
4.9) but without any requirement for a p-n junction. 
For KOH-based solutions, Price107 found a signifi-
cant reduction in etch rate for boron  concentrations 
greater than 5 × 1018 cm−3. The model by Seidel et al. 
(see below) provides an elegant explanation for the 
etch stop at high boron concentrations.
From the above, it follows that a simple boron dif-
fusion or implantation, introduced from the front 
of the wafer, can be used to create beams and dia-
phragms by etching from the back. A boron etch-
stop technique is illustrated in Figure 4.45A for the 
fabrication of a micromembrane nozzle.152 The SiO2 
mesa in Figure 4.45Ab leads to the desired boron p++ 
profile. The anisotropic etch from the back clears the 
258   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.43 Map of wafer thickness, membrane 
thickness, and etch depth. (From Lambrechts, M., and 
W. Sansen. 1992. Biosensors: microelectrochemical 
devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics Publishing. 
With permission.127)
(110)
(110)
(111) planes
Membrane
Wm
Wm
z
Si
(100)
SiO2
FIGURE 4.44 V-groove technique to monitor the thick-
ness of a membrane. At the precise moment the V-groove 
is developed, the membrane has reached the desired 
thickness.

[Page 259]
lightly doped p-type Si (Figure 4.45Ad). Stripping 
and reoxidation produce an orifice in the suspended 
membrane (Figure 4.45Ae). Two alternative ways of 
fabricating nozzles—one square and one circular—
are illustrated in Figure 4.45B. The method shown 
in Figure 4.45Ba uses silicon nitride as an etch-stop 
layer to etch a square nozzle. The side of the back-
side opening in the silicon nitride must be larger 
than 71% of the wafer thickness to etch all the 
way through the wafer (Volume I, Equation 4.2, 
W
W
zcot
.
W
z
m
m
0
2
54 74
2
=
−
=
−

). The approach 
shown in Figure 4.45Bb is again based on a p++ etch-
stop layer. The difference with the approach in Figure 
4.45A is that a uniform p++ doping profile is first estab-
lished here, and that layer  is subsequently etched 
into a circular pattern. Layers of p++ silicon with a 
thickness of 1–20 µm can easily be fabricated, and 
the boron etch stop is very effective; it is not critical 
when the operator takes the wafer out of the etchant. 
One important practical note is that the boron etch 
stop may become badly degraded in EDP solutions 
that were allowed to  react with atmospheric oxy-
gen. Because boron atoms are smaller than silicon, 
a highly doped, freely suspended membrane or dia-
phragm will be stretched; the boron-doped silicon is 
typically in tensile stress, and the microstructures are 
flat and do not buckle. Whereas doping with boron 
decreases the  lattice constant, doping with germa-
nium increases the lattice constant. A membrane 
doped with B and e still etches much more slowly 
than undoped silicon, and the stress in the layer is 
reduced. A stress-free, dislocation-free, and slow etch-
ing layer (±10 nm/min) is obtained at doping levels 
of 1020 cm–3 boron and 1021 cm–3 germanium.110,153
One major disadvantage of the boron etch-stop 
technique is that the extremely high boron concen-
trations are not compatible with standard CMOS 
or bipolar techniques, so they can only be used 
for microstructures without integrated electronics. 
Another limitation of this process is the fixed num-
ber and angles of (111) planes one can accommo-
date. The etch stop is less effective in KOH compared 
with EDP. Besides boron, other impurities have been 
tried for use in an etch stop in anisotropic etchants. 
Doping Si with germanium has hardly any influence 
on the etch rate of either the KOH or EDP solutions. 
At a doping level as high as 5 × 1021 cm–3, the etch 
rate is barely reduced by a factor of two.110
By burying the highly doped boron layer under 
an epitaxial layer of lighter doped Si, the prob-
lem of incompatibility with active circuitry can 
be avoided; ±1% thickness uniformity is possible 
with modern epilayer deposition equipment. A 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   259
Si
Si
Si
Si
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
(a) Oxidation
(b) Lithography and development
(c) Boron diﬀusion
(d) Anisotropic etching
(e) Stripping and reoxidation
Oriﬁce
Silicon frame
Silicon frame
Silicon nitride
Silicon 
nitride
Oriﬁce
membrane
p+
Si
(A)
(a)
(b)
{111}
{111}
1. Pattern mask
1. Pattern mask
3. Si3N4 deposition
     and etch
2. Anisotropic etch
2. Etch circle in p++
4. KOH etch and
nitride removal
p++
silicon
Resist
p++ silicon
(B)
Silicon
Silicon
FIGURE 4.45 (A) Illustration of the boron etch stop in the 
fabrication of a membrane nozzle. (From Brodie, I., and 
J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrication. New 
York: Plenum Press. With permission.152) (B) Two alternate 
methods to fabricate nozzles. (a) Etch stop is based on 
silicon nitride. (b) Etch stop is based on boron etch stop.

[Page 260]
widely used method of automatically measuring 
the epi-thickness is with IR instruments, espe-
cially Fourier transform infrared (see also epitaxy 
in Chapter 7).154
Electrochemical Etch Stop
For the fabrication of piezoresistive pressure sen-
sors, the doping concentration of the piezoresistor 
must be  kept smaller than 1 × 1019 cm–3 because 
the piezoresistive coefficients decrease considerably 
above this value, and reverse breakdown becomes 
an issue. Moreover, high boron levels compromise 
the quality of the crystal by introducing slip planes 
and tensile stress and prevent the incorporation of 
integrated electronics. As a result, a boron stop often 
cannot be used to produce well-controlled thin mem-
branes unless, as suggested above, the highly doped 
boron layer is buried underneath a lighter-doped Si 
epilayer. Alternatively, a second etch-stop method, an 
electrochemical technique, can be used. In this case, 
a lightly doped p-n junction is used as an etch stop 
by applying a bias between the wafer and a counter 
electrode in the etchant, a technique first proposed 
by Waggener in 1970.16 Other early work on electro-
chemical etch stops with anisotropic etchants such 
as KOH and EDP was performed by Palik et al.,155 
Jackson et al.,156 Faust and Palik,157 and Kim and 
Wise.158 In electrochemical anisotropic etching, a p-n 
junction is made, for example, by the epitaxial growth 
of an n-type layer  (phosphorus-doped, 1015 cm–3) on 
a p-type substrate (boron-doped, 30 Ω-cm). This p-n 
junction forms a large diode over the whole wafer. 
The wafer is usually mounted on an inert substrate, 
such as a sapphire plate, with an acid-resistant wax 
and is partly or wholly immersed in the solution. An 
ohmic contact to the n-type epilayer is connected to 
one pole of a voltage source, and the other pole of the 
voltage source is connected via a current meter to a 
counter electrode in the etching solution (see Figure 
4.46a). In this arrangement, the p-type substrate can 
be selectively etched away, and the etching stops at 
the p-n junction, leaving a membrane with a thick-
ness solely defined by the thickness of the epilayer. 
The incorporation of a third electrode (a reference 
electrode) in the three-terminal method, together 
with the use of a  potentiostat depicted in Figure 
4.46a, allows for a more precise determination of the 
silicon potential with respect to the solution than a 
two-terminal setup as we illustrated in Figure 4.36a.
At the Flade potential, marked with an arrow in 
Figure 4.46b, the oxide growth rate equals the oxide 
etch rate; a further increase of the potential results in 
a steep fall of the current as a result of complete passi-
vation of the silicon surface. At potentials positive of 
the Flade potential, all etching stops. At potentials 
260   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
I = 0
Potentiostat
ICE
n   epilayer
p   substrate
RE
Counter electrode
KOH
–1.6 –1.5 –1.4–1.3 –1.2 –1.1–1.0 –0.9 –0.8 –0.7 –0.6 –0.5–0.4
700.00
630.00
560.00
490.00
420.00
350.00
280.00
210.00
140.00
 70.00
   0.00
n-Si
p-Si
(b)
(a)
Current vs. applied potential
Voltage  (V)
Current (uR)
FIGURE 4.46 Electrochemical etch stop. (a) Electrochemi-
cal etching setup with potentiostatic control (three-
electrode system). Potentiostatic control, mainly used in 
research studies, enables better control of the potential 
as it is referenced now to a reference electrode such as an 
SCE. In industrial settings, electrochemical etching is often 
carried out in a simpler two-electrode system, that is, a Pt 
counter electrode and Si working electrode. (From Kloeck, 
B., S. D. Collins, N. F. de Rooij, and R. L. Smith. 1989. Study 
of electrochemical etch-stop for high-precision thickness 
control of silicon membranes. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 
36:663–69.159) (b) Cyclic voltammograms of n- and p-type 
silicon in an alkaline solution at 60°C. Flade potentials are 
indicated with an arrow.

[Page 261]
negative of the Flade potential, the current increases 
as the potential becomes more positive. This can 
be explained by the formation of an oxide etching 
faster than it forms; that is, the silicon is etched away. 
Whereas electrochemists like to talk about the Flade 
potential, physicists like to discuss matters in terms 
of the flat-band potential. The flat-band potential 
is the applied potential at which there are no more 
fields within the semiconductor; that is, the energy 
band diagram is flat throughout the semiconductor 
(see Volume I, Chapter 4). The passivating SiO2 layer 
is assumed to start growing as soon as the negative 
surface charge on the silicon electrode is cancelled 
by the externally applied positive bias, a bias corres-
ponding to the flat-band potential. At these poten-
tials, the formation of Si(OH)x complexes does not 
lead to further dissolution of silicon because two 
neighboring Si-OH HO-Si groups will react by split-
ting off water, leading to the formation of Si-O-Si 
bonds. As can be learned from Figure 4.46b, the 
value of the Flade potential depends on the dopant 
type. Consequently, if a wafer with both n- and 
p-type regions exposed to the electrolyte is held at a 
certain potential in the passive range for n-type and 
the active range for p-type Si, the p-type regions are 
etched away, whereas the n-type regions are retained. 
In  the case of the diode shown in Figure  4.46a, 
where, at the start of the experiment, only p-type Si 
is exposed to the electrolyte, a positive bias is applied 
to the n-type epilayer (Vn). This reverse biases the 
diode, and only a reverse bias current can flow. The 
potential of the p-type layer in this regime is negative 
to the flat-band potential, and active dissolution 
takes place. At the moment that the p-n junction 
is reached, a large anodic current can flow, and 
the applied positive potential passivates the n-type 
epilayer. Etching continues on the areas where the 
wafer is thicker until the membrane is reached there, 
too. The thickness of the Si membrane is thereby 
solely defined by the thickness of the epilayer; 
neither the etch uniformity nor the wafer taper will 
influence the result. A uniformity of better than 1% 
can be obtained on a 10-µm-thick membrane. The 
current versus time curve can be used to monitor 
the etching process; at first, the current is relatively 
low, limited by the reverse bias current of the diode. 
Then, as the p-n junction is reached, a larger anodic 
current can flow until all the p-type material is 
consumed and the current decreases again to a low 
plateau value. The plateau indicates that a current 
associated with a passivated n-type Si electrode has 
been reached. The  etch procedure can be stopped 
at the moment that the current plateau has been 
reached, and because the etch stop is basically one of 
anodic passivation, it is sometimes called an anodic 
oxidation etch stop. Registering an I versus V curve as 
in Figure 4.46b will establish an upper limit on the 
applied voltage, V,160 and such curves are used for 
in situ moni toring and controlling of the etch stop. 
A crude endpoint monitoring can be accomplished 
by the visual observation of cessation of hydrogen 
bubble formation accompanying silicon etching. 
Palik et al.161 presented a detailed characterization of 
Si membranes made by electrochemical etch stop.
Using the same anodic oxidation etch stop in a 
hydrazine-water solution at 90 ± 5°C and a simple 
two-terminal electrochemical cell, Hirata et al.162 
obtained a pressure sensitivity variation of less 
than 20% from wafer to wafer (pressure sensitiv-
ity is inversely proportional to the square of mem-
brane thickness; see Volume III, Chapter 8). A great 
advantage of this etch-stop technique is that it 
works with Si at low doping levels of the order of 
1016 cm–3. Because of the low doping levels, it is 
possible to fabricate structures with a very low, or 
controllable, intrinsic stress. Moreover, active elec-
tronics and piezomembranes can be built into the 
Si without problems. A disadvantage is that the back 
of the wafer with the aluminum ohmic contact has 
to be sealed hermetically from the etchant solution, 
which requires complex fixturing and manual wafer 
handling. The fabrication of a suitable etch holder 
is no trivial matter. The holder 1) must protect the 
epicontact from the etchant, 2) must provide a low-
resistance ohmic contact to the epilayer, and 3) must 
not introduce stress into wafers during etching.53,126 
Stress introduced by etch holders easily leads to 
diaphragm or wafer fracture and etchant seepage 
through to the episide.
Using a four-electrode electrochemical cell, con-
trolling the potentials of the epitaxial layer and the 
silicon wafer separately, as shown in Figure 4.47, can 
further improve the thickness control of the result-
ing membrane by directly controlling the p/n bias 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   261

[Page 262]
voltage. The potential required to passivate n-type 
Si can be measured using the three-electrode system 
in Figure 4.46a, but this system does not take into 
account the diode leakage. If the reverse leakage is too 
large, the potential of the n-type Si, Vn, will approach 
the potential of the p-type Si, Vp. If there is a large 
amount of reverse diode leakage, the p-type region 
may passivate before reaching the n-type region, and 
etching will cease. In the four-electrode configuration, 
the reverse leakage current is measured separately via 
a p-type region contact, and the counter electrode cur-
rent (ICE) may be monitored for endpoint detection. 
The four-electrode approach allows etch stopping on 
lower quality  epilayers (larger leakage current) and 
should also enable etch stopping of p-type epi on 
n-type substrates. Kloeck et al.159 demonstrated that, 
using such an electrochemical etch-stop technique 
and with current monitoring, the sensitivity of pres-
sure sensors fabricated on the same wafer could be 
controlled to within 4% standard deviation. These 
authors used a 40% KOH solution at 60  ± 0.5°C. 
Without the etch stop, the sensitivity from sensor to 
sensor on one wafer varied by a factor of two.
The etching solution used in electrochemical etch-
ing can be either isotropic or anisotropic. An elec-
trochemical etch stop used in isotropic media was 
discussed above. In this case, HF/H2O mixtures are 
used to etch the highly doped regions of p+p, n+n, n+p, 
and p+n systems.87,88,163–165 The rate-determining step 
in etching with isotropic etchants does not involve 
reducing water with electrons from the conduction 
band, as it does in anisotropic etchants, and the etch-
stop mechanism, as we will learn below, is very dif-
ferent. In isotropic media, the etch stop is simply a 
consequence of the fact that higher conductivity leads 
to higher corrosion currents, and the etching slows 
down on lower conductivity layers. A major advan-
tage of the KOH electrochemical etch is that it retains 
the anisotropic characteristics of KOH without need-
ing a heavily doped p+ layer to stop the etching.166
In Figure 4.48 we illustrate the etch-stop tech-
niques discussed so far. Figure 4.48a and b, rep-
resents two types of boron-dependent etch stops: 
diffused boron etch stop and buried layer boron 
262   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
VE
CE
IE
I
Potentiostat
RE
Counter electrode
0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
Voltage vs. SCE (V)
VE –1.5 V
p  substrate
n  epilayer
+
KOH
FIGURE 4.47 Four-electrode electrochemical etch-stop 
configuration. Voltage distribution with respect to the 
SCE reference electrode (RE) for the four-electrode case. 
The fourth electrode enables an external potential to be 
applied between the epitaxial layer and the substrate, 
thus maintaining the substrate at etching potentials. 
(From Kloeck, B., S. D. Collins, N. F. de Rooij, and R. L. 
Smith. 1989. Study of electrochemical etch-stop for high-
precision thickness control of silicon membranes. IEEE 
Trans Electron Devices 36:663–69. With permission.159)
FIGURE 4.48 Typical cross-sections of bulk micromachined 
wafers with various methods for etch-stop formation 
shown. (a) Diffused boron etch stop. (b) Boron etch stop 
as a buried layer. (c) Electrochemical etch stop. (From 
Wise, K. D. 1985. Micromachining and micropackaging of 
transducers. Eds. C. D. Fung, P. W. Cheung, W. H. Ko, and 
D. G. Fleming. New York: Elsevier. With permission.138)

[Page 263]
etch stop. In Figure 4.48c we illustrate the electro-
chemical etch stop.138 A comparison of the boron 
etch stop and the electrochemical etch stop reveals 
that the IC compatibility and the absence of built-in 
stresses, both results of the low dopant concentration, 
are the main assets of the electrochemical etch stop.
Photoassisted Electrochemical Etch 
Stop (for n-Type Silicon)
A variation on the electrochemical diode etch-
stop technique is the photoassisted electrochemical 
 etch-stop method illustrated in Figure 4.49.168  An 
n-type silicon region on a wafer may be selecti vely 
etched in an HF solution by illuminating and apply-
ing a reverse bias across a p-n junction, driving the 
p-type layer cathodic and the n-type layer anodic. 
Etch rates up to 10 µm/min for the n-type material 
and a high-resolution etch stop render this an attrac-
tive potential micromachining process. Advantages 
also include the use of lightly doped n-type Si, bias- 
and illumination intensity-controlled etch rates, in 
situ process monitoring using the cell current, and 
the ability to spatially control etching with optical 
masking or laser writing. Using this method, Mlcak 
et al.167 prepared stress-free cantilever beam test 
samples. They diffused boron into a 1015 cm–3 (100) 
n-type Si substrate through a patterned oxide mask, 
leaving exposed a small n-type region that defines 
two p-type cantilever beams (see Figure 4.49).
The boron diffusion resulted in a junction 3.3 µm 
underneath the surface. An ohmic contact on the 
back of the wafer was used to apply a variable voltage 
across the p-n junction, and both p and n areas were 
exposed to the HF electrolyte. The exposed n-type 
region was etched to a depth of 150 µm by shining 
light on the whole sample. The resulting n-type Si 
surface was at first found to be rough because porous 
Si up to 5 µm in height forms readily in HF solutions. 
The Si surface could be made smoother by etching 
at higher bias [4.3 V vs. saturated calomel electrode 
(SCE)] and higher light intensity (2 W/cm2) to a fin-
ish with features of the order of 0.4 µm in height. 
Smoothing could also be accomplished by a 5-sec-
ond dip in HNO3:HF:H3COOH or a 30- second dip 
in 25 wt%, 25°C, KOH. Yet another way of remov-
ing unwanted porous Si is a 1000°C wet oxidation 
to make oxidized porous Si (OPS) followed by an 
HF etch.168 The formation of porous Si and OPS is 
detailed further below.
The photoassisted electrochemical etching of 
n-type Si is commercially exploited at Boston Micro-
systems Inc. (http://www.bostonmicrosystems.com).
Photoinduced Preferential 
Anodization (for p-Type Si)
Electrochemical etching requires the application of a 
metal electrode to apply the bias. The application of 
such a metal electrode often induces contamination 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   263
n-Si
n-Si
In-diﬀused p-Si
(a)
Lamp and
optics
Sapphire window
Pt counter
electrode
electrode
electrode
(SCE)
Reference
Working
HF
electrolyte
IEEE 488
interface
IBM AT
computer
OHMIC contact
Variable
voltage
supply
Teﬂon seal
Solartron 1286
electrochemical
interface
(Potentiostat)
n-Si
p-Si
(b)
FIGURE 4.49 Photoelectrochemical etching. (a) Schematic of the photoelectrochemical etching experiment appara-
tus. (b) Schematic of the spatial geometry of the diffused p-type silicon layer into n-type Si used to form cantilever 
beam structures. (From Mlcak, R., H. L. Tuller, P. Greiff, and J. Sohn. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems 
(MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL: IEEE. With permission.167)

[Page 264]
and constitutes at least one extra process step, and 
extra fixturing is needed. With photoinduced pref-
erential anodization (PIPA), it is not necessary to 
deposit metal electrodes. Here, one relies on the 
illumination of a p-n junction to bias the p-type 
Si anodically, and the p-type Si converts automati-
cally into porous Si, whereas the n-type Si acts as a 
cathode for the reaction. The principle of photobias-
ing for etching purposes was known and patented 
by Shockley as far back as 1963.169 In US patent 
3,096,262, he writes that “light can be used in place 
of electrical connections … for biasing of the sample 
… This means a small isolated area of p-type mate-
rial on an n-type body may be preferentially biased 
for removal of material beyond the junction by 
etching.” The method was “reinvented” by Yoshida 
et al.168 in 1992 and in 1993 by Peeters et al.170,171 
The latter group called the method PHET, for photo-
voltaic electrochemical etch-stop technique, and the 
former group coined the PIPA acronym.
In PIPA, etch rates of up to 5 µm/min result in the 
formation of porous layers that are readily removed 
with Si etching solutions. An important advantage 
of the technique is that very small and isolated 
p-type islands can be anodized at the same time. The 
method also lends itself to fabrication of 3D struc-
tures using p-type Si as sacrificial layers.168 A disad-
vantage of the technology is that one cannot control 
the process very well because the current cannot be 
measured for endpoint detection. Application of 
PIPA to form a microbridge is shown in Figure 4.50. 
First, a buried p-type layer doped to 1018 cm–3 and 
an n-type layer doped to 1015 cm–3 are formed on an 
n-type substrate using epitaxy (Figure 4.50a). Then, 
the p-type layer is preferentially anodized in 10% 
HF solution under 30 mW/cm2 light intensity for 
180 minutes (Figure 4.50b), forming porous Si. The 
porous Si is then oxidized in wet oxygen at 1000°C 
(Figure 4.50c). Finally, the sacrificial layer of oxi-
dized porous Si (OPS) is etched and removed with 
an HF solution (Figure 4.50d). The resulting surfaces 
of the n-type silicon are very smooth. It is interest-
ing to consider making complicated 3D structures 
by going immediately to the electropolishing regime 
instead. Yoshida et al.168 believe that porous Si as a 
sacrificial intermediate is more suitable for fabricat-
ing complicated structures.
The authors are probably referring to the fact that 
electropolishing is much more aggressive and could 
not be expected to lead to the same retention of the 
shape of the buried, sacrificial p-type layers. Peeters 
et al.160 carry out their photovoltaic etching in KOH, 
thus skipping the porous Si stage of Yoshida et al. 
They, like Yosida et al., stress the fact that, in one 
single etch step, this technique can make a variety 
of complex shapes that would be impossible with 
electrochemical etching techniques. These authors 
found it necessary to coat the n-type Si part of the 
wafer with Pt to get enough photovoltaic drive 
for the anodic dissolution; this metallization step 
makes the process more akin to photoelectrochemi-
cal  etching (PEC), and some advantages of the pho-
tobiasing process are lost.
Etch Stop at Thin Insoluble Films 
Yet another distinct way (the fourth) to stop etching 
is by using a change in composition of material. An 
example is an etch stopped at a Si3N4 diaphragm 
(see Figure 4.45Ba for an example). Silicon nitride 
is very strong, hard, and chemically inert, and the 
stress in the film can be controlled by changing 
the Si/N ratio in the LPCVD deposition process. 
The stress turns from tensile in stoichiometric films 
to  compressive in silicon-rich films (for details, see 
Volume III, Chapter 5). A great number of materi-
als are not attacked by anisotropic etchants. Hence 
a thin film of such a material can be used as an 
etch stop.
Another example is the SiO2 layer in a silicon-
on-insulator (SOI) structure. A buried layer of SiO2, 
sandwiched between two layers of crystalline sili-
con, forms an excellent etch stop because of the 
264   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Forming a buried p-type layer
(a)
(c)
(b) Photoinduced preferential anodization (d)
Oxidation of porous silicon
Removing oxidized porous silicon
np
n
FIGURE 4.50 Photoassisted electrochemical etch stop 
(for n-type Si). Fabrication process for a microbridge and 
SEM picture of Si structure before and after PIPA. (From 
Yoshida, T., T. Kudo, and K. Ikeda. 1992. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’92). 
Travemunde, Germany: IEEE. With permission.168)

[Page 265]
good selectivity of many etchants of Si over SiO2. 
The  oxide  does not exhibit the good mechanical 
properties of silicon nitride and consequently is 
rarely used as a mechanical member in a microde-
vice. As with PIPA, no metal contacts are needed 
with an SOI etch stop, greatly simplifying the pro-
cess over an electrochemical etch-stop technique.
We classified SOI micromachining under surface 
micromachining in Chapter 7, where more details 
about this promising micromachining alternative 
are presented.
Chemical Etching Models 
for Single-Crystal Si
Introduction
Conflicting data abound in the literature for the 
anisotropic etch rates of the different Si planes, 
especially for the higher index planes. This is not 
too surprising, given the multiple parameters influ-
encing individual results: temperature, stirring, size 
of etching feature (i.e., crevice effects and loading 
effects), etchant concentration, addition of alcohols 
and other organics, surface defects, complexing 
agents, surfactants, pH, cation influence, and so on. 
Even the reason(s) why acidic media lead to isotropic 
etching whereas alkaline media lead to anisotropic 
etching was, until recently, not explicitly addressed 
in any of the models surveyed. More rigorous exper-
imentation and standardization will be needed, as 
well as improved etching models, to better under-
stand the influence of all these para meters on etch 
rates. In the following section we will present recent 
atomistic and fluctuating energy level models (see 
Volume I, Chapter 4) to explain anisotropic and 
isotropic etching of silicon. It is our hope that the 
reading of this section will inspire more detailed 
semiconductor electrochemistry work on Si elec-
trodes. The refining of an etching model will be of 
invaluable help in writing more predictive Si etch-
ing software code.
Atomistic Model—Gosalvez-Kelly
The origin of the macroscopic anisotropy in the 
etching of Si lies in the site-specificity of the etch 
rates at the atomistic scale. Surface sites on different 
crystallographic planes react with an etchant in a 
different manner because their surface orientations 
are different. As a consequence, as pointed out by 
Gosalvez, the macroscopic etch rate is different for 
different crystal orientations.47 The removal of Si sur-
face atoms is a complex process that involves chemi-
cal and electrochemical reactions. As shown in Figure 
4.51, the etching process takes place through sequen-
tial oxidation and etching reactions. During etching 
of Si, the surface, as we show here, is predominantly 
H-terminated, and this is true for both isotropic94 
and anisotropic etching.172 The H-termination of the 
surface was established from both ex situ (after etch-
ing the surface) and in situ (during etching) infra-
red spectroscopy by Kelly et al.172 In other words, 
removal of the native oxide from Si leaves the sur-
face hydrogen-terminated.
Once the substitution of H (hydrophobic) by 
OH (hydrophilic) has taken place, a fast sequence 
of chemical steps (represented as “etching” in 
Figure 4.51) leads to the removal of the silicon atom 
as a Si(OH)4 product. The triggering effect of the 
reaction by the OH ligand is attributed to the dif-
ference in electronegativities between the Si and 
O atoms, resulting in the polarization and weak-
ening of the backbonds of the Si atom, which as a 
result, becomes more vulnerable to further attack. 
Although the hydroxyl group plays an important 
role in catalyzing the removal of the surface atom 
by favoring backbond attack, the real active species 
attacking the backbonds are polar molecules: water 
in alkaline etchants and HF in acidic etchants.172
In an alkaline medium, the first step involving 
the nucleophilic attack by an OH− ion on the Si-H 
bond may be represented as172:
 
OH–
H2O
+
+ H2
OH
Si
Si
Si
H
Si
 
 
Reaction 4.10
The departing hydride reacts with water to give 
hydrogen gas, and the Si surface atom is hydroxy-
lated. It is the presence of the OH group that polar-
izes the Si-Si backbond. With the OH adding to the 
positively polarized surface atom, the backbond is 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   265

[Page 266]
attacked by water, and an H atom attaches itself to 
the subsurface atom, restoring the hydrogen termina-
tion of the Si surface as shown in Reaction 4.11172:
 
OH
OH OH
H
H2O
Si
Si
Si
Si
+ 
 
 
 
Reaction 4.11
Whether the surface is hydrogenated (hydro-
phobic) or hydroxylated (hydrophilic) during etch-
ing depends on the relative rates of Reactions 4.10 
and 4.11. The fact that in practice a predominantly 
H-termination is found is determined by kinetics 
rather than thermodynamics, and this implies that 
the site specificity of the whole process is a result of 
the rate-limiting oxidation reaction alone.47
The number of backbonds associated with the 
attacked Si atom is universally accepted as a major 
source for surface specificity. In the case of a (100) 
surface, each atom has a dihydride termination and 
is bonded to two subsurface Si atoms. In the (111) 
case, the surface is monohydride terminated with 
three backbonds. A dihydride is chemically less 
stable than a monohydride, so one expects Reaction 
4.10 to be faster for a (100) surface.173 Because it 
should be easier to dislodge a (100) Si atom with 
only two backbonds, the rate of Reaction 4.11 also 
should be faster than for a (111) surface. This quali-
tatively explains already why one expects a (111) 
plane to etch much more slowly than a (100) plane 
in alkaline media.172 In the model of Seidel et al.52 
(see below) the energy levels of the electrons in the 
backbonds are associated with surface states within 
the bandgap of Si. The energy level of these surface 
states is assumed to vary for different surface orien-
tations, being lowest for {111} planes.
We return now for a moment to Figure 4.51 and 
draw the readers’ attention to the fact that chemi-
cal and electrochemical reaction routes provide 
two alternative mechanisms for the oxidation of 
the hydrogen-terminated sites before the removal 
of the resulting hydroxyl-terminated silicon. For 
open-circuit etching of Si, i.e., with no external cir-
cuit connecting the Si to a counter electrode, there 
are two possible mechanisms: chemical and electro-
less. The two are distinguished by the fact that the 
latter involves the participation of free charge carri-
ers, giving rise to measurable currents and allowing 
for the possibility of controlling the etching process 
with a biasing potential.172 In the electrochemical 
route of Si oxidation, an oxidizing agent in solution 
extracts/injects mobile charge carriers from/into the 
solid. When, for example, an oxidizing agent extracts 
bonding electrons from the valence band, i.e., injects 
holes, and the holes stay localized at the surface, they 
will cause bond rupture. It is important to realize 
that these holes are mobile so that the two reactions, 
the reduction of the oxidant and the oxidation of the 
solid, can be considered as two spatially and tem-
porally independent electrochemical reactions. This 
form of etching is generally referred to as electroless 
because it does not involve two separate electrodes 
266   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Chemical
route
OH-
terminated
H-
terminated
H-
terminated
Electrochemical
route
Bulk
Rate
limiting
Bulk
Bulk
Very fast
Etching
Oxidation
+ 3H2O
+
Silicon
Oxygen
Hydrogen
FIGURE 4.51 Schematic representation of the oxidation and etching reactions that sequentially occur for the removal of 
Si surface atoms. The rate limiting process (oxidation) can take place through chemical and electrochemical routes. Only 
the nearest underlying bulk atoms in the neighborhood of the surface site are depicted. (Gonsalvez, M. 2003. Atomistic 
modelling of anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon. PhD diss., Helsinki University of Technology.47)

[Page 267]
(the same process is involved in metal corrosion). A 
reaction like this, involving the exchange of charge 
carriers, can lead to external currents when an exter-
nal circuit is fashioned and can be influenced by a 
bias applied between the etching electrode (Si) and 
a counter electrode (e.g., Pt). In chemical etching, 
bonds in the etching agent and the solid are bro-
ken, and new bonds are formed in a localized and 
synchronous reaction, not involving free carriers. 
In this case, the reaction rate cannot be influenced 
by an applied bias. In the oxidation subprocess of 
Figure 4.51, the main difference between the chemi-
cal and the electrochemical routes lies in the size of 
the activated complex. In chemical oxidation, we 
saw (Reaction 4.10) that the hydroxyl ion acts as a 
catalyst. It is postulated that the hydroxyl ion reduces 
the energy barrier of a sizable pentavalent transition 
state as shown schematically in Figure 4.52.174
The fact that both water (reactant) and OH− 
(catalyst) are involved in the reaction depicted in 
Figure 4.52 is made clear from the fact that etching 
of single-crystal silicon is possible in pure boiling 
water, where there is a small concentration of OH− 
present, but not in concentrated HF, where the con-
centration of OH− is too low to enable the oxidation 
subprocess in Figure 4.52. In this case, the reaction 
stops after the H-termination.47 Besides the number 
of backbonds of the site under attack, Gosalvez con-
cludes that the site specificity of anisotropic etching 
is also determined by the geometry of the transition 
complex; in other words, the steric hindrance of the 
OH-termination controls the reaction rate as well.47 
The larger the size and the more rigid the transition 
complex, the larger one expects the anisotropy to 
be. As a result of these constraints, the chemical oxi-
dation route is very anisotropic.
The Si etching process has been found to depend 
on the applied potential; thus, the chemical re -
action in Figure 4.52 cannot be the only oxidation 
subprocess. Under anodic potential, the dissolution 
rate becomes enhanced, and the ratio of H2/Si is 
reduced because of the contribution of the electro-
chemical reaction path.105 Therefore, there also must 
be an electrochemical route involving free charge 
carriers. We will detail our understanding of the 
electrochemical route when analyzing the Seidel 
et al. model (see below); here we just take advantage 
of the experimental evidence that the anodic 
current is found to be only weakly dependent on 
the OH− concentration but strongly so on the water 
concentration (see Equation 4.3, page 275),52,110 
suggesting that water is the only active species. 
This is illustrated in Figure 4.53, where the process 
is depicted as occuring through the dissociation of 
the surface hydride group and subsequent reaction 
with a water molecule.
In contrast with the sizable pentavalent transi-
tion state involved in the chemical oxidation route 
(see Figure 4.52), in the electrochemical oxidation 
route the small surface hydride leaves plenty of 
space for the reaction with water molecules, and the 
dissociation might occur at any surface site, making 
the electrochemical route rather isotropic compared 
with the chemical route.47
The surface morphology of the etched surfaces 
also turns out to be orientation-dependent when 
examined at the micrometer and smaller length 
scales. Pyramidal hillocks and round shallow pits, 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   267
H-terminated
OH-terminated
Bulk
Solution
Solution
Solution
Bulk
Bulk
Chemical oxidation
Silicon
Oxygen
Hydrogen
Pentavalent
transition state
–
–
FIGURE 4.52 Schematic representation of the chemical oxidation reaction. Only the nearest underlying bulk atoms in 
the neighborhood of the surface site are shown. (Gonsalvez, M. 2003. Atomistic modelling of anisotropic etching of crys-
talline silicon. PhD diss., Helsinki University of Technology.47)

[Page 268]
for example, are typical for {100} planes, whereas 
triangular pits are found on {111} surfaces. 
Gosalvez writes that the macroscopic anisotropy 
and the surface morphology are two manifestations 
of the same microscopic site specificity observed at 
different length scales.47 The surface microstructure 
during wet etching of Si then depends on the rela-
tive importance of the chemical and electrochem-
ical oxidation routes. The etching process is most 
anisotropic under cathodic bias, where the etching 
process is completely chemical, and it becomes 
increasingly more isotropic as the anodic bias is 
increased. At sufficiently negative bias one can even 
eliminate the surface pits on {111} planes, or a totally 
chemical oxidation process results in perfectly 
flat {111} surfaces. In Gosalvez’s view, under the 
usual alkaline etching conditions, without biasing 
potentials, the etching process is very anisotropic, 
and he claims that the electrochemical oxidation 
route has only minor effects (mainly the nucleation 
of pits on {111} planes). Within Gosalvez’s elegant 
model, the etch stop at passivating anodic poten-
tials is a result of an increased OH-termination. The 
high number of hydroxyl ligands on the Si surface 
produces the formation of silicon oxide through 
oxygen insertion into the Si-Si backbonds. The 
etching mechanism of SiO2 in alkaline media is 
slow compared with that of silicon, so the etching 
process is stopped. This is the same effect observed 
when increasing the amount of dissolved oxygen 
in the solution. Very revealing, the effect of oxygen 
and other oxidizing agents, added to the etching 
solution, is to make the etching process more 
isotropic, improving the surface finish of {100} 
surfaces but negatively affecting that of (111), just 
in the same manner as the biasing potentials. In 
both cases, mobile charge carriers make the process 
more dependent on water molecules only rather 
than requiring the water/OH− complex that makes 
a chemical process more anisotropic.
Seidel et al.’s Model
Anisotropy of Etch Rates Seidel et al.’s model is 
based on the fluctuating energy level model of the 
silicon/electrolyte interface and assumes the injec-
tion of electrons in the conduction band during the 
etching process. The construction of energy dia-
grams of the type discussed here was introduced 
in Volume I, Chapter 7. Consider the situation of a 
piece of Si immersed in an alkaline solution with-
out applied bias (open circuit conditions). After 
immersion of the silicon crystal into the alkaline 
electrolyte, a negative excess charge builds up on 
the surface as a result of the higher original Fermi 
level of the H2O/OH– redox couple in the etchant as 
compared with the Fermi level of the solid. In other 
words, as explained in Volume I, Chapter 7, the elec-
trochemical potential difference is equalized across 
the interface; the Fermi levels line up; or also, the 
work function difference is equalized. The Fermi 
level in a given material is equivalent to the electro-
chemical potential of the electrons in that material 
expressed per particle, or:
 
E
N
F
e
A
= μ
 
(7.79)
(see Volume I, Chapter 7). This leads to a downward 
bending of the energy bands on the solid surface for 
268   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
H-terminated
OH-terminated
Electrochemical oxidation
Silicon
Oxygen
Hydrogen
Bulk
Solution
Bulk
Solution
Bulk
+ 2 eCB
–
Solution
Dissociation and
H2O attack
+
+
+
–
FIGURE 4.53 Schematic representation of the electrochemical oxidation reaction. Only the nearest underlying bulk 
atoms in the neighborhood of the surface site are shown. (Gonsalvez, M. 2003. Atomistic modelling of anisotropic 
etching of crystalline silicon. PhD diss., Helsinki University of Technology.47)

[Page 269]
both p- and n-type silicon (Figure 4.54a and b). The 
downward bending is more pronounced for p-type 
than for n-type because of the initially larger differ-
ence of the Fermi levels between the solid and the 
electrolyte.
Next, hydroxyl ions cause the Si surface to oxi-
dize, consuming water and liberating hydrogen in 
the process. From the measurement of the amount 
of Si dissolution and H2 generation, a stoichiometric 
ratio of 2H2/1Si was found,108 and thus the following 
detailed steps, based on Palik,128 were suggested:
 
Si
2OH
Si(OH)
2e
Si(OH)
2OH
Si(OH)
2
2
2
2
+
+
+
−
+
−
+
−
→
→
4
4
2
6
2
2
2e
Si(OH)
e
4H O
Si(OH)
2H
+
+
+
+
−
−
−
4
→
  
 
 
Reaction 4.12
Silicate species were observed by Raman spectro-
scopy.175 Thus, the overall silicon oxidation reaction 
consumes four electrons first injected into the con-
duction band, where they stay near the surface as a 
result of the downward bending of the energy bands 
(see Figure 4.54). Raley et al.176 first presented evi-
dence for injection of four electrons rather than a 
mixed hole and electron mechanism. These authors 
could explain the measured etch-rate dependence on 
hole concentration only by assuming that the pro-
ton or water reduction reaction is rate determining 
and that a four-electron injection mechanism with 
the conduction band was involved. The injected 
electrons are highly “reducing” and react with water 
to form hydroxide ions and hydrogen:
 
4H2O + 4e− → 4H2O− 
Reaction 4.13
 4H2O− → 4OH− + 4H+ + 4e− + 2H2 
Reaction 4.14
It is thought that the hydroxide ions in Reaction 
4.14, generated directly at the silicon surface, react in 
the oxidation step. The hydroxide ions from the bulk 
of the solution may not play a major role because 
they will be repelled by the negatively charged Si 
surface, whereas the hydroxide ions formed in situ 
do not need to overcome this repelling force. This 
would explain why the etch rates for an EDP solu-
tion with an OH– concentration of 0.034 M are 
nearly as large as those for KOH solutions with a 
hundred- fold higher OH– concentration of 5–10 M.52 
The hydrogen formed in Reaction 4.14 can inhibit 
the reaction, and surfactants may be added to dis-
place the hydrogen (IBM, US Patent 4,113,551, 1978). 
Additional support for the involvement of four water 
molecules (Reaction 4.13) comes from the experi-
mentally observed correlation between the fourth 
power of the water concentration and the silicon etch 
rate for concentrated KOH solutions. The Si etch rate, 
R, as a function of KOH concentration at 72°C, was 
shown in Figure 4.39a and c.52 The etch rate has a 
maximum at about 20 wt% KOH of about 55 µm/h. 
The best fit for this experimentally determined etch 
rate, for most KOH concentrations, is52,110:
 
R
k[H O] [KOH]
2
4
1
4
=
 
(4.2)
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   269
EC
EF
EV
Surface states :
Dangling bond
Backbonds
A
B'
B
H2O
OH–/H
(a)
EC
EF
EV
Surface states :
Dangling bond A
Backbonds B'
B
(b)
H2O
OH–/H
FIGURE 4.54 Band model of the silicon/electrolyte interface for moderately doped silicon (electrolyte at pH > 12): p-type 
silicon (a) and n-type silicon (b). We assume no applied bias and no illumination. The energy scale functions in respect to 
the saturated calomel electrode (SCE), an often-used reference in electrochemistry. Notice that p-type Si exhibits more 
band bending because its Fermi level is lower in the bandgap. For simplicity, we show only one energetic position for 
surface states associated with dangling bonds and backbonds; in reality, there will be new surface states arising dur-
ing reactions as the individual dangling bonds and backbonds are taking on different energies as new Si-OH bonds are 
introduced. 

[Page 270]
The weak dependence of the etching curve on 
the KOH concentration (~1/4 power) supports the 
assumption that the hydroxide ions involved in 
the oxidation reactions are mostly generated from 
water. A strong influence of water on the silicon etch 
rate was also observed for EDP solutions. In molar 
water concentrations of up to 60%, a large increase 
of the etch rate occurs.108 The driving force for the 
overall Reaction 4.12 is given by the larger Si-O 
binding energy of 193 kcal/mol as compared with 
a Si-Si binding energy of only 78 kcal/mol. The role 
of cations, K+, Na+, and Li+, and even complicated 
cations such as NH2(CH2)2NH3
+   can probably be 
neglected.52
The four electrons in Reaction 4.13 are injected 
into the conduction band in two steps. In the case of 
{100} planes, there are two dangling bonds per sur-
face atom for the first two of the four hydroxide ions 
to react with, injecting two electrons into the con-
duction band in the process. As a consequence of the 
strong electronegativity of the oxygen atoms, the two 
bonded hydroxide groups on the silicon atom reduce 
the strength of the two silicon backbonds (Figure 
4.55). With two new hydroxide ions approaching, 
two more electrons (now stemming from the Si-Si 
backbonds) are injected into the conduction band, 
and the silicon-hydroxide complex reacts with the 
two additional hydroxide ions. Seidel et al.52 claim 
that the step of activating the second two electrons 
from the backbonds into the conduction band is 
the  rate-limiting step, with an associated thermal 
activation energy of about 0.6 eV for {100} planes.
The electrons in the backbonds are associated with 
surface states within the bandgap (see Figure 4.54). 
The energy level of these surface states is assumed 
to vary for different surface orientations, the lowest 
being for {111} planes. The thermal activation of 
the backbonds corresponds to an excitation of the 
electrons out of these surface states into the conduc-
tion band. Because the energy for the backbond sur-
face state level is the lowest within the bandgap for 
{111} planes, these planes will be hardest to etch. 
The {111} planes have only one dangling bond for 
a first hydroxide ion to react with. The second step, 
which is the rate-limiting step, involves breaking 
three lower energy backbonds (Figure 4.56).
The lower energy of the backbond surface states 
within the Si bandgap for {111} Si atoms can be 
understood from the simple argument that their 
energy level is raised less by the electronegativity of 
a single binding hydroxide ion compared with two 
in the case of the silicon atoms in {100} planes. The 
high etch rate generally observed on {110} surfaces 
is similarly explained by a high energy level of the 
backbond-associated surface states for these planes. 
Elwenspoek et al.55,56 do not accept this “two versus 
three backbonds” argument (see below). They point 
out that the silicon atoms in the {110} planes also 
have three backbonds, and activation energy in these 
crystallographic directions should be comparable 
with that of {111} planes in contrast to experimental 
evidence. Seidel et al. would probably counterargue 
here that the backbonds and the energy levels of the 
associated surface states are not necessarily the same 
for {111} and {110} planes because that energy will 
also be influenced by the effect of the orientation of 
these bonds. Another argument in favor of the rela-
tively high etching rates of {110} planes is the easier 
270   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.55 Two backbonds on Si {100} surfaces.
FIGURE 4.56 Three backbonds on Si {111} surfaces.

[Page 271]
penetrability of {110} surfaces for water molecules 
along channels in that plane.
The final step in the anisotropic etching is the 
removal of the reaction product Si(OH)4 by diffu-
sion. If the production of Si(OH)4 is too fast for solu-
tions with a high water concentration, the Si(OH)4 
leads to the formation of a SiO2-like complex before 
Si(OH)4 can diffuse away. This might be observed 
experimentally as a white residue on the wafer sur-
face.177 The high pH values in anisotropic etching 
are required to obtain adequate solubility of the 
Si(OH)4 reaction product and to remove the native 
oxide from the silicon surface. From silicate chemis-
try it is known that for pH values greater than 12 the 
Si(OH)4 complex will undergo the following reac-
tion by the detachment of two protons:
 
Si(OH)4 → SiO2 (OH)2−
2  + 2H+ 
Reaction 4.15
 
2H+ + 2OH− → 2H2O 
Reaction 4.16
Pyrocatechol in an ethylenediamine etchant 
acts as a complex-forming agent for reaction prod-
ucts such as Si(OH)4, converting these products 
into more complex anions:
 
Si(OH)
2OH
3C H (OH)
Si(C H O )
6H O
4
6
4
2
6
4
2 3
2–
2
+
+
+
–
→
 
Reaction 4.17
There is evidence by Abu-Zeid et al.178 of diffusion 
control contribution to the etch rate in EDP, proba-
bly because the hydroxide ion must diffuse through 
the layer of complex silicon reaction products (see 
Reaction 4.17). The same authors also found that the 
etch rate depends on the effective silicon area being 
exposed and on its geometry (crevice and loading 
effects). That is why the silicon wafer is placed in 
a holder, and the solution is vigorously agitated to 
minimize the diffusion layer thickness. For KOH 
solutions, no effect of stirring on etching rate was 
noticed. Stirring here is mainly used to decrease the 
surface roughness, probably through removal of 
hydrogen bubbles.
The influence of alcohol on the KOH etching rate 
in Equation 4.3 is the result of a change in the rela-
tive water concentration and its concomitant pH 
change; it does not participate in the reaction (this 
was confirmed by Raman studies by Palik et al.175). 
The reversal of etch rates for {110} and {100} planes 
through alcohol addition to KOH/water etchants 
can  be understood by assuming that the alcohol 
 covers the silicon surface,175 thus canceling the 
“channeling advantage” of the {110} planes. In the 
case of EDP, alcohol has no effect because the water 
concentration can be freely adjusted without signif-
icantly influencing the pH value as a result of the 
incomplete dissociation of EDP.
For the etching of SiO2 shown in Figure 4.42, 
Seidel et al. propose the following reaction:
 
SiO2 + 2OH− → SiO2(OH)2
2− 
Reaction 4.18
At KOH concentrations up to 35%, a linear cor-
relation occurs between SiO2 etch rate and KOH 
concentration. The SiO2 etch rate in KOH solu-
tions exceeds those in EDP by close to three orders 
of magnitude. For higher concentrations, the etch 
rate decreases with the square of the water concen-
tration, indicating that water plays a role in this 
reaction. Seidel et al. speculate that at high pH val-
ues the silicon electrode is highly negatively charged 
(the point of zero charge of SiO2 is 2.8), repelling 
the hydroxide ions while water takes over as reac-
tion partner. An additional reason for the decrease is 
that the hydroxide concentration does not continue 
to increase with increasing KOH concentration for 
very concentrated solutions. The decrease of the 
Si/SiO2 etch rate ratio with increasing temperature 
and pH of the solution (up to 35%) follows out of 
the larger activation energy associated with the SiO2 
etch rate (0.85 eV) and its linear correlation with the 
hydroxide concentration, whereas the silicon etch 
rate mainly depends on the water concentration.
The effect of water concentration and pH value on 
the etching process in the Seidel et al. model is sum-
marized in Table 4.10.179
Doping Dependence of Si Anisotropic Etching A 
good model for anisotropic etching of Si should 
also be able to explain the fact that the anisotro-
pic etch ant systems of Table 4.9 exhibit drastically 
reduced etch rates for high boron concentrations in 
silicon (≥5 × 1019 cm–3 solid solubility limit). Other 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   271

[Page 272]
impurities (P, Ge) also reduce the etch rate but at 
much higher concentrations (see Figure 4.5752). 
Boron typically is incorporated using ion implanta-
tion (thin layers) or liquid/solid source deposition 
(thick layers >1 µm). These doped layers are used as 
very effective etch stop layers (see above). Hydrazine 
or EDP, which display a smaller (100) to (111) etch 
rate ratio (∼35) than KOH, exhibits a stronger boron 
concentration dependency. The etch rate in KOH 
is reduced by a factor of 5–100 for a boron con-
centration larger than 1020 cm–3. When etching in 
EDP, the factor climbs to 250.151 With TMAHW 
solutions, the Si etch rate decreases to 0.01 µm/min 
for boron concentrations of about 4 × 1020 cm–3.180 
Seidel et al.’s model, we shall see, gives the most 
plausible explanation for this effect. 
Some of the different mechanisms that have been 
invoked to explain the doping dependence of Si 
anisotropic etching follow.
 
1. Several observations suggest that doping leads 
to a more readily oxidized Si surface. Highly 
boron- or phosphorus-doped silicon in aque-
ous KOH spontaneously can form a thin pas-
sivating oxide layer.128,155 The boron oxides and 
hydroxides initially generated on the silicon sur-
face are not soluble in KOH or EDP etchants.75 
The substitutional boron creates local tensile 
stress in the silicon, increasing the bond strength 
so that a passivating oxide might be more read-
ily formed at higher boron concentrations. 
Boron-doped silicon has a high defect density 
(slip planes), encouraging oxide growth.
 
2. Electrons produced during the oxidation of sili-
con are needed in a subsequent reduction step 
(hydrogen evolution in Reaction 4.14). When 
the hole density passes 1019 cm–3, these elec-
trons combine with holes instead, thus stop-
ping the reduction process.155 Seidel et al.’s 
model follows this explanation (see below).
 
3. Silicon doped with boron is under tension as 
the smaller boron atoms enter the lattice substi-
tutionally. The large local tensile stress at high 
boron concentration makes it energetically more 
favorable for the excess boron (>5 × 1019 cm–3) 
to enter interstitial sites. The strong B-Si bonds 
bind the lattice rigidly. With high enough dop-
ing, the high binding energy can stop etching.75 
This hypothesis is similar to item 1, except that 
no oxide formation is invoked.
The model by Seidel et al. provides an elegant 
explanation for the etch stop at high boron con-
centrations. At moderate dopant concentration, we 
saw that the electrons injected into the conduction 
band stay localized near the semiconductor surface 
as a result of the downward bending of the bands 
(Figure 4.58). The electrons there have a small prob-
ability of recombining with holes deeper into the 
crystal even for p-type Si. This situation changes 
when the doping level in the silicon increases 
272   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
1018
10–3
10–2
10–1
100
101
1019
1020
1021
1022
cm–3
B     EDP  S       110ºC
Ge  EDP  S        79ºC
P     10%KOH  21ºC
Ge  34%KOH  60ºC
Dopant concentration
Relative etch rate
FIGURE 4.57 Relative etch rate for (100) Si in EDP and 
KOH solutions as a function of concentration of boron, 
phosphorus, and germanium. (From Seidel, H., L. Csepregi, 
A. Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 1990. Anisotropic etch-
Anisotropic etch-
ing of crystalline silicon in alkaline solutions–part I: ori-
entation dependence and behavior of passivation layers. 
J Electrochem Soc 137:3612–26. With permission.)
TABLE 4.10 Effect of Water Concentration and pH 
Value on the Characteristics of Si Etching
− H2O +
− pH +
SiO2 etch rate
No effect
− ⇔ +
Si etch rate
− ⇔ +
Little effect
Solubility
No effect
− ⇔ +
Si/SiO2 ratio
− ⇔ +
+ ⇔ −
Diffusion effects
− ⇔ +
+ ⇔ −
Residue formation
− ⇔ +
+ ⇔ −
p+ etch stop
− ⇔ +
+ ⇔ −
p, n etch stop
− ⇔ +
+ ⇔ −
Source: Seidel, H. 1990. Technical digest: IEEE solid-state sensor 
and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.179

[Page 273]
further. At a high dopant concentration, silicon 
degenerates and starts to behave like a metal. For a 
degenerate p-type semiconductor, the space charge 
thickness shrinks, and the Fermi level drops into 
the valence band as indicated in Figure 4.58.
The injected electrons shoot (tunnel) right through 
the thin surface charge layer into deeper regions 
of the crystal, where they recombine with holes from 
the valence band. Consequently, these electrons are 
not available for the subsequent reaction with water 
molecules (Reaction 4.13), the reduction of which is 
necessary for providing new hydroxide ions in close 
proximity to the negatively charged silicon surface. 
These hydroxide ions are required for the dissolu-
tion of the silicon as Si(OH)4. The  remaining etch 
rate observed within the etch stop region is then 
determined by the number of electrons still avail-
able in the conduction band at the silicon surface. 
This number is assumed to be inversely proporti onal 
to the number of holes and thus the boron concen-
tration. Experiments show that the decrease in etch 
rate is nearly independent of the crystallographic 
orientation, and the etch rate is proportional to the 
inverse fourth power of the boron concentration in 
all alkaline etchants.
Model of Seidel et al. Summary The key points of 
the Seidel et al. model can now be summarized as 
follows (see also Table 4.10)179:
 
1. The rate-limiting step in anisotropic etching of 
Si is the water reduction.
 
2. Hydroxide ions required for oxidation of the 
 silicon are generated through reduction of water 
at the silicon surface. The hydroxide ions in the 
bulk do not contribute to the etching because 
they are repelled from the negatively charged 
surface. This implies that the silicon etch rate 
will depend on the molar concentration of 
water and that cations will have little effect on 
the silicon etch rate.
 
3. The dissolution of silicon dioxide is assumed 
to be purely chemical with hydroxide ions. The 
SiO2 etch rate depends on the pH of the bulk 
electrolyte.
 
4. For boron concentrations in excess of 3 × 1019 
cm–3, the silicon becomes degenerate, and the 
electrons are no longer confined to the surface. 
This prevents the formation of the hydroxide 
ions at the surface and thus causes the etching 
to stop.
 
5. Anodic biases will prevent the confinement of 
electrons near the surface as well and lead to 
etch stop as in the case of a p+ material.
This model applies well for lower index planes 
(i.e., {nnn} with n < 2), where high etch rates always 
correspond to low activation energies. However, for 
higher index planes (i.e., {n11} and {1nn} with n = 
2, 3, 4), Herr et al.54 found no correlation between 
activation energies and etch rates. For higher index 
planes, we must rely mainly on empirical data.
Several chemical models explaining the anisot-
ropy in etching rates for the different Si orientations 
have been proposed. In the different etching  models, 
different Si crystal properties have been correlated 
with the anisotropy in silicon etching:
 
1. According to Gandhi181 and Kern,77 the silicon 
oxidation reaction steps involve injection of 
holes into the Si (raising the oxidation state of 
Si), hydroxylation of the oxidized Si species, 
complexation of the silicon reaction products, 
and dissolution of the reaction products in the 
etchant solution. In this reaction scheme, etch-
ing solutions must provide a source of holes and 
hydroxide ions, and they must contain a com-
plexing agent that solubilizes reacted Si species in 
the etchant solution, for example, pyrocatechol 
forming the soluble Si(C6H4O2)3
2– species. This 
older model still seems to guide the thinking 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   273
+
++
+
+
+
+
+
-
- --
EF
Electron-hole recombination
in the bulk
Injected electrons tunnel right
through thin space charge layer
Solution
EV
EC
FIGURE 4.58 Si/electrolyte interface energetics at high 
doping level explaining etch-stop behavior.

[Page 274]
of many micromachinists, although Gosalvez’s 
atomistic model and Seidel et al.’s energy level-
based model of the silicon/electrolyte interface 
are more powerful and predictive.
 
2. Because the {111} Si planes present the highest 
density of atoms/cm2 to the etchant and because 
the atoms are oriented such that three bonds 
are below the plane (Figure 4.56), it is possible 
that these bonds become chemically shielded 
by surface-bonded OH or oxygen, thereby slow-
ing the etch rate for {111} planes. In this model, 
it is assumed that the anisotropy is caused by 
differences in activation energies and backbond 
geometries on different Si surfaces.182 Seidel 
et al.52,110 support this explanation. They detail a 
process to explain anisotropy based on the dif-
ference in energy levels of backbond-associated 
surface states for different crystal orientations.
 
3. It also has been suggested that etch rate cor-
relates with available bond density; thus, the 
surfaces with the highest bond density etch 
faster.107 The available bond densities in Si and 
other diamond structures follow the sequence 
1:0.71:0.58 for the {100}/{110}/{111} surfaces. 
However, Kendall48 commented that bond den-
sity alone is an unlikely explanation because 
of the magnitude of etching anisotropy (e.g., a 
factor of 400) compared with the bond density 
variations of at most a factor of two.
 
4. Kendall48 explains the slow etching of {111} 
planes based on their faster oxidation during 
etching; this does not happen on the other 
faces, he speculates, because of greater dis-
tance of the atoms on planes other than (111). 
Because the {111} planes oxidize faster, these 
planes may be better protected against etching. 
The oxidation rate in particular in oxygen fol-
lows the sequence {111} > {110} > {100}, and 
the etch rate often follows the reverse sequence 
(see also Volume I, Chapter 4 on Si oxidation in 
an oxygen gas stream). In the most used KOH-
H2O wet etching system, however, the sequence 
is {110} > {100} > {111}.
 
5. Besides the number of backbonds of the silicon 
atom under attack, Gosalvez concludes that 
the site specificity of anisotropic etching is also 
determined by the geometry of the transition 
complex; in other words, the steric hindrance of 
the OH-termination controls the reaction rate 
as well. The larger the size and the more rigid 
the transition complex, the larger one expects 
the anisotropy to be.
 
6. Madou (see below) explains why Si etches 
anisotropically in alkaline etchants and iso-
tropically in acidic etchants based on the pH 
dependency of the energy levels at the silicon/
electrolyte interface.
 
7. Finally, Elwenspoek et al.55, 56 (see below) propose 
that it is the degree of atomic smoothness of the 
various surfaces that is responsible for the anisot-
ropy of the etch rates. Basically, this research 
group argues for the kinetics of smooth faces [the 
(111) plane is atomically flat] being controlled by 
a nucleation barrier absent on rough surfaces. 
The latter, therefore, would etch faster by orders 
of magnitude. This model also contributes to the 
understanding why certain etchants etch isotro-
pically and others etch anisotropically.
Elwenspoek et al.’s Model
Elwenspoek et al.55,56 introduced an alternative 
model for anisotropic etching of Si, a model built 
on theories derived from crystal growth. According 
to these authors, the Seidel et al. model does not 
clearly explain the fast etching of {110} planes. 
Those planes, having three backbonds like the {111} 
planes, should etch equally slowly. The activation 
energy of the anisotropic etch rate depends on the 
etching system used; for example, etching in KOH 
is faster than in EDP, even when the pH of the solu-
tion is the same. Seidel et al. attribute this depen-
dence to diffusion that plays a greater role in EDP 
than in KOH solutions. However, Elwenspoek et al. 
point out that, at least for slow etching, the etch rate 
should not be diffusion controlled but governed by 
surface reactions. With surface reactions, diffusion 
should have a minor effect, analogous to growth at 
low pressure in an LPCVD reactor (see Chapter 7). 
Another comment focuses on the lack of under-
standing why certain etchants etch isotropically and 
others etch anisotropically.
Elwenspoek et al. note that crystal surfaces are 
not ideal and highlight the parallels in the process 
274   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 275]
of etching and growing of crystals; slowly grow-
ing crystal planes also etch slowly! A key to under-
standing both processes, growing or dissolution 
(etching), pertains to the concept of the energy 
associated with the creation of a critical nucleus on 
a  single-crystalline smooth surface, that is, the free 
energy associated with the creation of an island 
(growth) or a cavity (etching). Etching or  growing of 
a material starts at active kink sites on steps. Kink sites 
are atoms with as many bonds to the crystal as to the 
liquid. Kinetics depends critically on the number of 
such kink sites (see Figure 4.59). Remember that in 
Volume I, Chapter 2 we calculated that at room tem-
perature a certain number of vacancies (neq) must be 
present in an ideal crystal at any temperature above 
0 K (Volume I, Equation 2.59 and Figure 2.35).
A group of vacancies and adatoms can lead to a 
cavity (etching) or an island (growth), respectively. 
This aspect has remained neglected in the discussion 
of etch rates of single crystals until now. The free 
energy change, ΔG, involved in creating an island 
or digging a cavity (of circular shape in an isotropic 
material) of radius r on or in an atomically smooth 
surface, is given by:
 
∆G = −n∆µ + 2πrγ 
(4.3)
where n is the number of atoms forming the island 
or the number of atoms removed from the cavity, Δµ 
is the chemical potential difference between silicon 
atoms in the solid state and in the solution, and γ is 
the step free energy. The step free energy in Equation 
4.3 will be different at different crystallographic 
surfaces. This can be easily understood from the 
following example. A perfectly flat {111} surface in 
the Si diamond lattice has no kink positions (three 
backbonds, one dangling bond per atom), whereas 
on the {001} face every atom has two backbonds and 
two dangling bonds; that is, every position is a kink 
position. Consequently, creating an adatom-cavity 
pair on {111} surfaces costs energy: three bonds 
must be broken and only one is reformed. In the 
case of {001} faces, the picture is different. Creating 
an adatom-cavity pair now costs no energy because 
two bonds must be broken to remove an atom from 
the {001} face, but the energy is returned by placing 
the atom back on the surface. In Equation 4.3 n can 
be further written out as:
 
n = πr2hρ 
(4.4)
where h is the height of the step (down for a cavity 
and up for an island), r is the dia meter of the hole or 
island, and ρ is the density (atoms/cm3) of the solid 
material. The result is:
 
∆G = −πr2hρ∆µ + 2πrγ 
(4.5)
where Δµ is counted positive, and γ is positive in any 
case. In Figure 4.60 we show a plot of ΔG versus r. 
Equation 4.6 exhibits a maximum at:
 
r
h
* =
γ
ρ μ
Δ  
(4.6)
At r*, the free energy is:
 
Δ
Δ
Δ
G
G(r )
h
*
*
=
=
γ
ρ μ
π
2
 
(4.7)
Consequently, an island or an etched cavity of crit-
ical size exists on a smooth face. If by chance a cavity 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   275
Adatom
Kink
Terrace
Step or ledge
Vacancy
FIGURE 4.59 Perspective drawing of a crystal showing 
terraces, step or ledge, kinks, adatoms, and vacancies.
Step-free energy
ΔG
ΔG*
Chemical potential
r*
r
FIGURE 4.60 A plot of ΔG versus r based on Equation 4.5 
exhibits a maximum.

[Page 276]
is dug into a crystal plane smaller than r*, it will be 
filled rather than allowed to grow, and an island 
that is too small will dissolve rather than continue 
to grow because that is the easy way to decrease the 
free energy. With r = r*, islands or cavities do not have 
any course of action, but in case of r > r*, the islands 
or cavities can grow until the whole layer is filled or 
removed. Importantly, if r* is equal or smaller than 
the diameter of a single atom, every atom that leaves 
the surface will lead to a whole layer filled (a terrace) 
or removed. In the case of crystal growth, the reverse 
of etching, this phenomenon is called kinetic rough-
ening. For isotropic etching Δµ is very large; therefore, 
for all crystal orientations r* is very small. On the 
other hand, in light of this nucleation barrier theory, 
to remove atoms directly from flat crystal faces, such 
as the {111} Si faces, seems very difficult because the 
created cavities increase the free energy of the sys-
tem, and filling of adjacent atoms is more probable 
than removal; in other words, a nucleation barrier 
has to be overcome. That is, in anisotropic etch-
ing, Δµ is small, or, based on Equation 4.7, a sizable 
nucleation barrier must be overcome. The growth 
and etch rates, R, of flat faces are proportional to:
 
R
e
G
kT
*
−∆
 
(4.8)
Because ΔG* is proportional to γ 2 (see Equation 
4.7), the activation energy is different for different 
crystallographic faces, and both the etch rate and 
the activation energy are anisotropic. If ΔG*/kT is 
large, the etch rate will be very slow, as is the case 
for large step free energies. Both Δµ and γ depend 
on the temperature and type of etchant, and these 
parameters might provide clues to understanding 
the variation of etch rate, degree of anisotropy, tem-
perature dependence, and so on, giving this model 
perhaps more bandwidth than Seidel et al.’s model. 
According to Elwenspoek et al., the chemical reac-
tion energy barrier and the transport in the liquid 
are isotropic, and the most prominent anisotropy 
effect is caused by the step free energy (absent on 
rough surfaces) rather than the surface free energy. 
However, the surface free energy and the step free 
energies are related: when comparing flat faces, 
those having a large surface free energy have a small 
step free energy, and vice versa. The most important 
difference in these two parameters is that the step 
free energy is zero for a rough surface, whereas the 
surface energy remains finite.
Flat faces grow and etch with a rate proportional to 
ΔG*, which predicts that faces with a large free energy 
to form a step will grow and etch much slower than 
faces with a smaller free energy. Elementary analysis 
indicates that the only smooth face of the diamond 
lattice is the (111) plane. There may be other flat 
faces, but with lower activation energies, as a result 
of reconstruction and/or adsorption, prominent can-
didates in this category are {100} and {110} planes. 
On the other hand, a rough crystal face grows and 
etches with a rate directly proportional to Δµ. The 
temperature at which γ vanishes and a face transi-
tions from smooth to rough is called the roughening 
transition temperature TR.183,184 Above TR, the crystal is 
rough on the microscopic scale. Rough crystal faces 
grow and dissolve with a rate proportional to Δµ and 
therefore proceed faster than flat surfaces. Imperfect 
crystals, for example, surfaces with screw disloca-
tions, etch even faster with R proportional to Δµ2.
For the state of a surface slightly above or below 
the roughening temperature, TR, thermal equilibrium 
conditions apply. Etching, in most practical cases, is 
far from equilibrium, and kinetic roughening might 
occur. Kinetic roughening occurs if the super- or 
undersaturation of the solution is so large that the 
thermally created islands or cavities are the size of 
the critical nucleus.184 One can show that if the super- 
or undersaturation is larger than Δµc, given by:
 
Δμ = π γ
c
0
2
f
kT
 
(4.9)
(f0 being the area one atom occupies in a given 
crystal plane), the growth and etch mechanism 
changes from a nucleation barrier-controlled mech-
anism to an isotropic growth/etch mechanism. The 
growth rate and etch rate become proportional to 
the chemical potential difference (Δµ). Thus, it can 
be expected that if the undersaturation becomes 
high enough, even the {111} faces could etch iso-
tropically, as they do in acidic etchants. If the 
undersaturation becomes so large that Δµ << kT, the 
nucleation barrier breaks down. Each single-atom 
cavity acts as a nucleation site made in vast num-
bers by thermal fluctuations. The face in question 
276   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 277]
etches with a rate comparable to the etch rate of a 
rough surface. This situation is called kinetic rough-
ening. If all faces are kinetically rough, the etch rate 
becomes isotropic.
The binding energy ΔE of an atom in a crystal slice 
with orientation (hkl) divided by kT (Boltzmann 
constant × absolute temperature) is known as the α 
factor of Jackson of that crystal face,185 or:
 
α = ∆E
kT
 
(4.10)
At sufficiently low temperature, where entropy 
effects can be ignored, kTα is proportional to the step 
free energy γ, and the number of adatom-cavity pairs 
is then proportional to exp(−α). This number is very 
small on the {111} silicon faces at low temperature, 
but 1 on the {001} silicon faces at any temperature. 
The consequence for {111} and {001} planes is that, 
at sufficiently low temperatures, the first are atomi-
cally smooth and the latter are atomically rough.
Isotropic etching requires conditions of kinetic 
roughening because the etch rate is no longer domi-
nated by a nucleation barrier but by transport pro-
cesses in solution and the chemical reaction. To test 
this aspect of the model, Elwenspoek et al. show 
that there is a transition from isotropic to aniso-
tropic etching if the undersaturation becomes too 
small. This can occur if one etches with an acidic 
etchant very long or if one etches through very 
small holes in a mask (crevice effect). In both cases, 
anisotropic behavior becomes evident as aging or 
limited transport of the solution causes the under-
saturation to become very small. No proof is avail-
able to indicate that acidic etchants are much more 
undersaturated than the alkaline etchants. Still, the 
above explains some phenomena that Seidel et al.’s 
model fails to address. Another nice confirmation 
of Elwenspoek et al.’s model is in the effect of mis-
alignment on etch rate. A misalignment of the mask 
close to smooth faces implies steps; there is no need 
for nucleation to etch. Because the density of steps 
is  proportional to the angle of misalignment, the 
etch rate should be proportional to the misalign-
ment angle, provided the distance between steps is 
not too large. Nucleation of new cavities becomes 
very probable. This has been observed for the etch 
rate close to the <111> directions.52
Where Elwenspoek et al.’s model becomes a bit 
murky is in the classification of which surfaces are 
smooth and which ones are rough. As mentioned 
above for single-crystal Si, only the {111} planes are 
smooth at low temperatures. At this stage, the model 
does not explain anything more than other mod-
els; every model has an explanation for the slower 
{111} etch rate. However, as pointed out, these 
authors invoke the possibility of surface reconstruc-
tion and/or adsorption of surface species, which, by 
decreasing the surface free energy, could make faces 
such as {001} and {110} flat as well but with lower 
activation energies. The authors also take heart in 
the fact that CVD experiments often end up show-
ing flat {110}, {100}, {331}, and, strongest of all, 
{111} planes. Si etching models are improving fast, 
but especially where the influence of the etchant is 
concerned, more convincing thermodynamic data 
are needed to estimate Δµ and γ.
Madou Model for Isotropic versus 
Anisotropic Etching of Silicon
In contrast to alkaline etching, with an acidic etch-
ant such as HF, holes are needed for etching Si. An 
n-type Si electrode immersed in HF in the dark will 
not etch because of lack of holes. The same electrode 
in an alkaline medium etches readily. A p-type elec-
trode in an HF solution, where holes are available 
under the proper bias, will etch even in the dark. For 
HF etchants, one might assume that the Ghandi and 
Kern model,77,181 relying on the injection of holes, 
applies. In terms of the band model, this must mean 
that the silicon/electrolyte interface in acidic solu-
tions exhibits different energetics from the alkaline 
case. It is not directly obvious why the energetics 
of the silicon/electrolyte interface would  be pH- 
dependent. To the contrary, because the flat-band 
potential of most oxide semiconductors and most 
oxide-covered semiconductors (such as Si) and the 
Fermi level of the H2O/OH− redox couple in an 
aqueous solution are both expected to change by 
59 mV for each pH unit change,186 one would expect 
the energetics of the interface to be pH independent. 
Because the electronegativity in a Si-F bond is higher 
than for a Si-OH bond, one might even expect the 
back-bond surface states to be raised higher in an HF 
medium, making an electron injection mechanism 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   277

[Page 278]
even more likely than in alkaline media. To clarify 
this contradiction, we analyze the band model of a 
Si electrode in an acidic medium in more detail. The 
band model shown in Figure 4.61 was constructed 
based on a set of impedance measurements on an 
n-type Si electrode in a set of aqueous  solutions at 
different pH values. Mott-Schottky plots were con-
structed from the impedance measurements to deter-
mine the pH dependency of the flat-band potential. 
From that, the position of the conduction band Ecs, 
as well as valence band edges Evs, of the Si electrode 
in an acidic medium at a fixed pH of 2.2 (the point 
of zero charge) was calculated at 0.74 eV versus SCE 
(an often-used reference electrode in electrochemis-
try) for Ecs, and −0.36 eV versus SCE for Evs.187,188
We have assumed in Figure 4.61 that the bands 
are bent upward at open circuit (see below for justi-
fication); thus, holes in the valence band are driven 
to the interface where they can react with Si atoms 
or with competing reducing agents from the elec-
trolyte. Because we want to etch Si, we are only 
interested in the reactions where Si itself is con-
sumed. Reactions of holes with reducing agents are 
of great importance in photoelectrochemical solar 
cells.188 For n-type Si, holes can be 1) injected by oxi-
dants from the  solution (e.g., by adding nitric acid 
to the HF solution); 2) supplied at the electrolyte/ 
semiconductor  interface by shining light on a prop-
erly biased n-type Si wafer; or 3) created by impact 
ionization, that is, Zener breakdown, of a sufficiently 
high reverse biased n-type Si electrode.189 With a 
p-type Si wafer, a small forward bias supplies all the 
holes needed for the oxidation of the lattice even 
without light because the conduction happens via a 
hole mechanism. An important finding, explaining 
the different reaction paths in acidic and alkaline 
media, comes from plotting the flat-band potential 
as a function of pH. It was found that the band dia-
gram of Si shifts with less than 59 mV per pH unit. 
Actually, the average shift is only about 30 mV per 
pH unit.188 As shown in Figure 4.62, with increasing 
pH, the energy levels of the solution increase faster 
than the energy levels in the semiconductor. As a 
consequence, it is more likely that electron injec-
tion takes place in alkaline media as the filled levels 
associated with the OH– are closer to the conduc-
tion band, whereas in acidic media the filled levels 
of the redox system overlap better with the valence 
band, favoring a hole reaction. A lower position of 
the redox couple with respect to the conduction 
band edge, Ecs, in acidic media explains the upward 
bending of the bands as drawn in Figure 4.62. With 
isotropic etching in acidic media, the reaction starts 
with a hole in the valence band, equivalent to a bro-
ken Si-Si bond. In this case, the relative  position of 
backbond-related surface states in different crystal 
orientations is of no consequence, and all planes 
etch at the same rate. A study of the interfacial ener-
getics helps to understand why isotropic etching 
occurs in acidic media and anisotropic etching in 
alkaline media.
A few words of caution regarding our explanation 
for the reactivity difference between acidic and alka-
line media are in order. Little is known about the 
width of the bell-shaped curves describing the redox 
levels in solution.186 Not knowing the surface con-
centrations of the reactive redox species involved in 
the etching reactions further hinders a better under-
standing of the surface energetics because the bell-
shaped curves for oxidant and reductant will only be 
the same height (as drawn in Figures 4.61 and 4.62) if 
the concentrations of oxidant and reductant are the 
same. Clearly, the above picture is oversimplified; 
278   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
–
–
–
–
–
+ +
–
–
–
ECS
EOX
Eredox
EVS
ESCE
Ered
EV
EC
EF
L
0
0.74
µ
FIGURE 4.61 Band diagram for n-type Si in pH = 2.2 (no 
bias or illumination). Reference is the SCE. In Figure 4.40 
no energy values were given; here we provide positions 
of the conduction band edge, Ecs = 0.74 eV versus SCE, 
and the valence band edge, Evs = 0.74 eV −1.1 eV = −0.36 
eV versus SCE (1.1 eV is the bandgap of Si). These val-
ues were determined by means of Mott-Schottky plots. 
(Madou, M. J., K. W. Frese, and S. R. Morrison. 1980. 
Photoelectrochemical corrosion of semiconductors for 
solar cells. SPIE 248:88–95.187) The separation between the 
Fermi energy and the bottom of the conduction band is 
indicated by μ.

[Page 279]
several authors have found that the dissolution of 
Si in HF might involve both the conduction and 
valence band, a claim confirmed by photocurrent 
multiplication experiments.102,190 These photocur-
rent multiplication experiments showed that one or 
two holes generated by light in the Si valence band 
were sufficient to dislodge one Si unit, meaning that 
the rest of the charges were injected into the conduc-
tion band.191 Our contention here is only that the 
low pH dependence of the flat-band potential of a 
silicon electrode makes a conduction band mecha-
nism more favorable with alkaline-type etchants and 
a hole mechanism more favorable in acidic media.
Continued attempts at modeling the etch rates 
of all Si planes are underway. For example, Hesketh 
et al.192 attempted to model the etch rates of the dif-
ferent planes developing on silicon spheres in etch-
ing experiments with KOH and CsOH by calculating 
the surface free energy. The density of surface bonds 
on a Si plane is indicative of the surface free energy, 
which can be estimated by counting the bond den-
sity and multiplying by the bond energy. Using the 
unit cell dimension a of Si of 5.431 Å and a silicon-
to-silicon bond energy of 42.2 kcal/mol, the surface 
free energy, ΔG, can be related to NB, the bond den-
sity, by the following expression:
 
ΔG
N
2
J
m
B
2
=
×
−
2 94 10 19
.
 
(4.11)
Although Hesketh et al. could not explain the etch-
ing differences observed between CsOH and KOH 
(these authors identified a cation effect on the etch 
rate!), a plot of the calculated surface free energy 
versus orientation yielded minima for all low index 
planes such as {100}, {110}, and {111}, as well as for 
the high index {522} planes. Fewer bonds per unit 
area on the low index planes produce a lower sur-
face energy and lower etching rate. When Hesketh 
et al. added the in-plane bond density to the sur-
face bond density, producing a total bond density, a 
correlation with the hierarchy of etch rates in CsOH 
and KOH was found, that is, {311}, {522} > {100} > 
{111}. The  surfaces with the higher bond density 
etched faster, suggesting that the etch rate might be 
a function of the number of electrons available at 
the surface. Hesketh et al. imply that their result falls 
in line with the Seidel et al.’s model, although it is 
unclear how the total bond density relates to surface 
state energies of backbonds. Moreover, Hesketh’s 
model does not take into account the angles of the 
bonds, and in Elwenspoek’s view, the surface free 
energy does not determine the anisotropy.
More research should focus on the modeling of 
Si etch rates. The semiconductor electrochemistry 
of corroding Si electrodes will be a major tool in 
further developments. Interested readers may con-
sult Sundaram et al.193 on Si etching in hydrazine 
and Palik et al.128 on the etch-stop mechanism in 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   279
– –
– – – – – –
–
–
µ
1.04
pH = 12.2 in KOH
pH = 2.2 in HF
–
–
–
–
–
+ +
–
–
–
ECS
EOX
Eredox
EVS
ECS
EVS
ESCE
Ered
EV
EC
EF
EV
EC
EF
L
0
EOX
Eredox
ESCE
Ered
0
0.74
µ
FIGURE 4.62 Band model comparison of the Si/electrolyte interface at low and high pH. Increasing the pH by 10 units 
shifts the redox levels up by 600 mV, whereas the Si bands only move up by 300 mV. This leads to a different band-bend-
ing and a different reaction mechanism, that is, electron injection in the alkaline media (anisotropic) and hole injection 
in acidic media (isotropic). 

[Page 280]
heavily doped silicon; both explain in some detail 
the silicon/electrolyte energetics. A more generic 
treatise on semiconductor electrochemistry can be 
found in Morrison.194 A free etch simulator from the 
University of Illinois can be found at http://mass.
micro.uiuc.edu/research/completed/aces/pages/
home.html. For more modeling software of Si etch-
ing, consult Volume III, Chapter 6.
Etching with Bias and/or Illumination 
of the Semiconductor
Introduction
The isotropic and anisotropic etching of Si we dis-
cussed thus far requires neither a bias nor illumina-
tion of the semiconductor. The etching in such cases 
proceeds at open circuit, and the semiconductor is 
shielded from light. In a cyclic voltammogram, as 
shown in Figure 4.63, the operational potential 
in this case is the rest potential, Vr, where anodic 
and cathodic currents are equal in magnitude and 
opposite in sign, resulting in the absence of flow of 
current in an external circuit. This does not mean 
that macroscopic changes do not occur at the elec-
trode surface because the anodic and cathodic cur-
rents may be part of different chemical reactions just 
as in the corrosion of a metal exposed to, for exam-
ple, seawater. Earlier, in the context of Si etching, we 
called this type of open circuit etching “electroless” 
etching (see page 266). As an example of “electro-
less” etching, consider again the isotropic etching of 
Si in an HF/HNO3 etchant at open circuit where the 
local anodic reaction is associated with corrosion of 
the semiconductor:
 
Local anode: Si
2H O
nh
SiO
4H
(4-n)e
2
2
+
+
+
+
+
−
→
+
 
Reaction 4.19
 
SiO
6HF
H SiF
2H O
2
2
6
2
+
+
→
 
Reaction 4.20
(the involvement of holes h+ in the acidic reaction 
was discussed in the preceding sections), whereas 
the local cathodic reaction could be associated with 
reduction of HNO3:
 Local cathode: NO
4H
3e
NO
2H O
3
+
2
−
−
+
+
→
+
 
 
 
Reaction 4.21
We now explore Si etching while illuminating 
and/or applying a bias to the silicon sample. To sim-
plify the situation, we first consider the case of an 
oxidant-free solution so that all the holes must come 
from within the semiconductor. Anodic dissolution 
of n-type Si in an HF-containing solution requires a 
supply of holes to the surface. For an n-type wafer 
under reverse bias, very few holes will show at the 
surface unless the high reverse (anodic) bias is suf-
ficient to induce impact ionization or Zener break-
down (see Figure 4.63a). Alternatively, the interface 
can be illuminated, creating holes in the space charge 
region (SCR) that the field pushes toward the semi-
conductor/electrolyte interface (Figure 4.63b). In the 
forward direction, electrons from the Si conduction 
band (majority carriers) reduce oxidizing species in 
the solution (e.g., reduction of protons to hydrogen). 
A p-type Si sample exhibits high anodic currents 
even without illumination at small anodic (forward) 
bias (Figure 4.63c). Here, the current is carried by 
holes. A p-type electrode illuminated under reverse 
280   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
+
–
+
+
Zener breakdown for n type Si
Zener breakdown for p type Si
Anodic currents
Cathodic currents
Holes to
the surface
(a)
(b)
(c )
(d)
V vs. SCE
Vr
Vr
Electrons to
the surface
FIGURE 4.63 Basic cyclic voltammograms (I vs. V) for 
n- and p-type Si in an HF solution in the absence of a 
hole- injecting oxidant: n-type Si without illumination 
(a); n-type Si under illumination (b); p-type Si without 
illumination (c); p-type Si under illumination (d). If the 
reactions on the dark Si electrode determining the rest 
potential Vr for n- and p-type are the same, then Vr is 
expected to be the same as well. For clarity of the figure 
we have chosen Vr differently here; in practice, Vr for 
n- and p-type Si in HF are found to be identical.

[Page 281]
bias gives rise to a cathodic photocurrent (Figure 
4.63d). At relatively low light intensities, the pho-
tocurrent plateaus for both n- and p-types (Figure 
4.63b and d respectively) depend linearly on light 
intensity. The photocurrent is cathodic for p-type Si 
(species are reduced by photoproduced electrons at 
the surface, e.g., hydrogen formation) and anodic 
for n-type Si (species are oxidized by photopro-
duced holes at the surface; either the lattice itself is 
consumed or reducing compounds in solution are). 
In Figure 4.64, we show the cyclic voltammograms 
of n-type and p-type Si in the presence of a hole-
injecting oxidant. The most obvious effect is on the 
dark p-type silicon electrode. The injection of holes 
in the valence band increases the cathodic dark cur-
rent dramatically. The current level measured in this 
manner for varying oxidant concentration or differ-
ent oxidants could be used to estimate the efficiency 
of different isotropic Si etchants, a pointer to the 
fact that semiconductor electrochemistry has been 
underused as a tool to study Si etching. When n-type 
Si is consumed under illumination, we experience 
photocorrosion (see Figure 4.63b). This photocorro-
sion phenomenon has been a major barrier to the 
long-term viability of photoelectrochemical cells.187 
In what follows, photocorrosion is put to good use 
for electropolishing and formation of microporous 
and macroporous layers.189
Electropolishing and Porous Silicon 
Electropolishing In Figure 4.65 we show cyclic vol-
tammograms for p- and n-type Si in an HF solution 
in the dark and under illumination. The anodic cur-
rent in the dark for a p-type Si electrode presents 
two peaks, characterized by iCRIT and vp (first peak) 
and iMAX and vMAX (second peak). This was also illus-
trated, in somewhat less detail, in Figure 4.37, where 
we only marked the first peak with ip and vp (iCRIT 
was called ip in that graph) and did not show the 
oscillations at potentials positive of vMAX. As can be 
deduced from this figure, at high light intensities, in 
so-called photoelectrochemical etching (PEC), the 
anodic curves for n-type and p-type Si are similar. 
The two differences are 1) a potential shift of a few 
hundred millivolts, and 2) the illuminated n-type Si 
in the anodic range only shows the first peak and 
then transitions into a photoplateau. At very high 
illuminations, a second anodic peak also appears in 
this case. Because of this equivalence, most of the 
processes described below apply for both forward-
biased p-type and for n-type Si under strong illu-
mination. PEC etching involves photocorrosion in 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   281
(a)
(b)
V vs. SCE
+
+
Two diﬀerent
concentrations
of hole injecting
oxidant
FIGURE 4.64 Basic cyclic voltammograms for n- and 
p-type Si in an HF solution and in the presence of a hole-
injecting oxidant, for example, HNO3: n-type Si in the dark 
(a); p-type Si in the dark (b). An increase of the cathodic 
dark current on the p-type electrodes is most obvious. The 
current level is proportional to the oxidant concentration.
FIGURE 4.65 Cyclic voltammograms identifying porous 
Si formation regime and electropolishing regime. (From 
Levy-Clement, C., A. Lagoubi, R. Tenne, and M. Neumann-
Spallart. 1992. Photoelectrochemical etching of silicon. 
Electrochim Acta 37:877–88. With permission.189)

[Page 282]
an electrolyte in which the semiconductor is gener-
ally chemically stable in the dark; that is, no hole-
 injecting oxidants are present, as in the case of an 
HF solution (see also experiments described in 
Figure 4.63). For carrying out PEC, a setup as shown 
in Figure 4.66a may be used with a provision to illu-
minate the semiconductor electrode. The Al strip 
shown here is used to make ohmic contact to the back 
side of the Si electrode. For fabricating porous Si and 
electropolishing, one often uses a so-called electro-
chemical double cell, also referred to as double tank 
lateral cell, as shown in Figure 4.66b. Such a cell has 
two platinum working electrodes, one in each part 
of the cell, with the Si wafer in the middle separating 
the two parts. When current is passed through the 
wafer, its anodic side will be etched. The main advan-
tages compared with the cell in Figure 4.66a are that 
no back-side metallization is required and that the 
uniformity of the process is typically better. 
The potential range to the left (more positive) of 
the first current peak (vp) in Figure 4.65 was clari-
fied earlier as the electropolishing range. Here, the 
current density exceeds the so-called critical current 
density, iCRIT (see also Equation 4.1), marked by the 
first peak in the I-V curve. The silicon etches in this 
domain, leaving behind a smooth (electropolished) 
surface. It is generally assumed that the electropol-
ishing of silicon takes place in two steps. In the first 
step an oxide layer forms, and this oxide layer sub-
sequently dissolves in the HF (see Reactions 4.8 and 
4.9). Hills on the surface dissolve faster than depres-
sions because the current density is higher on high 
spots. As a result, the surface becomes smoother, that 
is, electropolishing takes place.91 Electropolishing 
in this regime can be used to smooth silicon sur-
faces or to thin epitaxially grown silicon layers. The 
second peak and the oscillations in Figure 4.65 are 
explained as follows: at current densities exceeding 
iMAX another type of oxide grows on top of the sili-
con, leading to a decrease of the anodic photocur-
rent (explaining the iMAX peak), until a steady state 
is reached in which dissolution of the oxide by HF 
through formation of a fluoride complex in solu-
tion (SiF6
2–) equals again the oxide growth rate. The 
oscillations sometimes observed in the anodic curve 
in Figure 4.65 can be explained by a nonlinear cor-
relation between formation and dissolution of the 
oxide.189
Electropolishing is also possible under a layer of 
porous Si already formed at the porous Si/bulk sili-
con interface, and the porous layer may be under-
etched this way. The latter is the enabling technology 
in the Bosch advanced porous Si membrane pro-
cess (APSM) (see page 293). The APSM technology 
makes use of porous Si to form a cavity underneath 
the surface of monocrystalline silicon and turns the 
traditional bulk micromachining process into a sur-
face micromachining technology.
Porous Silicon
Historical Note Uhlir first discovered porous 
Si (PS) in 1956 at the Bell Laboratories.7 He found 
that, with the appropriate current and solution com-
position, silicon does not dissolve uniformly, and 
pores are produced instead. These pores, he found, 
propagate primarily in the <100> direction of the 
Si wafer. This did not provide the smooth polish 
for Si that he sought, and after his curious results 
were reported in a Bell Labs technical note, the 
work was pretty much forgotten. Renewed interest 
in porous Si came about in the 1970s and 1980s: its 
high surface area was found to be useful as a model 
in the spectroscopic studies of chemical adsorption/
282   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.66 Cells for electrochemical and photoelectro-
chemical etching of Si. (a) The cell comes with a provision 
to illuminate the semiconductor. The Al is used for ohmic 
contact to the Si electrode. (Picture from http:// sailorgroup.
ucsd.edu/research/porous_Si_intro.html.) (b) Electrochemi-
cal double cell (also referred to as double tank lateral 
cell). (Gaburro, Z., N. Daldosso, and L. Pavesi, eds. 2005. 
Encyclopedia of condensed matter physics: porous silicon. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier Ltd.195)

[Page 283]
desorption kinetics on crystalline Si surfaces, and 
the material also found application as a precur-
sor to generate thick oxide layers on Si and as a 
dielectric layer in capacitance-based chemical sen-
sors (see above and further below under “Porous Si 
Applications”).
In the late 1980s, Leigh Canham, from the Defense 
Research Agency in the United Kingdom, argued 
that the thin Si filaments generated when the pores 
in  porous Si become large and numerous enough 
might display quantum confinement effects. His intu-
ition turned out to be correct, and by 1990 Canham 
found that electrochemically etched PS material was 
fluorescent at room temperature with a bright red-
 orange color (see Figure 4.67).196,197 Shortly thereafter, 
in 1991, Richter demonstrated electroluminescence 
on porous Si in the 560–480-nm range.198
The observation that porous Si features a large 
photoluminescence (PL) effect in the visible range 
(at room temperature!) was a very surprising result 
because the PL efficiency of bulk Si (Si) is very low as 
a result of its indirect energy bandgap (typical room 
temperature light emission efficiencies for silicon 
are much less than 0.001%; in contrast, GaAs LEDs 
routinely have quantum efficiencies of 1–10%, and 
approaching 30% for specialized LEDs). As expected 
from the quantum confinement-induced blue shift, 
the emitted color is at an energy that is significantly 
larger than the bandgap energy for bulk Si (which 
occurs in the infrared region of the spectrum 
Eg = 1.1 eV) (see Figure 4.68 and Volume I, Chapter 3). 
The underlying mechanism for this blue shift is the 
result of the quantum-confined structures formed 
in the porous Si pore walls. High-porosity porous Si 
material emits green/blue light, whereas low poros-
ity emits red light.
The discovery of efficient visible light emis-
sion from porous Si initiated an explosion of 
work focused on creating Si-based optoelectronic 
switches, displays, lasers, and so on. However, prob-
lems with the material’s chemical and mechani-
cal stability and the aging of its optoelectronic 
properties (see Figure 4.73) led to a waningof the 
interest in porous Si as an optoelectronic mate-
rial by the mid-1990s (http://chem-faculty.ucsd.
edu/sailor/research/porous_Si_intro.html). By the 
late 1990s, optoelectronic properties research of 
porous Si got a new lease on life, however, because 
of the potential of porous Si for photonic crystals 
(see below and Volume I, Chapter 5).197 Porous Si 
might represent a simple way of making photonic 
crystals as explained in the section on Macroporus 
Silicon. Other unique features of porous Si, such as 
its large surface area, its controllable pore size, its 
convenient surface chemistry, and its compatibility 
with conventional silicon microfabrication tech-
nologies, also inspired research into applications 
far outside the optoelec tronics field. Additional 
applications include bio compatible interfaces, bio-
sensing, and drug delivery. An overview of porous 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   283
FIGURE 4.67 Bright photoluminescence of porous Si 
at room temperature. (Science and art from Mikael 
Östling, KTH.)
FIGURE 4.68 Bandgap widening of silicon in porous silicon.

[Page 284]
Si applications is listed in Table 4.11. Today, porous 
Si, together with carbon nanotubes, is often used 
to illustrate nanotechnology products/applications 
that are relatively easy to make/implement.
Porosity in Si Porosity P of a material is the volu-
metric fraction of air in the material and is defined 
as:
 
P
V
V
m
m
m
voids
material
original
anodized
origi
=
=
−
nal
dissolved
m
−
 
(4.12)
For example, porous Si with P = 10% means that 
there is 10% air and 90% silicon in the material. The 
tunable pore size range in porous Si can be divided 
into (International Union of Pure and Applied 
Chemistry definition)195:
 
1. Microporous: d < 2 nm 
 
2. Mesoporous: 2 nm < d < 50 nm
 
3. Macroporous: d > 50 nm
The geometry of porous Si varies from a sponge-
like layer consisting of nanoscale branch-shaped 
fractal-like pores to straight pore arrays. These geom-
etries depend on various conditions, such as the 
doping level and doping type of the Si substrate, the 
current density, HF concentration, and crystal orien-
tation. The porous Si porosity can vary between 5% 
and 85%, and pore size can differ by three orders of 
magnitude, 20 Å to 10 µm, and the exact underly-
ing formation mechanism, we shall see, is still under 
debate. The word nanoporous is sometimes used for 
the smallest-pore regime.
Accurate determination of pore size distribution 
in porous Si is usually performed by the analysis 
of adsorption isotherms of gases at low  temperature 
in the so-called Barret-Joyner-Halenda, or BJH, 
method.199 The physical adsorption of gases by a 
porous surface is increased relative to a nonporous 
one because of capillary condensation in the pores. 
This increase in adsorption starts when the gas pres-
sure is high enough to fill the smallest pores. The 
specific surface area A of porous Si, determined by 
Brunauer-Emmett-Teller, or BET, ranges from ABET = 
1–1000  m2/cm3.200 The structure of the pores in 
nanoporous Si can best be observed by transmis-
sion electron microscopy (TEM), and its thickness 
can be monitored with an infrared (IR) microscope. 
Structural properties of porous Si have also been 
investigated by a wide variety of other techniques 
such as electron microscopy, scanning probe micros-
copy, x-ray scattering techniques, x-ray absorption 
284   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 4.11 Porous Si Application Fields and Examples195
Application Area
Role of PS
Key Property
Optoelectronics
LED
Waveguide
Field emitter
Optical memory
Efficient electroluminescence
Tunability of refractive index
Hot carrier emission
Nonlinear properties
Microoptics
Fabry-Perot filters
Photonic band gap structures
All optical switching
Refractive index modulation
Regular macropore array
Energy conversion
Antireflection coatings
Photoelectrochemical cells
Solar cells
Low refractive index
Photocorrosion cells
Environmental 
monitoring
Gas sensing
Ambient sensitive properties
Microelectronics
Microcapacitor
Insulator layer
Low-k material
High specific surface area
High resistance
Electrical properties
Wafer technology
Buffer layer in heteroepitaxy
SOI wafers; see also Eltran process
Variable lattice parameter
High etch selectivity
Micromachining
Thick sacrificial layer
Highly controllable etching 
patameters
Biotechnology
Tissue bonding
Biosensors
Tunable chemical reactivity
Enzyme immobilization

[Page 285]
techniques, and Raman spectroscopy. For example, 
Raman measurements were used to demonstrate 
the crystallinity of the porous Si skeleton and infer 
information on the size of the Si nanocrystals. 
The very reactive porous Si material etches or 
oxidizes very rapidly. Heat treatment in an oxidiz-
ing atmosphere leads to oxidized porous Si (OPS). 
The oxidation occurs throughout the whole porous 
volume, and SiO2 layers several micrometers thick 
can be obtained in times that correspond to the 
growth of a few hundred nanometers on regular Si 
surfaces (1100°C in oxygen for 30 minutes is suf-
ficient to make a 4-µm-thick film).201 Porous Si is 
low-density and remains single-crystalline, provid-
ing a suitable substrate for epitaxial Si film growth. 
These properties have been used to obtain dielectric 
isolation (fully isolated by porous oxidized silicon, 
or FIPOS) and to make silicon-on-insulator (SOI) 
wafers (see porous Si applications in Table 4.11); 
in dry etching (see Chapter 3), as prepared, porous 
Si etches six to seven times faster compared with 
 single-crystal Si.202 A typical etch rate of porous Si 
in a reactive ion etching (RIE) station, with SF6 as 
the gas, is 6.8 µm/min (whereas for nonporous Si 
it is 1.5 µm/min), and in a high-density plasma sta-
tion the etch rate is 66 µm/min (Si, 10 µm/min). 
The dry etching rate of porous Si depends on the 
porous Si porosity, aging of the layer, and ther-
mal treatment. The etch rate of thermally treated 
porous Si layers is significantly smaller than that 
of freshly etched layers (0.33 µm/min in a high-
 density plasma).203 By treatment of the porous Si 
with NH3 at high temperatures, it is possible to 
make thick Si3N4 films. Even at 13 µm, these films 
show little evidence of stress in contrast to stoichio-
metric LPCVD nitride films.204
Porous Silicon Fabrication
Microporous Silicon Whether one is in the 
regime of electropolishing or porous Si formation 
depends on both the anodic current density and the 
HF concentration. The surface morphology produced 
by the Si dissolution process critically depends on 
whether mass transport or hole supply is the rate-
limiting step. Porous Si formation is favored for high 
HF concentrations and low currents (low anodic 
bias for p-type and weak light intensities for n-type 
Si), where the positive charge supply (holes) is limit-
ing, whereas smooth etching is favored for low HF 
concentration and high currents (higher anodic bias 
for p-type Si and strong light intensity for n-type Si), 
where mass transport is limiting.
For current densities less than iCRIT (Figure 4.65), 
holes are depleted at the surface, and HF accu-
mulates at the electrode/electrolyte interface. As a 
result, a dense network of fine holes forms.202,205 
Thus, porous Si typically forms when using low cur-
rent densities in a highly concentrated HF/water or 
an HF/ethanol solution—in other words, by limit-
ing the oxidation of silicon resulting from hole and 
OH– deficiency. In view of the Si etching models 
introduced earlier, one observes that aqueous HF is 
less suitable for the porous etching process because 
the silicon surface is hydrophobic in water. The 
porous layer can be made more structurally uniform 
if an ethanolic solution (e.g., 1 part of 48% HF and 
1 part ethanol) is used—this increases the wettabil-
ity of the silicon and allows better surface wetting 
by the acid. Ethanolic etch solutions also reduce the 
formation of hydrogen gas bubbles because ethanol 
acts as a surfactant and prevents bubbles sticking 
to the silicon surface. The potential range in Figure 
4.65 where porous Si forms is at potentials below 
(toward negative potentials) the first current peak 
(vp; see also Figure 4.37). During the formation of 
porous Si, hydrogen gas evolves, and the morphol-
ogy of the porous Si depends, among other factors, 
on the doping density of the wafer, orientation, 
the HF concentration, and the current density (and 
thus the light intensity for n-type Si and the voltage 
for p-type Si). As pointed out earlier, porous Si was 
shown to be monocrystalline,92 and the suggested 
reaction mechanism is based on the assumption 
that fluoride ions close to the surface cause the 
Si-Si backbonds to be polarized, thus facilitating 
the breaking of these bonds.206 The Si backbonds 
are broken, leaving an H-terminated surface and 
a SiHxFy compound that reacts with water and HF 
to form SiF6
2− and H2. The overall process, as intro-
duced earlier, is given by Reaction 4.7. 
As sketched in Figure 4.69, microporous silicon 
is easy to obtain: a few minutes of anodization in 
an HF solution suffices (a typical anodization rate is 
0.3 µm/min).
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   285

[Page 286]
Porous Si can also be formed chemically through 
Reactions 4.19 and 4.21. This is a much less com-
mon technique to form porous Si. The purely 
chemical process is called stain etching, or chemi-
cal etching (with no current flow), and is performed 
in an HF-HNO3 solution. In this case, the differ-
ence between chemical polishing and porous Si 
formation conditions is more subtle. In the chemi-
cal polishing case, all reacting surface sites switch 
constantly from being local anode (Reaction 4.19) 
to being local cathode (Reaction 4.21), resulting in 
nonpreferential etching. If surface sites do not switch 
fast between being local anode and cathode, charges 
have time to migrate over the surface. In this case, 
the original local cathode site remains a cathode for 
a longer time, and the corresponding local anode 
site, somewhere else on the surface, also remains an 
anode to keep the overall reaction neutral. A pref-
erential etching results at the localized anode sites, 
making the surface rough and causing porous Si 
to form.207 Any inhomogeneity, for example, some 
oxide or a kink site at the surface, might increase 
such preferential etching.207 Unlike porous Si fabri-
cated by electrochemical means, chemically etched 
porous Si film thickness is self-limiting.
Depending on porosity and/or pore size, porous Si 
has the general properties summarized in Table 4.12 
(single-crystal Si values are listed as reference). 
Remember that these properties can be tailored by 
the process conditions.
The electrical resistivity of porous Si is up to five 
orders of magnitude higher than that of intrinsic 
nonporous Si. The reason is that porous Si is depleted 
of free carriers. This depletion occurs either because 
1) energy gap widening caused by quantum con-
finement, which reduces the thermal generation of 
free carriers, or 2) trapping of free carriers. Trapping 
of free carriers takes place during the preparation 
of the porous Si, and again there are two possible 
explanations: 1) the binding energy of the dopant 
impurities is increased, or 2) the formation of more 
surface states occurs. It has been shown that the 
dopants are still present in the porous Si in a concen-
tration unchanged from the original Si, but that the 
dopants are in a neutral state. The electrical trans-
port through porous Si is very much affected by the 
disordered structure of the porous Si skeleton that 
restricts the conduction paths to a highly constrained 
geometry, which for certain types of porosities 
forms a percolated or fractal geometry. As a conse-
quence, conductivity is thermally activated, strongly 
frequency-dependent, and highly dispersive. Several 
models have been proposed to explain the electrical 
transport properties in porous Si. They differ on the 
286   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.69 (a) Si piece. (b) Porous Si in circular area. (c) SEM of porous Si nanosponge.
TABLE 4.12 General Properties of Porous Si
Property
Porous Si Value
Single-Crystal Si Value
Young’s Modules E
83 GPa (P = 20%)–0.87 GPa (P = 90%)
160 GPa
Thermal conductivity
1.2 W/mK (nano)–80 W/mK (meso)
157 W/mK
Electrical resistivity
1010–1012 Ω cm nanoporous 
Optical bandgap
1.4 eV (P = 70%)–2.0 eV (P = 90%)
1.12 eV
Refractive index
1.2–2.8
3.94
Oxidation 1100°C for 30 min in oxygen
4 μm FASTER
<0.5 μm SLOWER
Dry etching (SF6 gas)
66 μm/min FASTER
10 μm/min SLOWER
Source: Gaburro, Z., N. Daldosso, and L. Pavesi, eds. 2005. Encyclopedia of condensed matter physics: porous silicon. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier Ltd.195

[Page 287]
transport paths and mechanisms assumed. The pro-
posed transport paths range from transport in the Si 
nanocrystals (with diffusion or tunneling between 
the Si nanocrystals or at their surface) to transport 
in the amorphous and disordered matrix surround-
ing the nanocrystals, or through both.
The nanoporous Si structures may have dimen-
sions in the low nanometer range. If the structure 
size reaches a value less than, e.g., 3 nm, quantum 
effects can occur; therefore, nanoporous samples can 
exhibit strong visible photoluminescence and elec-
troluminescence. Raman spectroscopy gives indirect 
information about the nanostructure of porous Si 
and has shown that the nanocrystals alter the selec-
tion rules relating to the interaction of optical pho-
nons with incident photons (see Volume I, Chapter 
5). This results in the efficient photoluminescence 
and electroluminescence of porous Si compared 
with nonporous Si. The first and most favored expla-
nation for the visible light emission in porous Si is 
the quantum confinement of excitons in nanometer-
sized Si nanostructures. The nature of the energy gap 
is still indirect even though a quasidirect bandgap 
can be formed in ultrasmall Si nanocrystals. The 
other properties of porous Si listed in Table 4.12 will 
be highlighted in the text below.
Macroporous Silicon In addition to micropo-
res, well-defined macropores (d > 50 nm) can also 
be made in Si by photo and/or bias etching in HF 
solutions. The macroporous material exhibits very 
low values of porosity (P < 10%) and high levels of 
roughness. Macropores have sizes as large as 10 µm, 
visible with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
rather than the transmission electron microscope 
(TEM) typically used for nanoporous material. The 
two types of pores often coexist, with micropo-
res covering the walls of macropores. This is not a 
matter of a broad fractal-type distribution of pores 
because the formation mechanism for the large 
pores is different.
Conditions of lower HF concentration and higher 
current density tend to offer larger diameter pores. 
Electrochemical etching of macropores or macro-
holes has been reported, for example, with n-type 
silicon in 2.5–5% HF under high voltage (>10 V), low 
current density (10 mAcm–2), under illumination, 
and in the dark.189 In the latter case, Zener break-
down in silicon (electric field strength in excess of 
3 × 105 V/cm) causes the hole formation (see also 
Volume I, Chapter 4 on Zener diodes and Volume I, 
Figure 4.43). In the case of lightly doped n-type 
silicon, the macropores are formed at much higher 
anodic potentials than those used for micropore 
formation.208 More details on models explaining 
porous Si formation follow below. By using a pore 
initiation pattern, the macropores can be localized 
at any desired location. This option is limited to 
macroporous porous Si because present lithographic 
resolution lowest limits are typically in the range of 
65 nm (Figure 4.70).
The dramatic effect of the use of a pore initiation 
pattern is illustrated in the comparison of Figures 
4.71 and 4.72.91,209 In Figure 4.71 we show repre-
sentative porous Si layers without the use of a pore 
initiation pattern. Figure 4.71a illustrates nanoscale 
pores (mesoporous Si),203 and Figure 4.71b shows 
microscale pores (macroporous Si).91 The 45° bevel 
cross-section in Figure 4.71b is of an n-type sample 
(1015/cm3 phosphorus-doped) and shows a random 
pattern of macropores. In contrast, the macroscale 
pores in Figure 4.72 all start at the micropit initia-
tion points. Pores orthogonal to the surface with 
depths up to a whole wafer thickness can be made, 
and aspect ratios as large as 250 are possible.
The periodic arrays of macropores shown in 
Figure 4.72 can form a 2D photonic crystal. Photonic 
crystals, we recall, are materials with a periodi-
cally varying index of refraction, and in porous 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   287
Si
Etch
Pits
Photolitography
KOH
anisotropic etch
Mask removal
Macroporous
anodization
FIGURE 4.70 Schematic lithographic procedure result-
ing in the definition of pore-starting etch pits. (Gaburro, 
Z., N. Daldosso, and L. Pavesi, eds. 2005. Encyclopedia of 
condensed matter physics: porous silicon. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier Ltd.195)

[Page 288]
Si, air alternates with Si (see Volume I, Chapter 
5). Grüning et al.210 realized such a photonic crys-
tal with a  photonic  bandgap in the near IR using 
macropores in n-type silicon etched under back-side 
illumination.
Summarizing, we have learned that single-crystal 
silicon can be turned into a porous material with 
porosity and pore sizes determined by the current 
density, type, and concentration of the dopant, as 
well as the hydrofluoric acid concentration. Also, a 
transition from pore formation to electropolishing 
is reached by increasing the current density and/or 
by decreasing the hydrofluoric acid concentration. 
Electropolishing is even possible under a layer of 
porous silicon (PS) already formed. The latter is the 
enabling technology in the Bosch APSM process (see 
page 293), which makes use of PS to form a cavity 
underneath the surface of monocrystalline silicon.
In Chapter 7 we learn that PS can also be formed 
under similar conditions from LPCVD polysilicon, 
with pores roughly following the grain boundaries 
of the polysilicon. We will see how, by changing the 
conditions from pore formation to electropolishing 
and back to PS, enclosed cavities may be formed 
with porous polysilicon walls (plugs) and “floor and 
ceiling” of silicon nitride layers.
Porous Silicon Drying and Aging When drying 
a porous Si film in air, a water meniscus forms in the 
pores, and this results in stress exerted on the pore 
walls. Depending on the size of the structure (poros-
ity) and the surface tension of the liquid, cracking of 
the porous Si layer is always a possibility. This lim-
its the maximum porosity obtainable and also sug-
gests different procedures for drying, for example, 
by working with very low surface tension liquids in 
the pores when drying. This may be accomplished 
by rinsing the freshly made porous Si with pure 
ethanol that has a lower surface tension than water 
(22 mJ/m2 compared with 72 mJ/m2); an alternative 
is to use pentane (with a surface tension of 14 mJ/m2). 
The best results, however, have been obtained by 
supercritical drying in CO2 (>95% porosity), where 
drying is performed above the supercritical point 
of a liquid, usually CO2.211 Other methods include 
freeze drying and using very slow evaporation rates. 
Pentane drying is the easiest to implement. Pentane 
has a very low surface tension and shows no chemi-
cal interaction with porous Si (unlike ethanol). 
Using pentane as drying liquid strongly reduces the 
288   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.71 Representative porous Si layers. (a) Nano-
scale pores (mesoporous Si). (Tserepi, A., et al., 2003. 
Dry etching of porous silicon in high density plasmas. 
Physica Status Solidi (A) 197:163–67.203) (b) Microscale 
pores (macroporous Si). (Lehmann, V. 1993. The physics 
of macropore formation in low doped n-type silicon. J 
Electrochem Soc 140:2836–43.91) Random: surface, cross-
section, and a 45° bevel of an n-type sample (1015/cm3 
phosphorus-doped) showing a random pattern of 
macropores. Pore initiation was enhanced by applying 
10-V bias in the first minute of anodization followed by 
149 minutes at 3 V. The current density was kept constant 
at 10 mA/cm2 by adjusting the back-side illumination. A 
6% aqueous solution of HF was used as an electrolyte.
FIGURE 4.72 SEM image of well-ordered localized or 
arrayed straight macropores. Inset, SEM image is an artifi-
cial micropit array formed in advance of Si electrochemical 
etching. Localized: surface, cross-section, and a 45° bevel 
of an n-type sample (1015/cm3 phosphorus-doped) show-
ing a predetermined pattern of macropores (3 V, 350 min, 
2.5% HF). Pore growth was induced by a regular pattern 
of pits produced by standard lithography and subsequent 
alkaline etching (inset top right). (From Lehmann, V. 1993. 
The physics of macropore formation in low doped n-type 
silicon. J Electrochem Soc 140:2836–43. With permission.91)

[Page 289]
capillary tension, but because water and pentane are 
nonmiscible, ethanol or methanol has to be used as 
intermediate rinsing liquid. Using this drying tech-
nique, PS layers with porosity values up to 90% and 
thickness up to 5 µm exhibit no cracking after dry-
ing. Supercritical drying requires a specific appara-
tus but is more effective in preventing cracking of 
the film; thus, porous layers of porosity values up to 
95% were demonstrated.211
In the electrolyte and immediately after dry-
ing, the pore walls are mostly H-terminated. The 
hydrogen termination is replaced by oxygen to 
form native oxide rapidly in air.211 This changes the 
properties of the porous Si over time, making it one 
of the major problems preventing the implementa-
tion of porous Si in practical applications. An exam-
ple of the nefarious effect of porous Si aging is its 
effect on photo- and electroluminescence of porous 
Si. The so-called luminescence fatigue shown in 
Figure 4.73 is explained by photochemical reactions 
occurring on the surface of the Si nanocrystals. As 
the time passes, a shift to the blue region in the 
peak position and both decreases and increases in 
the PL intensity have been reported. The blue shift 
has been attributed to the decrease in dimension of 
porous Si pillars resulting from the oxidization of 
the surface with time, which supports the quantum 
confinement effect.
Because of the large surface area of the porous Si, 
the silicon/oxygen ratio may be large, resulting in 
a significant impact on the properties of porous Si. 
Several methods for surface passivation have been 
reported in the literature, and they seem to lead to 
more stable luminescence.211 To name a few, con-
trolled oxidation by anodic or chemical oxidation, 
rapid thermal oxidation, capping of the porous Si 
layer by a dielectric or metal, thermal nitridation, 
and thermal carbonization.211
Porous Si Models The critical question about any 
kind of porous Si formation, nano- or macropo-
rous, is why there is a difference in dissolution 
rate between pore tip and pore walls? Unagami205 
proposed that insoluble silicates passivate the pore 
walls, resulting in the formation of a porous Si layer, 
but this does not explain why such selective passiva-
tion takes place in the first case. Parkhutik et al.212 
compared porous Si formation with that of porous 
alumina formation (see Volume III, Chapter 5). In 
this model a passive layer (e.g., an oxide) exists at 
the bottom of each pore and results in the electric 
field enhancement at the pore tips. Poreformation in 
this case is a consequence of the dissolution of the 
passive layer enhanced by the local electrical field, 
which is stronger at the sharp tips. The competition 
between growth and dissolution of the passive layer 
gives rise to a time-evolving electrolyte/passive film 
interface defining the surface of the pore. This model 
predicts the correct dependence of pore size on HF 
concentration. In 1970, Theunissen et al. proposed 
that porous Si forms in n-type Si as a result of Zener 
breakdown because of electric field enhancement 
at the pore tip.87,163 However, Theunissen’s model 
cannot explain other kinds of porous Si formation 
without this breakdown condition (e.g., what about 
porous p-type Si). In 1985, Beale et al.211 expanded 
Theunissen’s model by introducing the involvement 
of a space charge region (SCR), which forms at the 
surface region of the Si in contact with the electro-
lyte and acts as a Shottky barrier, as illustrated for 
p-type Si in Figure 4.74. The SCR is depleted of holes 
and prevents charge transfer at the interface between 
the electrolyte and the Si surface. When a pore wall 
becomes sufficiently thin (small d in Figure 4.74), 
space charge regions from opposite sides of the pore 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   289
3.0
2.0
1.6
1.2
Atmospheric impregnation
1–3 years 
15 weeks
2 hours
500
700
900
1100
Photon wavelength (nm)
Photoluminescence intensity (a.u.)
Photon energy (eV)
FIGURE 4.73 Aging of the luminescence of porous Si. 
(Thönissen, M., and M. G. Burger, eds. 1997. Properties of 
porous silicon. Washington, DC: IEEE.211)

[Page 290]
wall overlap, thus decreasing charge transfer at the 
interface even further. Consequently, current is 
selectively directed to the pore tips’ region, and pore 
walls stop thinning when d < 1/2 SCR. Pore forma-
tion in this model is a self-adjusting electrochemical 
mechanism. The limitation is a result of the deple-
tion of holes in the pore walls, causing them to stop 
etching, whereas holes continue to be collected at 
the pore tip, where they continue to promote Si dis-
solution. No passivating layer is involved to protect 
the pore wall in this model. The only decisive dif-
ferences between pore tips and pore walls are their 
geometry and their location. Holes generated by light 
or Zener breakdown are collected at pore tips. Every 
depression or pit in the surface initiates pore growth 
because the electrical field at a curved pore bottom 
is much larger than that of a flat surface as a result of 
the effect of the radius of curvature. The latter leads 
to higher current and enhances local etching.208 
Zener breakdown and illumination of n-type Si lead 
to different types of pore geometry.91,163,213 Branched 
pores with sharp tips form if holes are generated by 
breakdown (see Figure 4.75a).91 Unbranched pores 
with larger tip radii result from holes created by 
illumination (see Figure 4.75b).213 The latter differ-
ence can be understood as follows: the electric field 
strength is a function of bias, doping density, and 
geometry. High doping level density or sharp pore 
tips will lower the required bias for breakdown; 
therefore, macropores will tend to follow pores with 
the sharpest tips. Because every tip causes a new 
breakdown and hole generation, the position of the 
original pore tip becomes independent of the other 
pores, branching of the pores is possible, and fir tree-
type fractal-like pores can be observed. With illu-
mination the pore radius may be larger because the 
breakdown field strength is not necessary to generate 
charge carriers; thus, the pores remain unbranched.
To obtain the necessary depletion layers in both 
n- and p-type Si under anodic bias, Beale et al. had to 
assume Fermi level pinning at midgap (for example, 
see the energy diagram for n-Si in HF in Figure 4.62).
Yet another model, the diffusion-limited model 
developed by Smith et al.,214 describes the formation 
290   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
+
+
+
+ +
+ +
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
Ionized  acceptors
Holes (majority carriers)
Electric ﬁeld lines
Electrolyte
SCR
Bulk
p-Si
+
d
FIGURE 4.74 Space charge regions (SCRs) at the semi-
conductor/electrolyte interface form an insulating layer 
that prevents charge transfer. As two space charge 
regions in a wall pore wall of thickness d overlap that 
wall will passivate, and current is directed to the bottom 
of the pore. The example shown here involves p-type Si. 
(Lehmann, V., et al. 1999. J Electrochem Soc 146:2968–75.) 
FIGURE 4.75 Comparison of macropores made with 
breakdown holes (a) and macropores made with light-
 created holes (b). (a) An oxide replica of pores etched 
under weak back-side illumination visualizes the branching 
of pores produced by generation of charge carriers result-
ing from electrical breakdown (5 V, 3% HF, room tem-
perature, 1015/cm3 phosphorus-doped). (From Lehmann, 
V. 1993. The physics of macropore formation in low doped 
n-type silicon. J Electrochem Soc 140:2836–43. With per-
mission.91) (b) Single pore associated with KOH pit. (From 
Lehmann, V., and H. Foll. 1990. Formation mechanism and 
properties of electrochemically etched trenches in n-type 
silicon. J Electrochem Soc 137:653–59. With permission.213)

[Page 291]
of porous Si in terms of a stochastic random walk. 
During pore formation, a hole diffuses to the  silicon/
electrolyte interface and reacts with a Si surface 
atom. The nature of the random walk presents the 
pore tip as the most likely contact site for a hole dif-
fusing from the bulk Si region and provides a similar 
selective dissolution mechanism of surface irregular-
ities as the Beale model. The rate of pore growth, in 
this model, is limited by the diffusion of holes to the 
growing pore tip. A characteristic diffusion length, 
function of dopant concentration, current density, 
and so on control the different pore morphologies. 
Unlike the Beale model, this model applies very 
generally to all electrochemical phenomena. Smith 
et al. confirmed that the porous Si geometry simu-
lated by random walk and diffusion-limited model 
is similar to the geometry of formed porous Si.
In 1990, Lehmann et al.197 proposed a model for 
nanoporous Si formation based on the quantum 
confinement effect. As described above, it is well 
known that porous Si is luminescent in the visible 
region. Lehmann et al. expanded the quantum con-
finement effect to explain porous Si formation. The 
increase in bandgap for quantum wires and quan-
tum dots in the pore walls decreases the mobile 
carrier concentration, i.e., produces the barrier to 
charge transfer.197 As a result, the current is again 
limited to the pore tips, resulting in porous layer for-
mation. Obviously this model can only account for 
nanoporous Si formation.
As for the direction of the pores in porous Si, 
there will be a natural tendency to follow the direc-
tion of the strongest field with the highest supply 
of holes, i.e., in the <001> direction on a (001) sub-
strate. The <100> and <113> directions have been 
found to be the preferred growth directions of the 
macropores in both p- and n-type silicon.215 The 
growth direction depends on the surface orienta-
tion. When using a {111} surface, three equivalent 
<113> macropores start to grow into the substrate. 
The macropore walls consist of (111) facets that can 
be observed by TEM. These pores can intersect and 
form a 3D pore network in the silicon, making for a 
possible 3D photonic crystal. The resulting structure 
is slightly different from the Yablonovite photonic 
crystal introduced in Volume I, Chapter 5; the pores 
are tilted about 29° off the vertical axes, whereas 
in the Yablonovite they have an angle of about 35° 
(see Volume I, Chapter 5). Large pore formation for 
(100) and (111) Si is illustrated in Figure 4.76.
Lehmann has shown that square pore cross-
sections and pore arrays of high porosity can be 
produced by subsequent alkaline etching of macrop-
orous Si.216 With the proper choice of etchants, the 
rounded pore walls can be etched to reveal (100) or 
(110) faces.
It was also determined that the macrohole for-
mation in porous Si depends on the wavelength 
of the light used. It was found that no pore forma-
tion occurs below ∼800 nm. Depending on the 
wavelength, the shape of the pores can be manipu-
lated as well.213 For wavelengths above 867 nm, the 
depth profile of the pores changed from conical to 
cylindrical. The latter was interpreted in terms of 
the influence of the local minority carrier genera-
tion rate. Carriers generated deep in the bulk would 
promote the pore growth at the tips, whereas near-
surface generation would lead to lateral growth.
In 1993, Cahill et al.217 reported the creation of 
1–5-µm-diameter pores with pore spacings (center 
to center) from 200–1000 µm. Until this finding, the 
pores typically formed were spaced in the range of 
4–30 µm center to center and 0.6–10 µm in diam-
eter. Making highly isolated pores presents another 
challenge. In the previous work, the relatively close 
spacing of the pores allowed the authors to con-
clude that the regions between the pores were almost 
totally depleted and that practically all carriers were 
collected by the pore tips. In such a case, neither the 
pore sidewalls nor the wafer surface etched as all 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   291
FIGURE 4.76 Large pore-formation for (100) and (111) Si; 
SCR, space charge region.

[Page 292]
holes was swept to the pore tips. Because the surface 
was not attacked by pore-forming holes, the qual-
ity of the pore initiation mask lost its relevance. In 
Cahill et al.’s case, on the other hand, a long-lived 
mask (>20 h) is needed to help prevent pore forma-
tion everywhere except at initiation pits. The mask 
used was a SiC layer sandwiched between two layers 
of Si nitride. The silicon nitride (insulator) directly 
atop the Si (semiconductor) serves to insulate the 
silicon carbide (semiconductor) from the underlying 
silicon substrate. Because the silicon carbide proves 
very resistant to HF, loss of thickness does not show 
during the procedure. The top nitride serves to protect 
the carbide during anisotropic pit formation. By low-
ering the bias applied to the Si substrate to less than 
2 V with respect to SCE, side branching is avoided.
The Si anisotropy common with alkaline etchants 
surprisingly shows up here with acidic isotropic etch-
ants. For example, with breakdown-supplied holes, 
<100>-directed macroholes with <110> branches 
form (see Figure 4.76),91 and with <111>- directed 
wafers, <113> branches form (see Figure 4.76), lead-
ing to a complex network beneath the silicon sur-
face. Pyramidal pore tips were also observed when 
the current density was limited by the bias (i < ip).91 
Isotropic pore pits form when the current is larger 
than the critical current density, that is, iso tropy in 
HF etching can be changed into anisotropy when 
the supply of holes is limited. We refer here to the 
Elwenspoek et al. model (see above), which predicts 
that in confined spaces etching will tend to be more 
anisotropic, even when using a normally isotropic 
etchant such as HF.
The enhanced photoluminescence efficiency 
of porous Si—compared with Si—has motivated 
active research toward other porous semiconduc-
tor materials. For example, highly porous InP, 
SiC, GaP, Si1-xGex, and Ge structures have all been 
investigated. Among the first examples of strong 
anisotropy in porous etching of semiconduc-
tors other than Si was that reported by Takizawa 
et al.,203 who reported pores in <111> A-oriented 
InP in HCl with an aspect ratio larger than 100. 
Some other preliminary evidence was collected on 
GaAs218 and GaP.210 Pore formation in TiO2 anodic 
and alumina films is described in more detail in 
Volume III, Chapter 5.
Porous Silicon Applications Uhlir’s discovery has 
led to all types of interesting new devices from 
quantum structures, chemical sensors and biosen-
sors, permeable membranes, and photoluminescent 
and electroluminescent devices to a basis for mak-
ing thick SiO2 and Si3N4 films.201,204 Some of these 
applications are listed in Table 4.11 introduced ear-
lier. Besides its use for dielectric isolation and the 
fabrication of SOI wafers, porous Si has been intro-
duced in a wide variety of other applications: Luggin 
capillaries for electrochemical reference electrodes, 
high surface area gas sensors, humidity sensors, sac-
rificial layers in silicon micromachining, and so on.
We already highlighted the fact that porous Si 
exhibits photoluminescent and electroluminescent 
behavior; light-emitting porous Si (LEPOS) was 
demonstrated. If a LEPOS device could be integrated 
monolithically with other structures on silicon, a big 
step in micro-optics, photon data transmission, and 
processing would be achieved. To explain the blue 
shift of the absorption edge of LEPOS of about 0.5 eV 
compared with bulk silicon197 and room temperature 
photoluminescence,196 Searson et al.219 proposed an 
energy-level diagram for porous Si where the valence 
band is lowered with respect to bulk silicon to give a 
bandgap of about 1.8 eV (see Figure 4.68).
Porous Si can easily be etched in relatively harm-
less solutions like diluted aqueous KOH solutions, 
making it an attractive sacrificial material. The sur-
face and bulk properties of porous Si are easily mod-
ified; for example, oxidization of the material makes 
it useful as an insulating material in gas sensors; 
metallization enables its use in microelectronics; 
and nitridation of the material is possible as well.
The large specific surface area (e.g., 200 m2/cm3) 
and the very small diameters of the pores make po -
rous Si an interesting material for several analytical 
MEMS and NEMS devices. Given the large specific 
area per unit volume, the electrical transport is 
strongly influenced by external factors such as resid-
ual electrolyte and ambient atmosphere. The latter 
property is very interesting for sensor applications. 
Certain gases—for example, NO—have the capability 
of modifying the free carrier population. Changes in 
the electrical conductivity in the presence of sub-
parts per million concentrations of such gases can 
be detected at room temperature operation. Other 
292   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 293]
gaseous species (for example, polar liquid vapors) 
also affect electrical transport via electric field 
interactions with charge carriers.
An optical biosensor based on porous Si also 
has been demonstrated. PS samples were prepared 
in such a way that the porous Si films displayed 
Fabry-Perot fringes in their white-light reflection 
spectrum. When biological molecules are then 
chemically attached as recognition elements to the 
porous Si surface and exposed to the appropriate 
complementary binding pair, binding occurs and is 
observed as a shift in the Fabry-Perot fringes.220,221
Lammel et al.222 fabricated tunable optical fil-
ters based on porous Si—filters that can be used in 
reflective or transmission mode. The ratio of voids 
to total volume of porous Si determines its refrac-
tive index, and because porosity can be adjusted 
by varying the current density, these authors were 
able to micromachine a multilayer stack of porous 
Si of different indices by modulating the current 
density during porosification (in principle, indices 
between 1.6 and 2.1 can be obtained this way). The 
process was applied to an area of single-crystal Si 
delineated by a Si nitride window. The porosified 
Si plate was released from the substrate by subsur-
face electropolishing. During chemical release, two 
suspension arms lift the plate out of the plane auto-
matically by internal stress release. The suspension 
arms are also provided with Cr/Ni heater wires to 
actuate the filters. By tilting the freestanding plate 
of porous Si with the thermal bimorph suspension 
arms, a wavelength scan is possible. Using this pro-
cess, Lammel et al. achieved a 20-nm wavelength 
resolution in the visible part of the spectrum. 
Figure 4.77 is an SEM of the described porous Si 
plate optical filter.
Another more recent interest in porous Si 
stems from the ability to culture mammalian cells 
directly onto porous Si. Initial research findings 
from DeMonfort University suggest that the material 
may be biocompatible (http://www.findarticles.com/
m0WVI/ 1999_April_6/54338205/p1/article.jhtml and 
L.T. Canham223). In this vein porous Si can also be 
used for sieving to filter very small particles. For 
more on biocompatibility of single-crystal Si, poly-
crystalline Si, and porous Si, see also Volume III, 
Chapter 5.
Porous Si also enabled an elegant new microma-
chining technology at Bosch with their advanced 
porous silicon membrane (APSM) process. This 
technology makes use of porous Si to form a cavity 
underneath the surface of a single-crystalline silicon 
membrane, which helps to make the wafer manu-
facturing process fully CMOS-compatible and turns 
the traditional bulk micromachining process into 
a surface micromachining technology.  Armbruster 
et al.224 reported this new micromachining technol-
ogy for the fabrication of monocrystalline silicon 
membranes covering a vacuum cavity for applications 
such as piezoresistive pressure sensors. In Figure 4.78 
we compare a silicon-based absolute pressure sensor 
made with traditional bulk micromachining with 
the same device made with the new porous Si-based 
APSM process. The new process evidently produces 
not only cavities inside a device in a shorter amount 
of time, uses no wafer-bonding steps, and consti-
tutes an all-silicon process, but it is also is CMOS-
compatible. The main process steps, illustrated in 
Figure 4.79, are (a) local anodic etching of a layered 
porous Si (LPCVD Si3N4 is used as a mask). (b) One 
of the following processes is used: 1) conversion of 
part of the porous material to oxidized porous Si 
and etching it away, 2) direct electropolishing of 
part of the porous Si, or 3) thermal rearrangement of 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   293
FIGURE 4.77 Optical filter of porous Si. SEM of a free-
standing porous Si microplate containing a multilayered 
optical interference filter. The wavelength can be tuned 
by tilting the microplate using the integrated thermal 
bimorph microactuator. The tilt angle is a function of 
the actuator DC voltage. This filter element can be used 
to build a microspectrometer. (Courtesy of Dr. Gerhard 
Lammel, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.222)

[Page 294]
part of the porous layer. These three different tech-
niques all lead to a cavity underneath a suspended 
porous membrane, and (c) epitaxial growth of a sili-
con membrane layer over the remaining porous Si 
membrane. As we saw earlier, porous Si remains sin-
gle-crystalline, providing a suitable substrate for epi-
taxial Si growth. The layer thicknesses of the porous 
layer over the cavity and the cavity layer may be 1–10 
µm or more, depending on the application.
The degree of porosity of the porous Si layer in 
the APSM process deliberately varies in the lateral 
and vertical direction. The lateral doping of the 
semiconductor material for the edge region and 
central region of the porous diaphragm is selected 
in such a way that mesopores (pores on the order 
of 5–50  nm) are formed in the edge region and 
macropores (pores > 50 nm and up to a few 
micrometers) are formed in the center region. This 
may be accomplished, for example, with an n-type 
doping to produce macropores in the center region, 
whereas the edge region of the diaphragm is pro-
vided with p+ doping to obtain mesoporous Si. This 
makes it possible for the gases produced in etching 
to escape more easily through regions of the porous 
layer, which have a comparatively higher porosity, 
when producing the cavity underneath the porous 
layer. In the edge region of the diaphragm with 
the lower porosity, a good layer quality is possible, 
for example, for the subsequent epitaxial process, 
whereas in the central region of the diaphragm the 
epitaxial quality is comparatively lower as a result of 
higher-porosity sections. However, in the pressure 
sensor application, this is unimportant because the 
properties of the pressure sensor are not impaired. 
The semiconductor substrate is also doped differ-
ently in the region of the porous diaphragm layer 
and in the region of what will become the cavity 
in such a way that mesopores are produced in the 
semiconductor material of the diaphragm layer 
and nanopores (pores from 2–5 nm) are produced 
as a “precursor structure” in the cavity region. The 
production of a small-pore precursor structure pre-
vents the formation of comparatively large air bub-
bles, which makes it possible to adequately remove 
the gas bubbles through the porous diaphragm 
layer. In this procedure, use is also made of the fact 
that the “nanostructure” has a considerably higher 
internal surface area than the “mesostructure” of 
the diaphragm region, which is usable in a sub-
sequent process step for a shorter oxidation time. 
We learned above that the very reactive porous Si 
etches or oxidizes very rapidly. This makes it possi-
ble to subsequently produce a completely oxidized 
porous Si, which is then selectively removed, e.g., 
in a vapor etching process. The cavity may also be 
produced by rearranging the nanoporous layer in a 
high-temperature process step. Different porosities 
subjected to heat treatment at high temperatures 
in a reducing atmosphere induce a structural rear-
rangement, forming in this way a membrane with a 
thickness ranging from few tenths of micrometers 
to 1 µm, as well as the cavity under the membrane. 
294   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.78 Comparison of a bulk Si micromachined absolute pressure sensor (left) with such a sensor made with the 
new Bosch porous Si-based APSM process (right). (From a Bosch presentation.)

[Page 295]
A third alternative procedure in forming the cavity 
structure involves directly dissolving the semicon-
ductor material underneath the porous layer using 
electrolytic polishing, for example, at compara-
tively higher current densities and lower HF con-
centrations (see also page 287).
In contrast to conventional bulk micromachining, 
the new technology has the benefit of more design 
freedom because the shape/size of the monocrystal-
line silicon membrane only depends on the porous 
Si region. Except for the anodic etching, all pro-
cess steps are part of a standard mixed signal IC 
production line. We may also compare the APSM 
process to a surface micromachined membrane pres-
sure sensor. In surface micromachining, we learn in 
Chapter 7, to make a membrane sensor, a sacrificial 
layer is normally used, which is applied to the front 
of a carrier substrate before depositing the sensor 
diaphragm. The sacrificial layer is later removed 
from the front of the sensor through “dissolution 
openings” in the diaphragm, whereby an unsup-
ported structure is obtained. The surface microma-
chining method is relatively complicated because of 
the need for separate sacrificial layers. Using APMS, 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   295
FIGURE 4.79 The Bosch porous Si-based APSM process. (From a Bosch presentation.) (a) Local anodic etching of layered 
porous Si with different porosities. (b) Thermal rearrangement of the porous Si. (c) Epitaxial growth of the Si membrane 
layer. (From a Bosch presentation.)

[Page 296]
it is possible to considerably simplify the manufac-
ture of such component because no sacrificial layer 
needs to be additionally applied, and the sacrificial 
layer and the porous diaphragm are produced from 
the semiconductor material itself.
A piezoresistive pressure sensor (the SMD 500, the 
world’s smallest digital pressure sensor) with inte-
grated ASIC based on the new fabrication method is 
shown in Figure 4.80. The sensor that is shown here 
can measure pressure ranges from ±2.5 kPa (rela-
tive) up to 3.3 MPa (absolute). The sensor accuracy 
is 1.0% over the sensor lifetime, and its high robust-
ness makes it ideal for applications like barometer, 
altimeter, weather forecast, health care, and fluid 
level measurements.
A good update on the chemistry of porous Si can 
be found at Sailor’s web site: http://chem-faculty.
ucsd.edu/sailor/research/porous_Si_intro.html.
Problems Associated with Wet Bulk 
Micromachining of Single-Crystal Silicon
Introduction
Despite the introduction of more controllable etch-
stop techniques, bulk micromachining of Si remains 
a difficult industrial process to control. It is also not 
an applicable submicrometer technology because wet 
chemistry is not able to etch  reliably on that scale. 
For submicrometer structure definition, dry etching 
is required (dry etching is also more environmentally 
safe). We will now look into some of the other prob-
lems associated with Si bulk micromachining, such 
as the extensive real estate consumption and diffi-
culties in etching at convex corners, and detail cur-
rent solutions to avoid, control, or alleviate them.
Problem: Extensive Real Estate Consumption
Introduction Bulk micromachining involves exten-
sive real estate consumption. This quickly becomes 
a problem when making arrays of devices. Consider 
the diagram in Figure 4.81, illustrating two mem-
branes created by etching through a <100> wafer 
from the back until an etch stop, e.g., a Si3N4 mem-
brane, is reached. In creating two of these small mem-
branes, a large amount of Si real estate is wasted, and 
the resulting device might become fragile.
Solution 1: Real Estate Gain by Etching from the 
Front One solution to limit the amount of Si real 
estate loss is to use thinner wafers, but this solution 
becomes impractical below 200 µm because such 
wafers often break during handling. A more elegant 
solution is to etch from the front rather than from the 
back. Anisotropic etchants will undercut a masking 
material by an amount dependent on the orientation 
of the wafer with respect to the mask. Such an etchant 
will etch any <100> silicon until a pyramidal pit is 
formed, as shown in Figure 4.82. These pits have side-
walls with a characteristic 54.7° angle with respect to the 
surface of a <100> silicon wafer because the delineated 
planes are {111} planes. This etch property makes it 
possible to form cantilever structures by etching from 
the front because the cantilevers will be undercut and 
eventually will be suspended over a pyramidal pit in 
the silicon. Once this pyramidal pit is completed, the 
etch rate of the {111} planes exposed is extremely slow 
and practically stops. Therefore, process sequences, 
296   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.80 The Bosch SMD 500. The world’s smallest 
digital pressure sensor! With a size of only 5 × 5 × 1.6 mm, 
the SMD 500 is the smallest pressure sensor for consumer 
electronics available. Manufactured using the new APSM 
technology (advanced porous Si membrane), it is much 
smaller compared with conventional bulk micromachined 
sensors. (From a Bosch presentation.)
Slope
length
280 µm
Membrane
length L
Wafer
thickness
400 µm
FIGURE 4.81 Two membranes formed in a <100>- oriented 
Si wafer.

[Page 297]
which depend on achieving this type of a final struc-
ture, are very uniform across a wafer and very con-
trollable. The top drawings in Figure 4.82 represent 
patterned holes in a masking material: a square, a dia-
mond, and a square with a protruding tab. The draw-
ings immediately below represent the etched pit in 
the silicon produced by anisotropic etching. Note in 
the first drawing that a square mask aligned with the 
<110> direction produces a four-sided pyramidal pit. In 
the second drawing, a similar mask shape oriented at 
45° produces an etched pit that is oriented parallel to 
the pit etched in the first drawing independent of the 
mask orientation. In the second drawing, the corners 
of the diamond are undercut by the etchant as it pro-
duces the final etch pit. The third drawing illustrates 
that any protruding member is eventually undercut 
by the anisotropic etchant, leaving a cantilever struc-
ture suspended over an identical etch pit. The inset 
detailing the third drawing shows how undercutting 
at the convex corners of the cantilever, in pure KOH, 
is determined by {411} planes.225
Solution 2: Real Estate Gain by Using Silicon Fusion-
Bonded Wafers Using silicon fusion-bonded (SFB) 
wafers rather than conventional wafers also makes 
it possible to fabricate much smaller microsensors 
and gain real estate. The process, introduced in the 
1980s, is clarified in Figure 4.83 for the fabrication 
of a pressure sensor.225 The bottom handle wafer has 
a standard thickness of 525 µm and is anisotropi-
cally etched with a square cavity pattern. Next, the 
etched handle wafer is fusion bonded to a top sens-
ing wafer (the SFB process itself is detailed in Chapter 
7, dealing with surface micromachining, and is also 
touched on in Volume III, Chapter 4, on packaging). 
The sensor wafer consists of a p-type substrate with 
an n-type epilayer corresponding to the required 
thickness of the pressure-transducing membrane. 
The sensing wafer is thinned all the way to the epil-
ayer by electrochemical etching, and resistors are 
ion implanted. The handle wafer is ground and pol-
ished to the desired thickness. For gauge measure-
ment, the anisotropically etched cavity is truncated 
by the polishing operation, exposing the back of the 
diaphragm (Figure 4.83a). For an absolute pressure 
sensor, the cavity is left enclosed (Figure 4.83b). 
With the same diaphragm dimensions and the 
same overall thickness of the chip, an SFB device, 
because of the inward sloping {111} walls, is almost 
50% smaller than a conventional machined device 
(see Figure  4.84). For example, Lucas NovaSensor 
(Fremont, CA; now GE Novasensor, http://www.
gesensing.com/novasensor products) manufactures 
a sensor that is 400 µm wide, 800 µm long, and 150 
µm thick and fits inside the tip of a catheter.
Solution 3: Real Estate Gain by Using the Bosch 
Advanced Porous Silicon Membrane Process As we 
saw on page 293, the Bosch APSM process makes 
use of porous Si to form a cavity underneath the sur-
face of a single-crystalline silicon membrane, which 
turns the traditional bulk micromachining pro-
cess into a surface micromachining technology (see 
Figures 4.78–4.80). A piezoresistive pressure sensor 
made this way, the SMD 500, is the world’s smallest 
digital pressure sensor (Figure 4.80).
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   297
Concave corner
Convex corner
Inset
Suspended
beam
FIGURE 4.82 Three anisotropically etched pits etched from the front in a <100>-oriented silicon wafer. Inset, illustration 
of etching at convex corners for the formation of suspended beams.

[Page 298]
Problem: Underetching and Undercutting
Mask Underetching Underetching of a mask that 
contains no convex corners (that is, corners turn-
ing outside in) in principle stems from mask mis-
alignment and/or from a finite etching of the {111} 
planes. Peeters measured the widening of {111}-
walled V-grooves in a (100) Si wafer after etching in 
7 M KOH at 80 ± 1° over 24 hours as 9 ± 0.5 µm.126 
The sidewall slopes of the V-groove are  a well-de-
fined 54.74°, and the etch rate R111 is related to the 
rate of V-groove widening Rv through:
 
R
1
2
111
sin(
.
)
.
54 74
0 40
º R or R
R
v
111
v
=
 
(4.13)
with R111 the etch rate of the (111) plane in nanometers 
per minute and Rv the groove widening, also in nano-
meters per minute. The V-groove widening experi-
ment then results in an R111 of 2.55 ± 0.15 nm/min. 
In practice, this etch rate implies a mask underetch-
ing of only 0.9 µm for an etch depth of 360 µm. For a 
1-mm-long V-groove and a 1° misalignment angle, a 
total underetching of 18 µm is theoretically expected, 
with 95% resulting from misalignment and only 5% 
caused by etching of the {111} sidewalls.126 The total 
underetching will almost always be determined by 
misalignment rather than by etching of {111} walls.
Mask underetching with masks that include con-
vex corners is much larger than the underetching 
298   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.83 Fabrication process of SFB-bonded pressure sensors. (a) For gauge measurement, the anisotropically etched 
cavity is truncated by the polishing operation, exposing the back of the diaphragm. (b) For an absolute pressure sensor, 
the cavity is left enclosed. (From Bryzek, J., K. Petersen, J. R. Mallon, L. Christel, and F. Pourahmadi. 1990. Silicon sensors 
and microstructures. Fremont, CA: Novasensor. With permission.226)
400 µm
250 µm
600 µm
140 µm
140 µm
FIGURE 4.84 Comparison of conventional and SFB pro-
cesses. The SFB process results in a chip that is at least 
50% smaller than the conventional chip. (From Bryzek, J., 
K. Petersen, J. R. Mallon, L. Christel, and F. Pourahmadi. 
1990. Silicon sensors and microstructures. Fremont, CA: 
Novasensor. With permission.226)

[Page 299]
just described because the etchant tends to circum-
scribe the mask opening with {111} walled cavi-
ties. This is usually called undercutting rather than 
underetching. 
Undercutting—Convex Corner Attack It is advis-
able to avoid mask layouts with convex corners. 
However, mesa-type structures often are essential, 
and in that case there are two possible ways to reduce 
the undercutting. One is by chemical additives, 
reducing the undercut at the expense of a reduced 
ansiotropy ratio, and the other is by a special mask 
compensating the undercut at the expense of more 
lost real estate. When etching rectangular convex 
corners, deformation of the edges occurs because of 
undercutting. This is often an unwanted effect, espe-
cially in the fabrication of, e.g., acceleration sensors, 
where total symmetry and perfect 90° convex corners 
on the proof mass are mandatory for good device 
prediction and specification. The undercutting is a 
function of etch time and thus directly related to the 
desired etch depth. An undercut ratio is defined as 
the ratio of undercut to etch depth (δ/H).
Solutions: Additives and Corner Compensation 
Structures Saturating KOH solutions with isopro-
pyl alcohol (IPA) reduces the convex corner under-
cutting; unfortunately, this happens at the cost of 
the anisotropy of the etchant. This additive also 
often causes the formation of pyramidical or cone-
shaped hillocks.126,141 Peeters claims that these 
hillocks are the result of carbonate contamination 
of the etchant, and he advises etching under inert 
atmosphere and stockpiling all etchant ingredients 
under an inert nitrogen atmosphere.126
Undercutting can also be reduced or even pre-
vented by “corner compensation structures,” which 
are added to the corners on the mask layout to be 
undercut during etching. Depending on the etching 
solution, different corner compensation schemes 
are used, among them square corner compensa-
tion (EDP or KOH) and rotated rectangle corner 
com pensation (KOH) as illustrated in Figure 4.85. 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   299
<110>
<110>
<110>
<100>
Proof mass
Proof mass
Compensation
rectangle
Compensation
corner
wr
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
ws
FIGURE 4.85 Formation of a proof mass by silicon bulk micromachining. (a and b) Square corner compensation method, 
using EDP as the etchant. (c and d) Rotated rectangle corner compensation method, using KOH as the etchant.

[Page 300]
In square corner compensation, the square of SiO2 
in the  mask, outlining the square proof mass fea-
ture for an  accelerometer, is enhanced by adding an 
extra SiO2 square to each corner (Figure 4.85a). Both 
the proof mass and the compensation squares are 
aligned with their sides parallel to the <110> direc-
tion. In this way, two concave corners are created 
at the  convex corner to be protected. Thus, direct 
undercutting is prevented. The three “sacrificial” 
convex corners at the protective square are undercut 
laterally by the fast etching planes during the etch 
process. The dimension of the compensation square, 
ws, depends on the depth of the required cavity; for 
example, for a 300-µm-deep cavity, a square with a 
side length of 300 µm is used. The resulting mesa 
structure after EDP or KOH etching is shown in 
Figure 4.85b. In rotated rectangle corner compensa-
tion, shown in Figure 4.85c, a properly scaled rectan-
gle (wr should be twice the depth of etching) is added 
to each of the mask corners. The four sides of the mesa 
square are still aligned along the <110> direction, 
but the compensation rectangles are rotated (45°) 
with their longer sides along the <100> directions. 
Using KOH as an etchant reveals the mesa shown in 
Figure 4.85d. A proof mass is frequently dislodged by 
simultaneously etching from the front and the back. 
Corner compensation requires a significant amount 
of real estate in the mask layout around the corners, 
making the design less compact, and the method is 
often only applicable for simple geometries.
Different groups using different corner compen-
sation schemes all claim to have optimized spatial 
requirements. For an introduction to corner com-
pensation, refer to Puers et al.227 Sandmaier et al.228 
use <110>-oriented beams, <110>-oriented squares, 
and <010>-oriented bands for corner compensa-
tion during KOH etching. They found that spatial 
 requirements for compensation structures could 
be reduced dramatically by combining several of 
these compensation structures. Figure 4.86 shows the 
mask layouts for some of the different compensation 
schemes they used. To understand the choice and 
dimensioning of these compensation structures, as 
well as those in Figure 4.85, we will first look at emerg-
ing planes at convex corners during KOH etching.
There is some disagreement in literature about 
the exact nature of planes that emerge at convex 
corners as etching progresses. Long et al.229 in their 
work assumed {310} to be the dominant etch plane. 
Mayer et al.225 found that the undercutting of convex 
corners in pure KOH etch is determined exclusively 
by {411} planes. However, the {411} planes of the 
convex underetching corner, as shown in Figure 4.87, 
are not entirely laid free; rugged surfaces, where only 
fractions of the main planes can be detected, overlap 
the {411} planes under a diagonal line shown as AB 
in Figure 4.87b. The ratio of {411} to {100} etching 
does not depend on temperature between 60 and 
100°C. The value decreases with increasing KOH 
concentration from about 1.6 at 15% KOH to 1.3 
above 40%, where the curve flattens out.225 Ideally 
one avoids rugged surfaces and searches for well-
defined planes bounding the convex corner. Figure 
300   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.86 Mask layout for various convex corner 
compensation structures. (A) Splitting of the compensa-
tion beam creates concave corners, and by arranging two 
such double beams, a more symmetrical final structure is 
achieved. (B) Three convex corners of the compensation 
square are protected from undercutting by the added 
<110> beams. The side beam on corner b is made about 
30% longer than the other two side beams. In this case, 
the corner is formed by the etch fronts starting at the 
corners a and b. (C) <010> bands that are added to convex 
corners in the <100> direction. (From Sandmaier, H., H. 
L. Offereins, K. Kuhl, and W. Lang. 1991. Sixth interna-
tional conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’91). San Francisco. With permission.228)

[Page 301]
4.88 shows how a <110> beam is added to the con-
vex  corner to be etched. Fast-etching {411} planes, 
starting at the two convex corners, laterally under-
etch a <110>-oriented beam (dashed lines in Figure 
4.88). The longer this <110>-oriented beam is, the 
longer the convex corner will be protected from 
undercutting. It is essential that the beam disap-
pear by the end of the etch to maintain a minimum 
of rugged surface at the convex edge. On the other 
hand, as is obvious from Figure 4.88, a complete dis-
appearance of the beam leads to a beveling at the 
face of the convex corner. The dimensioning of the 
compensating <110> beam then works as follows: 
the length of the compensating beam is calculated 
primarily from the required etch depth (H) and the 
etch rate ratio R{411}/R{100} (≈δ/H) at the concen-
tration of the KOH solution used:
 
L
L
L
H R{411}
R{100}
B
2tan(30.9 )
1
2
<110>
=
=
−
−
2
º
 
(4.14)
with H the etch depth, B<110> the width of the <110>-
oriented beam, and tan (30.9°) the geometry fac-
tor.225 The factor 2 in the first term of this equation 
results because the etch rate of the {411} plane is 
determined normal to the plane and has to be con-
verted to the <110> direction. The second term in 
Equation 4.15 takes into account that the <110> 
beam needs to disappear completely by the time the 
convex corner is reached. How long does etching go 
in {110} direction when it goes down in {100} direc-
tion by a certain depth?
The resulting beveling in Figure 4.88 can be fur-
ther reduced by altering the etch compensation 
structures. This is done by decelerating the etch 
front, which largely determines the corner under-
cutting. One way to accomplish this is by creating 
more concave shapes right before the convex corner 
is reached. In Figure 4.86a, splitting of the compen-
sation beam creates such concave corners, and by 
arranging two such double beams, a more symmet-
rical final structure is achieved. By using these split 
beams, the beveling at the corner is reduced by a fac-
tor of 1.4–2 and leads to bevel angles less than 45°.
Corner 
compensation 
with 
<110>-oriented 
squares  (as shown in Figure 4.85a) features 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   301
FIGURE 4.87 Planes occurring at convex corners during KOH etching of Si. (a) SEM picture. (b) Schematic. (From Mayer, 
G. K., H. L. Offereins, H. Sandmeier, and K. Kuhl. 1990. Fabrication of non-underetched convex corners in ansisotropic 
etching of (100)-silicon in aqueous KOH with respect to novel micromechanic elements. J Electrochem Soc 137:3947–51. 
With permission.225)
L1
L2
<110>
<110>
FIGURE 4.88 Dimensioning of the corner compensation 
structure with a <110>-oriented beam. (From Sandmaier, 
H., H. L. Offereins, K. Kuhl, and W. Lang. 1991. Sixth inter-
national conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’91). San Francisco. With permission.228)

[Page 302]
considerably higher spatial requirements than the 
<110>-oriented beams. Because these squares are 
again undercut by {411} planes that are linked to 
the rugged surfaces described above, the squares 
do not easily lead to sharp {111}-defined corners. 
Dimensioning of the compensation square is done 
by using Equation 4.15 again, where L1 is half the 
side length of the square; for B<110>, the side length is 
used. All fast-etching planes have to reach the con-
vex corner at the same time. As before, the spatial 
requirements of this compensation structure can be 
reduced if it is combined with <110>-oriented beams. 
Such a combination is shown in Figure 4.86b. The 
three convex corners of the compensation square 
are protected from undercutting by the added <110> 
beams. During the first etch step, the <110>-ori-
ented side beams are undercut by the etchant. Only 
after the added beams have been etched does the 
square itself compensate the convex corner etching. 
The dimensioning of this combination structure is 
carried out in two steps. First, the <110>-oriented 
square is selected with a size that is permitted by 
the geometry of the device to be etched. From 
these dimensions, the etch depth corresponding to 
this size is calculated from Equation 4.15. For the 
remaining etch depth, the <110>-oriented beams are 
dimensioned like any other <110>-oriented beam. If 
the side beam on corner b is made about 30% longer 
than the other two side beams, the quality of the 
convex corner can be further improved. In this case, 
the corner is formed by the etch fronts starting at the 
corners a and b (Figure 4.86b).
A drawback to all the above-proposed compen-
sation schemes is the impossibility of obtaining a 
sharp corner in both the top and the bottom of a 
convex edge as a result of the rugged surfaces asso-
ciated with {411} planes. Buser et al.230 introduced 
a compensation scenario where a convex corner 
was formed by two {111} planes, which were well 
defined all the way from the mask to the etch bot-
tom. No rugged, undefined planes show in this 
case. The mask layout to create such an ideal convex 
corner uses <010> bands that are added to convex 
corners in the <100> direction (see Figure 4.86c). 
These bands will be underetched by vertical {100} 
planes from both sides. With suitable dimension-
ing of such a band, a vertically oriented membrane 
results, thinning and eventually freeing the convex 
edge shortly before the final intended etch depth 
is reached. In contrast to compensation structures 
undercut by {411} planes, posing problems with 
undefined rugged surfaces (see above), this com-
pensation structure is mainly undercut by {100} 
planes. For the temperature range of 50–100°C 
and KOH concentrations ranging from 25–50 
wt%, no undefined surfaces could be detected in 
the case of structures undercut by {100} planes.228 
The width of these <010>-oriented compensation 
beams, which determines the minimum dimen-
sion of the structures to etch, has to be twice the 
etching depth. These beams can either connect two 
opposite corners and protect both from undercut-
ting simultaneously or be added to the individual 
convex corners (open beam). With an open-beam 
approach (see Figure 4.89), it is extremely impor-
tant that the {100} planes reach the corner faster 
than the {411} planes. For that purpose the beams 
have to be wide enough to avoid complete under-
etching by {411} planes moving in from the front 
before they are completely underetched by {100} 
planes moving in from the side. For example, in a 
33% KOH etchant a ratio between beam length and 
width of at least 1.6 is required. To make these com-
pensation structures smaller while at the same time 
maintaining {100} undercutting to define the final 
convex corner, Sandmaier et al.228 remarked that the 
shaping {100} planes do not need to be present at 
302   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
B 740
50
1023
min.1.6.B
FIGURE 4.89 Beam structure open on one side. The beam 
is oriented in the <010> direction. The dimensions are in 
microns, and B is the width of the beam.

[Page 303]
the beginning of the etching process. These authors 
implement delaying techniques by adding fan-like 
<110>-oriented side beams to a main <100>- oriented 
beam (see Figure 4.86c). As described above, these 
narrow beams are underetched by {411} planes 
and the rugged surfaces they entail until reaching 
the <100>-oriented beam. Then the {411} planes 
are decelerated in the concave corners between the 
side beams by the vertical {100} planes with slower 
etching characteristics. The length of the <110>- -
oriented side beams is calculated from:
 
L
H
B
2
R{411}
R{100}
<110>
<010>
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
−
 
(4.15)
with H being the etching depth at the deepest posi-
tion of the device.
The width of the side beams does not influence 
the calculation of their required length. To avoid the 
rugged surfaces at the convex corner, the width of 
the side beams and the spaces between them should 
be kept as small as possible. For an etching depth of 
500 µm, a beam width of 20 µm and a space width 
of 2 µm are optimal.228 The biggest drawback of this 
compensation strategy is that the mask layout is 
rather complicated, and it takes a lot of time to gen-
erate the pattern to fabricate the masks themselves.
Modifications of the compensation scheme that 
uses <010> bands have been proposed to simplify 
the mask design. Zhang et al.231 introduced a modi-
fied method that uses a <100> bar with a width 
greater than twice the etching depth, so that lateral 
etching would stop at <410> sidewalls, and improved 
results were obtained. Another novel structure was 
described by Enoksson232 and involves a layout that 
consists of a <010> diagonal band connected to a con-
cave corner on the opposite side of the groove (simi-
lar to the situation in Figure 4.89). The band has a slit 
in the middle of the concave corner, and according to 
Enoksson, this gives a near-perfect square corner.
Depending on the etchant, different planes are 
responsible for undercutting. From the above we 
learned that in pure KOH solutions, undercut-
ting, according to Mayer et al.225 and Sandmaier 
et al.,228 mainly proceeds through {411} planes or 
{100} planes. That the {411} planes are the fastest 
undercutting planes was confirmed by Seidel.233 At 
the wafer surface, the sectional line of a (411) and a 
(111) plane point in the <410> direction, forming an 
angle of 30.96° with the <110> direction, and it was 
in this direction that he found a maximum in the 
etch rate. In KOH and EDP etchants, Bean131 iden-
tified the fast undercutting planes as {331} planes. 
For alkali/alcohol/water, Puers et al.227 identified 
the fast underetching planes as {331} planes as well. 
Mayer et al.,225 working with pure KOH, could not 
confirm the occurrence of such planes. Lee112 indi-
cated that in hydrazine/water, the fastest underetch-
ing planes are {211} planes. Abu-Zeid234 reported 
that the main beveling planes are {212} planes in 
ethylenediamine-water solution (no added pyrocat-
echol). Wu et al.235 found the main beveling planes 
at undercut corners to be {212} planes whether 
using KOH, hydrazine, or EPW solutions. In view of 
our earlier remarks on the sensitivity of etching rates 
of higher index rates to a wide variety of parameters 
(e.g., temperature, concentration, etching size, stir-
ring, cation effect, alcohol addition, and complexing 
agent), these contradictory results are not too sur-
prising. Along the same line, Wu et al.236 and Puers 
et al.227 have suggested triangles to compensate for 
underetching, but Mayer et al.225 found them to lead 
to rugged surfaces at the convex corner. Combining 
a chemical etchant with more limited undercutting 
(IPA in KOH) with Sandmaier’s reduced compensa-
tion structure schemes could further decrease the 
required size of the compensation features while 
retaining an acceptable anisotropy.
Corner compensation for <110>-oriented Si was 
explored by Ciarlo,51 who comments that both 
corner compensation and corner rounding can be 
minimized by etching from both surfaces so as to 
minimize the etch time required to achieve the 
desired features. This requires accurate front-to-back 
alignment and double-sided polished wafers.
Using corner compensation offers access to com-
pletely new applications such as rectangular solids, 
orbiting V-grooves, truncated pyramids with low 
cross-sections on the wafer surface, bellow struc-
tures for decoupling mechanical stresses between 
micromechanical devices and their packaging, and 
so on.228
Some additional important references on cor-
ner compensation are Ted Hubbard’s PhD thesis 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   303

[Page 304]
(MEMS Design, Caltech 1994)237 and references by 
Nikpour et al.238 and Kim et al.239
Comparing Wet and Dry Etching of Si
For the construction of Si micromechanical devices, 
etching is a commonly used technique. Silicon can 
be etched in four principal ways: wet anisotropic, 
wet isotropic, dry anisotropic, and dry isotropic (see 
Figure 4.90). For wet anisotropic etching, aqueous 
KOH solutions are mostly used. Slow-etching (111) 
planes determine the shape of the etched structure. 
For dry etching, plasma etching machines are com-
mon tools. By varying the conditions, the shape of 
the channels can be varied from perfectly isotropic 
to exactly vertical. Positive or negative tapering is 
also possible.
In bulk micromachining, which requires more 
extreme topologies (more z-axis) than classical IC 
devices, wet etching of crystalline Si used to domi-
nate the state of the art. The development of the 
newest fast etching, highly anisotropic DRIE equip-
ment is changing this picture rapidly (see Chapter 3). 
Wet  anisotropic etching of Si results in atomically 
smooth planes and atomically sharp edges, prop-
erties hard to achieve with dry etching. Wet etch-
ing also offers the advantage of low-cost batch 
 fabrication—usually 20–25 wafers at a time. Some 
dry etching advantages include the elimination of 
handling of dangerous acids and solvents and the 
use of small amounts of chemicals that can provide 
both isotropic or anisotropic etch profiles, i.e., direc-
tional etching without relying on the crystal orien-
tation of Si. Disadvantages of RIE etching are the 
fact that expensive equipment must be used, and 
the etching recipes are machine-dependent and also 
depend on the etching history of the machine. The 
walls of the etched structures are also rough compared 
with wet (electro)chemically etched structures.
Dry etching already is predominantly used in IC 
manufacture, and with higher-aspect-ratio devices 
and better materials selectivity being attained, the 
same is happening in micromachining. Besides 
selectivity and aspect ratio, problems with and con-
cerns about the slow dry etch rate, mask erosion, 
and high sensitivity to operating parameters are 
being addressed. Etch rates as high as 6 µm/min 
have become possible, and the operation is much 
more automated. However, the equipment is still 
very specialized and expensive and requires very 
clean lines to bring the various gases into the vac-
uum chamber.
Environmental issues dictated a switch from wet 
to dry etching, but a recent concern in this context 
is the search for alternative chemistries because 
chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) production was banned. 
According to the Montreal Protocol, all ozone-
 depleting CFCs had to be eliminated by the year 
2000. This included etchants such as CFCl3, CCl2F2, 
CF3Cl, C2F5Cl, and CF3Br.240 However, the most deci-
sive reason for a switch to dry etching was the need 
for better CD control.
304   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
SiO2
Photoresist
Photoresist
SiO2/HF
For silicon
–HNA (HF, HNO3, CH3COOH)
Etch depth
Side etch
Silicon
Silicon
SiN 54.7º
{111}
{100}
Mirror surface
Si/KOH, EDP, TMAH
Orientation-dependent
Si/SF6 + sidewall protective gas
Independent of crystallographic axis
Isotropic
Anisotropic
Wet
Dry
FIGURE 4.90 Different means for etching Si.

[Page 305]
Surface micromachining (see Chapter 7) relies on 
both wet and dry etchants, with processes similar to 
the ones used in the IC industry. For example, wet 
etchants are used to etch away sacrificial layers (e.g., 
HF to etch CVD phosphosilicate glass), whereas dry 
etching helps to define polysilicon structural ele-
ments (e.g., in an NF3-O2 plasma). A combination 
of wet and dry techniques presently makes up the 
majority of Si micromachining work. Table 4.13 
compares the characteristics of dry versus wet etch-
ing techniques.
Example 4.1: Dissolved Wafer Process
Figure 4.91 illustrates the dissolved wafer.241 This 
process, used by Draper Laboratory for the fab-
rication of low-cost inertial sensors, involves a 
sandwich of a silicon sensor anodically bonded 
to a glass substrate.242,243 The preparation of the 
silicon part requires only two masks and three 
processing steps. A recess is KOH-etched into a 
p-type (100) silicon wafer (step 1 with mask 1), 
followed by a high-temperature boron diffu-
sion (step 2 with no mask). In step 1, reactive ion 
etching (RIE) may be used as well. Cho claims that 
by maintaining a high-temperature uniformity in 
the KOH etching bath (±0.1°C), the accuracy and 
absolute variation of the etch across the wafer, 
wafer-to-wafer and lot-to-lot, can be maintained 
to <0.1 μm using premixed, 45 wt% KOH.241 Cho 
also uses low-defect oxidation techniques (e.g., 
nitrogen annealing and dry oxidation) to form 
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   305
TABLE 4.13 Comparison of Wet versus Dry Etching Techniques
Parameter
Dry Etching
Wet Etching
Directionality
Can be highly directional with most materials (aspect ratio 
of 25 and above)
Only directional with single 
crystal materials (aspect 
ratio of 100 and above)
Production-line automation
Good ease of automation (e.g., cassette loading)
Poor
Environmental impact
Low but some gases are toxic and corrosive
High
Masking film adherence
Not as critical
Very critical
Cost chemicals
Low 
High 
Selectivity
Poor
Can be very good
Materials that can be etched
Only certain materials can be etched (e.g., not Fe, Ni, Co)
All
Radiation damage
Can be severe
None
Process scale-up
Difficult
Easy
Cleanliness
Good under the right operational conditions. 
Redeposition of nonvolatile compounds might occur.
Good to very good
CD control
Very good (<0.1 μm) Faithfully transfers lithographically 
defined photoresist patterns into underlying layers. High 
resolution. Less undercutting
Poor
Equipment cost
Need for specialized (expensive) equipment
Inexpensive
Submicron features
Applicable
Not applicable
Typical etch rate
Slow (0.1 μm/min)
Fast (1 μm/min, anis.)
Theory
Very complex, not well understood
Better understood (Volume I, 
Chapter 4)
Operating parameters
Many
Few
Control of etch rate
Good because of slow etching 
Difficult
FIGURE 4.91 Dissolved wafer process. (From Greiff, P. 
1995. Micromachining and microfabrication process tech-
nology. Proceedings of the SPIE. Austin, TX: SPIE. With 
permission.242)

[Page 306]
defect-free silicon surfaces. In the boron diffu-
sion, the key is optimizing the oxygen content. 
In general, the optimal flow of oxygen is on the 
order of 3–5% of the nitrogen flow, in which 
case the doping uniformity is on the order of 
±0.2 μm. Varying the KOH etch depth and the 
shallow boron diffusion time, a wide variety of 
operating ranges and sensitivities for sensors 
can be obtained. Next, the silicon is patterned 
for a RIE etch (step 3 with mask 2). Aspect ratios 
greater than 10 are accessible. Using some of the 
newest dry etching techniques, depths in excess 
of 500 μm at rates greater than 4 μm/min (with 
an SF6 chemistry) are possible.244 The glass sub-
strate (#7740 Corning glass) preparation involves 
etching a recess, depositing, and, in a one-mask 
step, patterning a multimetal system of Ti/Pt/Au. 
The electrostatic bonding of glass to silicon takes 
place at 335°C with a potential of 1000 V applied 
between the two parts (electrostatic or anodic 
bonding is explained in detail in Volume III, 
Chapter 4). Commercial bonders have alignment 
accuracies on the order of <1 μm. The lightly 
doped silicon is dissolved in an EDP solution at 
95°C. The keys to uniform EDP etching are tem-
perature uniformity and suppression of etchant 
depletion through chemical aging or restricted 
flow (e.g., through bubbles). These effects can 
be minimized by techniques that optimize tem-
perature control and reduce bubbling (e.g., 
proper wafer spacing, lower temperature, large 
bath). The structures are finally rinsed in deion-
ized water and a hot methanol bath.
Draper Laboratory, although obtaining excel-
lent device results with the dissolved wafer 
process, is now exploring an SOI process as an 
alternative. The latter yields an all-silicon device 
while preserving many of the dissolved wafer 
process advantages (see also Chapter 7 under 
“SOI Surface Micromachining”).
Example 4.2:  An Electrochemical Sensor 
Array Measuring pH, CO2, and 
O2 in a Dual Lumen Catheter
An electrochemical sensor array developed by 
the author is shown in Figure 4.92, packaged 
and ready for in vivo monitoring of blood pH, 
CO2, and O2. The linear electrochemical array fits 
inside a 20-gauge catheter (750 μm in diameter) 
without taking up so much space as to distort 
the pressure signal monitored by a pressure sen-
sor outside the catheter. A classical (macro) ref-
erence electrode, making ionic contact with the 
blood through the saline drip, was used for the 
pH signal, whereas the CO2 and O2 had their own 
internal reference electrodes. The high imped-
ance of the small electrochemical probes makes 
a close integration of the electronics mandatory; 
otherwise, the high impedance connector leads, 
in a typical hospital setting, act as antennas for 
the surrounding electronic noise. As can be seen 
from the computer-aided design (CAD) picture 
in Figure 4.93, the thickness of the sensor comes 
from two silicon pieces: the top piece contain-
ing electrochemical cells and the bottom piece 
containing the active electronics. Each wafer 
is 250 μm thick. The individual electrochemi-
cal cells are etched anisotropically into the top 
306   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 4.92 An in vivo pH, CO2, and O2 sensor based on a 
linear array of electrochemical cells.
FIGURE 4.93 CAD of the electrochemical sensor array 
showing two pieces of silicon (each 250-µm thick) on top 
of each other, mounted in a dual-lumen catheter. The bot-
tom part of the catheter is left open so pressure can be 
monitored and blood samples can be taken.

[Page 307]
silicon wafer. The bottom piece is fabricated in 
a custom IC housing using standard IC processes. 
The process sequence to build a generic elec-
trochemical cell in a 250-μm-thick silicon wafer 
with one or more electrodes at the bottom of 
each well is illustrated in Figure 4.94. Wells are 
etched from the front of the wafer, and after 
an oxidation step access cavities for the metal 
electrodes are etched from the back. The etch-
ing of the vias stops at the oxide-covered bot-
toms of the electrochemical wells (Figure 4.94a). 
Next, the wafers are oxidized a second time with 
the oxide thickness doubling everywhere except 
in the suspended window areas where no Si can 
feed further growth (Figure 4.94b). The desired 
electrode metal is subsequently deposited from 
the back of the wafer into the access cavities 
and against the oxide window (Figure 4.94c). 
Finally, a timed oxide etch removes the sacrificial 
oxide window from above the underlying metal, 
while preserving the thicker oxide layer in the 
other areas on the chip (Figure 4.94d).245–247 An 
SEM micrograph demonstrating Figure 4.94d 
is shown in Figure 4.95. The electrodes in the 
electrochemical cells of the top wafer are fur-
ther connected to the bottom wafer electron-
ics by solder balls in the access vias of the top 
silicon wafer (see Figure 4.96). Separating the 
chemistry from the electronics in this way pro-
vides extra protection for the electronics from 
the electrolyte, as well as from the electronics, 
and chemical sensor manufacture can proceed 
independently. Depending on the type of sen-
sor element, one or more electrodes are fabri-
cated at the bottom of the electrochemical cells. 
For example, shown in Figure 4.97 is an almost 
completed (Severinghaus) CO2 sensor with an 
Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode 
(left in the figure) and an IrOx pH-sensitive elec-
trode, both at the bottom of one electrochemi-
cal well. The metal electrodes are electrically 
isolated from each other by the SiO2 passivation 
layer over the surface of the silicon wafer. To 
complete the CO2 sensor, we silk-screen a hydro-
gel containing an electrolytic medium into the 
silicon sensor cavity and dip-coat the sensor into 
a silicone-polycarbonate rubber solution to form 
the gas-permeable membrane. For hydrogel 
inside the micromachined well, we use poly(2-
hydroxyethyl)methacrylate or polyvinylalcohol.
The concept of putting the sensor chemis-
tries and the electronics on opposite sides of 
a substrate is a very important design feature 
we decided on several years ago in view of the 
overwhelming problems encountered in build-
ing chemical  sensors based on ion-sensitive field 
effect transistors or extended gate field effect 
transistors.187
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   307
SiO2
Wafer is oxidized after
electrochemical
wells are etched
(a)
Wafer is oxidized a second time
after vials are etched
Oxide over the window is only 1/2
of the oxide thickness elsewhere
on the wafer
Metal deposition from the back
against oxide window
Sensor metal electrode
Metal is etched free by a timed
etch
Electrochemical
well
Si
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 4.94 (a–d) Fabrication sequence for a generic 
electrochemical cell in Si. Depth of the electrochemical 
well, number of electrodes, and electrode materials can 
be varied.
FIGURE 4.95 SEM micrograph illustrating process step (d) 
from Figure 4.94. A 30 × 30 μm Pt electrode is shown at 
the bottom of an electrochemical well. This Pt electrode is 
further contacted to the electronics from the back.

[Page 308]
Example 4.3: Disposable Electrochemical Valves
One of the most difficult aspects of developing 
a microfluidic system is the miniaturization of 
valves. Most current MEMS valve technologies are 
still too complicated, too large, too power hun-
gry, and too expensive for deployment in such 
applications as disposables (prohibitive cost) or 
implants (required power and size are too large). 
A more appropriate technology for a valve in a 
disposable such as a diagnostic panel for blood 
electrolytes or for an implantable drug deliv-
ery system may be a “sacrificial” or “use-once” 
valve. Such a valve could ensure device sterility, 
isolate reagents until they are required, and even 
entrap a vacuum to draw sample into the device 
(like a vacutainer blood-collection tube). Most 
current MEMS valves have moving parts, such as 
diaphragm valves that are micromachined in sili-
con, and are prone to malfunction through clog-
ging. Valves without moving parts are obviously 
preferred, and some such valves have been incor-
porated in the electrokinetic and centrifugal flu-
idic platforms covered in Volume I, Chapter 6. 
These “valves” form a barrier for liquids but not 
for vapors. There is an even simpler valve, also 
without moving parts, which forms a barrier for 
both liquids and vapors. Creating a vapor bar-
rier is essential if liquids are to be stored in small 
micromachined chambers for extended periods, 
e.g., for a diagnostic test incorporating different 
on-chip reagents. In the absence of such vapor 
barriers, liquid would be distributed over time 
driven by the gradients in vapor pressure above 
each individual chemical reservoir.
In researching the structures described in 
Example 4.2 we discovered that a small current, 
applied between a counter electrode and a thin 
suspended metal electrode (see Figure 4.98), 
causes anodic dissolution of the metal or local 
electrolysis of water, depending on the nature of 
the valve metal. In both cases, the applied poten-
tial leads to bursting of the thin metal barriers. 
Thus, thin suspended metal membranes, such as 
silver or Au, can be burst open by passing a small 
current from the metal via a contacting electro-
lyte solution to a counter electrode. A Ag valve, 
for example, can be opened with an applied 
bias as low as 1–1.5 V. Although the “use-once” 
308   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Hydrogel
Sensor chip-
250 µm thick
Si IC chip-250 µm thick
Si
Solder bump
Membrane material
Silicone polycarbonate
copolymer
(gas-permeable and
biocompatible)
Metal encapsulation
channel
Epoxy encapsulant
Active sensor metal
FIGURE 4.96 Schematic of the bonding scheme between sensor wafer and IC. The schematic is a cut-through of the 
catheter.
FIGURE 4.97 SEM micrograph of an Ag/AgCl (left) and 
IrOx (right) electrode at the bottom of an anisotropically 
etched well in silicon. This electrochemical cell forms the 
basis for a Severinghaus CO2 sensor.

[Page 309]
microvalve in Figure 4.98 involves a Ag mem-
brane suspended over an orifice, this patented 
electrochemical valve technology is generic, and 
a wide variety of metals may be used.248 Small 
amounts of drugs can be kept in the Si micro-
machined chambers, and the chamber may be 
closed off using a polymeric laminate. The struc-
ture shown in Figure 4.98 has also been fabri-
cated using a dry photoresist replacing the Si as 
structural material. Arrays of the element shown 
in Figure 4.98 can be made, and the individually 
addressable metal covers can then be opened 
electronically, releasing the drugs stored in the 
Si or polymer chambers. Different drugs can 
be released at different times, and by opening 
more “holes,” the rate of drug delivery can be 
set. This is illustrated in Figure 4.99.249 
One application for this type of valve is 
responsive drug delivery in a smart pill as 
sketched in Figure 4.100 (pharmacy-on-a-chip). 
In this type of implant, openings in a drug reser-
voir are regulated by a biological stimulus (e.g., 
the concentration of glucose sensed by a glucose 
biosensor); therefore, a patient receives only the 
amount of drug his/her body requires (e.g., the 
correct amount of insulin). A doctor may inter-
vene via a telemetric link. This technology is 
currently being pursued by iGlyko (http://www.
iglyko.com/iGlyko/Welcome_to_iGlyko.html).
Example 4.4:  Self-Aligned Vertical Mirrors 
and V-Grooves for a Magnetic 
Micro-optical Matrix Switch
Hélin et al.250 fabricated an elegant, monolithic 
magnetomechanical optical switch for dynami-
cally reconfigurable dense wavelength division 
multiplexing networks. Arrays of optical switches 
allow for the rapid reconfiguration of optical 
networks by altering the light path in a system of 
intersecting fibers. A wavelength division multi-
plexer adds or deletes extra optical channels. A 
switch routing light from a single fiber into any 
of N output fibers is a 1 × N switch. An M × N 
switch routes any one of M inputs to any one of 
N outputs. The M × N designation is the order of 
the optical switch. Commercially available opti-
cal switch arrays from companies such as JDS 
Uniphase Corp. (Milpitas, CA; http://www.jdsu.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   309
Ag electrodes
Etched Si substrate
Oxide or nitride passivation
Ag cathode - counter electrode
Ag anode - burst value
FIGURE 4.98 Disposable electrochemical valve: principle 
of operation.
FIGURE 4.99 Metal electrodes are “blasted” open elec-
trochemically. By making electrode arrays, the number of 
openings is selectable. The metal valve material may be 
Ag, Pt, Au, and so on. In the SEM picture on the left, we 
show a platinum electrode (top) and a set of an Ag/AgCl 
electrode and an IrOx electrode (bottom). In the latter 
case the pH of the drug inside the reservoir can be moni-
tored by measuring the voltage between the Ag/AgCl and 
IrOx electrode.
FIGURE 4.100 Model of responsive drug-delivery system 
(pharmacy-on-a-chip). Responsive drug-delivery pill-type 
configuration. A video on the operation of the device can 
be found at http://www.biomems.net/.

[Page 310]
com) and DiCon Fiberoptics, Inc. (Berkeley, CA; 
http://www.diconfiberoptics.com) are limited to 
1 × 2 or 2 × 2.251 Using MEMS, the prospect is to 
deliver 64 × 64 or even larger arrays in the case 
of Xros (bought by Nortel and then dissolved) 
(see also Volume III, Chapter 10 on IT applica-
tions of MEMS).
To make a low-cost, batch-machined switch, 
Hélin et al. use a simple, one-level mask pro-
cess on a (100) silicon wafer, which allows for 
the simultaneous fabrication of (100) sidewalls 
for high quality mirrors and (111) V-grooves for 
self-alignment between V-grooves and mirrors. 
The etching principle, a nice illustration of the 
wet etching processes described in this chapter, 
is shown in Figure 4.101. The 45° angle between 
the <100> and <110> directions is used to self-
align the vertical mirrors and V-grooves. As the 
310   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
D
A
C
B
V-groove
Mirror after
etching
<110>
<100>
Etching stopped by the (111) planes
Lateral underetching of (100)
planes
FIGURE 4.101 Principle of the self-aligned optical switch 
structure (arrows indicate the underetching).
FIGURE 4.102 (a) Examples of optical switching structures for a self-aligned matrix switch; 2 × 2 bidirectional switch (left) 
and 1 × 8 (right). (b) Principle of switch operation with a self-latching system. (Courtesy of Dr. H. Fujita, University of Tokyo.)

[Page 311]
bottom and sidewall planes are all from the same 
{100} family, the lateral underetch rate is equal 
to the vertical etch rate (see also Figure 4.102). 
Underetching in the <100> direction creates 
the upstanding mirror while at the same time 
V-grooves (A, B, C, and D) are formed in the 
<110> directions for optical fiber alignment. 
Contrary to DRIE-based processes, in which rip-
ples etched in the vertical walls are inevitable, 
wet anisotropic etching fulfills the requirements 
of high surface quality mirrors, reducing optical 
losses. Because intersecting (111) planes stop the 
etching, the width of the V-groove in the mask 
layout fixes the position of the optical axis. The 
thickness of the mirror is determined by timing 
the etch. Cr/Au layers are deposited by vacuum 
evaporation to finish the mirror manufacture. 
The etching principle outlined in Figure 4.101 can 
be expanded to an M × N matrix switch as shown 
in Figure 4.102a for a 2 × 2 and 1 × 8 switch.
The front-side wafer etching process is pre-
ceded by a back-side etching of a cantilever 
beam, whose role is to support the mirror and 
allow it to move. The thickness of the cantilever 
support plate is determined by a timed etch, and 
the cantilever with mirror is actuated using elec-
tromagnetic actuation. The actuation principle 
is demonstrated in Figure 4.102b.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Mr. Chengwu Deng, graduate stu-
dent UCI. 
Questions
 4.1: True or False. Give an explanation for your 
answer.
 
 
(a)  Sputtering technique yields a poor qual-
ity of SiO2.
 
 
(b)  Etch selectivity of <110> over <111> for 
KOH is much higher than EDP.
 
 
(c) EDP does not etch Si3N4.
 
 
(d) KOH does not etch SiO2.
 
 
(e)  Doping Si with high levels of boron pro-
vides a good etch stop for both EDP and 
KOH.
 
 
(f)  The lift-off technique is used mostly to 
pattern thick Si3N4 films.
 4.2: A 0.6 µm film of silicon dioxide is to be 
etched with a buffered oxide etchant (BOE) 
with an etch rate of 750 Å/min. Process data 
show that the thickness may vary up to 10% 
and the etch rate may vary up to 15%.
 
 
(a) Specify a time for the etch process. 
 
 
(b)  Predict how much undercut will occur at 
the top of the film.
 4.3:  Using the isotropic etching diagram for sili-
con from H. Robbins and B. Schwartz, J. 
Electrochem. Soc., 107, 108–11, 1960:
 
 
(a)  If HF: HNO3: HC2H3O2 = 70:10:20, what 
is the etch rate?
 
 
(b)  At this point, which component controls 
the etch rate?
 
 
(c)  If we use water (10%) instead of HC2H3O2 
(10%) as our diluent, the etch rate will be 
more sensitive to which components?
 
 
(d)  How can we significantly reduce the etch 
rate?
 4.4: You are asked to build a 600 µm square, 
25-µm thick diaphragm in an oxidized (100) 
silicon wafer. Given that the wafer thick-
ness is 300 µm and that you will be using an 
anisotropic etching solution of KOH/water 
which attacks the (111) crystal plane 100 
times slower than the (100) crystal direction, 
the etch rate of (100) silicon in this specific 
KOH/water solution is 10 µm/hr.
 
 
(a) Find the etching time. 
 
 
(b)  Find the dimensions of the mask opening 
you would use.
 4.5: You are asked to make grooves 50 µm deep in 
an oxidized (100) silicon wafer. Use first a BOE 
etch to make an opening in the oxide layer 
and then an  anisotropic etchant like KOH/
water. What are the dimensions of the mask 
opening you would use to make this dimen-
sion insensitive to the amount of  over-etch?
 4.6: Write one paragraph on each of the Si etch 
stop techniques including electrochemical 
etch stop, p-n junction etch stop, and dopant-
dependent etch stop, etc.
 4.8: Explain in detail the various corner compen-
sation schemes to reduce undercutting while 
etching anisotropically.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   311

[Page 312]
 4.9: Which are the three orientations of silicon 
wafers most commonly employed in micro-
machining? Arrange them in order of most 
common usage and briefly describe their 
benefits and drawbacks.
 4.10: Derive the relation that connects the size of 
an etched cavity with the size of the mask 
opening in the case of anisotropic etching of 
[100] silicon.
 4.11: In a 4” Si (100) wafer, with a thickness of 
525 µm, 2 different etch features must be cre-
ated. What should the mask opening be to 
create:
 
 
(a)  A square orifice of width 200 µm that 
extends through the wafer?
 
 
(b)  A V-groove that extends all the way 
through the wafer?
 4.12: Compare the etching characteristics of (110)- 
and (100)-oriented silicon wafers. Which 
would you choose for the following applica-
tions and why?
 
 
(a) A diaphragm-based pressure sensor
 
 
(b)  Closely spaced packed high-aspect-ratio 
comb actuators
 4.13: Draw a mask with a convex and a concave cor-
ner and describe what happens when aniso-
tropically etching with such a mask. What is 
the effect etch stop layer has on undercutting 
of a mask?
 4.14: We are building a MEMS device using a 
<100>-oriented silicon substrate. The 4-inch 
wafer is p-type and 500 µm thick. There is a 
200-nm-thick PECVD SiO2 thin film depos-
ited onto the surface. We use photolithog-
raphy to pattern a 750-µm square onto the 
wafer backside, and while the photoresist 
is still in place, employ a 33% KOH bath at 
70°C to etch the device (see also the figure 
below*).
 
 
(a)  What is the final size of the internal 
square projected onto the SiO2 on the 
opposite side of the wafer?
* Figures appearing under Question 4.14 reprinted from Microelectronics 
Journal, Volume 37, pp. 519–525, 2006. With kind permission from 
Elsevier.
 
 
(b)  What would have been the minimum 
photolithography square feature that will 
etch all the way through the wafer?
 
 
(c)  How long will it take to etch through the 
SiO2 layer (see also the figure below)?
 
 
(d)  Once the SiO2 layer is removed, how long 
will it take to etch through the Si layer?
 
 
(e)  The etch rate of SiO2 in buffered hydro-
fluoric acid (BHF) is 100 nm/min. How 
long will it take to etch the remaining 
oxide layers away from the device?
100
22wt% KOH
33wt% KOH
3% TMAH
8% TMAH
2% dual doped TMAH
5% dual doped TMAH
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
45
50
55
Silicon etch rate (µ m/hr)
60
65
Temperature (°C)
70
75
80
85
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
500
Continuous line for SiO2
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
4.00
3.75
3.50
3.25
3.00
2.75
2.50
2.25
2.00
Aluminium etch rate (µm/min
1.75
1.50
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0.000
10wt% KOH
33wt% KOH
12% TMAH
20% TMAH
2% dual doped TMAH
5% dual doped TMAH
33wt% KOH
44wt% KOH
3% TMAH
6% TMAH
2% dual doped TMAH
5% dual doped TMAH
SiO2 etch rate (µ m/hr)
Temperature (°C)
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Dotted line for AI
 4.16:  What wafer orientation would you select if 
you had to etch under a micro-bridge with a 
shallow V-groove crossing it at a 90° angle?
 4.17:  Compare wet and dry etching of Si.
 4.18:  Prepare a table with the most relevant design 
parameters for making a very sensitive 
312   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 313]
piezoresistive Si cantilever to measure bend-
ing induced by differential surface stress.
 4.19:  With what you have learned so far, how 
would you make a very thin Si membrane 
in a Si frame and pattern a square Au elec-
trode on that membrane inside the cavity? 
Where does your process differ from typical 
IC manufacture?
 4.20:  How would you make, using lift-off technol-
ogy, an array of Pt electrodes at the bottom 
of a deep cavity and contact the Pt electrodes 
with leads extending over the cavity’s edge?
 4.21:  Mark the wrong statements:
 
◾The factors that affect the etching process 
are temperature, transport of reactant, 
reaction rate, diffusion rate, and so on.
 
◾Acetic acid is more polar than water, 
which helps in achieving proper wetting of 
slightly hydrophobic Si wafers.
 
◾Photon-pumped etching uses photogene-
rated electron-hole airs to supply oxidation 
sites for the etching process.
 
◾Boron doped regions can be used as an 
etch stop layer.
 
◾KOH etching is used for MOS and CMOS 
processing.
 4.22:  In the context of using piezoresistivity to 
sense strain, what are the advantages/disad-
vantages of using silicon vs. silicon nitride 
for pressure sensitive diaphragms? How does 
residual stress affect the sensitivity?
References
 
1. Harris, T. W. 1976. Chemical milling. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
 
2. Durant, W. 1957. The reformation: a history of European civi-
lization from Wyclif to Calvin, 1300–1564. New York: MJF 
Books.
 
3. Robbins, H., and B. Schwartz. 1959. Chemical etching of 
silicon-I: the system, HF, HNO3, and H2O. J Electrochem Soc 
106:505–08.
 
4. Robbins, H., and B. Schwartz. 1960. Chemical etching 
of silicon-II: the system HF, HNO3, H2O, and HC2C3O2. J 
Electrochem Soc 107:108–11.
 
5. Schwartz, B., and H. Robbins. 1961. Chemical etching 
of silicon-III: a temperature study in the acid system. J 
Electrochem Soc 108:365–72.
 
6. Schwartz, B., and H. Robbins. 1976. Chemical etching of sil-
icon-IV: etching technology. J Electrochem Soc 123:1903–9.
 
7. Uhlir, A. 1956. Electrolytic shaping of germanium and sili-
con. Bell Syst Tech J 35:333–47.
 
8. Hallas, C. E. 1971. Electropolishing silicon. Solid State 
Technol 14:30–32.
 
9. Turner, D. R. 1958. Electropolishing silicon in hydrofluoric 
acid solutions. J Electrochem Soc 105:402–08.
 10. Stoller, A. I., and N. E. Wolff. 1966. Proceedings: second inter-
national symposium on microelectronics. Munich, Germany.
 11. Stoller, A. I. 1970. The etching of deep vertical–walled pat-
terns in silicon. RCA Rev 31: 271–75.
 12. Forster, J. H., and J. B. Singleton. 1966. Beam–lead sealed 
junction integrated circuits. Bell Lab Rec 44:313–17.
 13. Kenney, D. M. 1967. Methods of isolating chips of a wafer 
of semiconductor material. US Patent 3,332,137.
 14. Lepselter, M. P. 1966. Beam lead technology. Bell Sys Tech J 
45:233–54.
 15. Lepselter, M. P. 1967. Integrated circuit device and method. 
1967. US Patent 3,335,338.
 16. Waggener, H. A. 1970. Electrochemically controlled thin-
ning of silicon. Bell Sys Tech J 49:473–75.
 17. Kragness, R. C., and H. A. Waggener. 1973. Precision etch-
ing of semiconductors. US Patent 3,765,969.
 18. Waggener, H. A., R. C. Kragness, and A. L. Tyler. 1967. 
Technical digest: IEEE international electron devices meeting 
68. Washington, DC: IEEE.
 19. Waggener, H. A., R. C. Krageness, and A. L. Tyler. 1967. 
Two–way etch. Electronics 40:274.
 20. Bean, K. E., and W. R. Runyan. 1977. Dielectric isola-
tion: comprehensive, current and future. J Electrochem Soc 
124:5C–12C.
 21. Rodgers, T. J., W. R. Hiltpold, B. Frederick, J. J. Barnes, F. B. 
Jenné, and J. D. Trotter. 1977. VMOS memory technology. 
IEEE J Solid-State Circuits SC-12:515–23.
 22. Rodgers, T. J., W. R. Hiltpold, J. W. Zimmer, G. Marr, and 
J. D. Trotter. 1976. VMOS ROM. IEEE J Solid-State Circuits 
SC-11:614–22.
 23. Ammar, E. S., and T. J. Rodgers. 1980. UMOS transistors on 
(110) silicon. IEEE Trans Electron Devices ED-27:907–14.
 24. Smith, C. S. 1954. Piezoresistance effect in germanium and 
silicon. Phys Rev 94:42–49.
 25. Pfann, W. G. 1961. Improvement of semiconducting 
devices by elastic strain. Solid State Electron 3:261–67.
 26. McGeough, J. A. 1974. Principles of electrochemical machin-
ing. New York: Wiley.
 27. Romankiw, L. T., and T. A. Palumbo. 1987. Proceedings: 
symposium on electrodeposition technology, theory and practice. 
Eds. L. T. Romankiw and D. R. Turner. Pennington, NJ: The 
Electrochemical Society, Inc.
 28. Stevens, G. W. W. 1968. Microphotography: photography and 
photofabrication at extreme resolution. New York: Wiley.
 29. Humphrey, E. F., and D. H. Tarumoto, eds. 1965. Fluidics. 
Boston: Fluidic Amplifier Associates.
 30. Allen, D. M. 1986. The principles and practice of photochemi-
cal machining and photoetching. Bristol and Boston: Adam 
Hilger.
 31. Trotter, D. M. 1991. Photochromic and photosensitive 
glass. Sci Am 124:124–29.
 32. Stookey, S. D. 2000. Explorations in glass: an autobiography. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
 33. Vollmer, J., H. Hein, W. Menz, and F. Walter. 1994. Bistable 
fluidic elements in liga technique for flow control in fluidic 
microactuators. Sensors Actuators A A43:330–34.
 34. Schomburg, W. K., J. Vollmer, B. Bustgens, J. Fahrenberg, 
H. Hein, and W. Menz. 1994. Microfluidic components in 
LIGA technique. J Micromech Microeng 4:186–91.
 35. Ehrfeld W. 1994. Notes from handouts. Banff, Canada.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   313

[Page 314]
 36. Phillips, R. E. 1985. Electrochemical grinding: What is it? 
How does it work? SME Technical Paper MR-85:383.
 37. Boothroyd, G., and W. A. Knight. 1989. Fundamentals of 
machining and machine tools. New York: Marcel Dekker.
 38. Sommer, C. 2000. Non-traditional machining handbook. 
Houston: Advance Publishing.
 39. Datta, M. 1995. Interface. The Electrochemical Society. 4:32.
 40. Datta, M., L. T. Romankiw, D. R. Vigliotti, and R. J. von 
Gutfeld. 1989. Jet and laser-jet electrochemical microma-
chining of nickel and steel. J Electrochem Soc 136:2251.
 41. Bard, A. J. 1994. Integrated chemical systems. New York: Wiley.
 42. Amemiya, S., A. J. Bard, F.-R. F. Fan, M. V. Mirkin, and P. R. 
Unwin. 2008. Scanning electrochemical microscopy. Annu. 
Rev. Anal. Chem. 1:95–131.
 43. Landolt, D. 1994. Proceedings of symposium on electrochemi-
cal microfabrication. Eds. M. Datta,K. Sheppard, and J. O. 
Dukovic. Pennington, NJ: The Electrochemical Society. 
 44. Datta, M. J. 1995. Fabrication of an array of precision noz-
zles by through-mask electrochemical micromachining. 
Electrochem Soc 142:3801–05.
 45. Madore, C., and D. Landolt. 1997. Electrochemical micro-
machining of controlled topographies on titanium for bio-
logical applications. J Micromech Microeng 7:270–75.
 46. den Braber, E. T., J. E. den Ruijte, L. A. Ginsel, A. F. von Recum, 
and J. A. Jansen. 1996. Quantitative analysis of fibroblast 
morphology on microgrooved surfaces with various groove 
and ridge dimensions. Biomaterials 17:2037–44.
 47. Gonsalvez, M. 2003. Atomistic modelling of anisotropic etch-
ing of crystalline silicon. PhD diss., Helsinki University of 
Technology.
 48. Kendall, D. L. 1979. Vertical etching of silicon at very high 
aspect ratios. Ann Rev Mater Sci 9:373–403.
 49. Tuckerman, D. B., and R. F. W. Pease. 1981. High-
performance heat sinking for VLSI. IEEE Electron Device Lett 
EDL-2:126–29.
 50. Barth, P. W., P. J. Shlichta, and J. B. Angel. 1985. Third 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators. 
Philadelphia.
 51. Ciarlo, D. R. 1987. Proceedings: IEEE micro robots and teleop-
erators workshop. Hyannis, MA: IEEE.
 52. Seidel, H., L. Csepregi, A. Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 
1990. Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon in alkaline 
solutions–part I: orientation dependence and behavior of 
passivation layers. J Electrochem Soc 137:3612–26.
 53. Elwenspoek, M., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, and A. Prak. 
1994. Micromechanics. Report No. 122830. Twente, the 
Netherlands: University of Twente.
 54. Herr, E., and H. Baltes. 1991. Sixth international conference 
on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San 
Francisco.
 55. Elwenspoek, M. 1993. On the mechanism of anisotropic 
etching of silicon. J Electrochem Soc 140:2075–80.
 56. Elwenspoek, M., U. Lindberg, H. Kok, and L. Smith. 1994. 
IEEE international workshop on micro electro mechanical sys-
tems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan: IEEE.
 57. Kendall, D. L. 1975. On etching very narrow grooves in sili-
con. Appl Phys Lett 26:195–98.
 58. Schumacher, A., H.-J. Wagner, and M. Alavi. 1994. Mit 
Laser und Kalilauge. Technische Rundschau 86:20–23.
 59. Seidel, H., and L. Csepregi. 1988. Advanced meth-
ods for the micromachining of sensors. Technical digest 
of the 7th sensor symposium. Tokyo, Japan. Reprinted in 
MBB Jahresbericht 1989, Forschung und Entwicklung - 
Technisch-wissenschaftliche Veröffentlichungen 1989, S. 41.
 60. Alavi, M., S. Buttgenbach, A. Schumacher, and H. J. Wagner. 
1991. Sixth international conference on solid-state sensors and 
actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 61. Alavi, M., S. Buttgenbach, A. Schumacher, and H. J. Wagner. 
1992. Fabrication of microchannels by laser machin-
ing and anisotropic etching of silicon. Sensors Actuators A 
A32:299–302.
 62. Kaminsky, G. 1985. Micromachining of silicon mechanical 
structures. J Vac Sci Technol B3:1015–24.
 63. Stoller, A. I., R. F. Speers, and S. Opresko. 1970. A new 
technique for etch thinning silicon wafers. RCA Rev 
31:265–70.
 64. Kern, W., and C. A. Deckert. 1978. Thin film processes. Eds. J. 
L. Vossen, and W. Kern. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
 65. Yang, K. H. 1984. An etch for delineation of defects in sili-
con. J Electrochem Soc 131: 1140–45.
 66. Chu, T. L., and J. R. Gavaler. 1965. Dissolution of silicon 
and junction delineation in silicon by the CrO3-HF-H2O 
system. Electrochim Acta 10:1141–48.
 67. Archer, V. D. 1982. Methods for defect evaluation of thin 
<100> oriented silicon in epitaxial layers using a wet chem-
ical etch. J Electrochem Soc 129:2074–76.
 68. Schimmel, D. G., and M. J. Elkind. 1973. An examina-
tion of the chemical staining of silicon. J Electrochem Soc 
125:152–55.
 69. Secco d’Aragona, F. 1972. Dislocation etch for (100) planes 
in silicon. J Electrochem Soc 119:948–51.
 70. Tuck, B. 1975. Review: the chemical polishing of semicon-
ductors. J Mater Sci 10:321–39.
 71. Kooij, E. S., K. Butter, and J. J. Kelly. 1999. Silicon etching 
in HF/HNO solution: charge 3 balance for the oxidation 
reaction. Electrochem Solid-State Lett 2:178–80.
 72. Kovacs, G. T. A., N. I. Maluf, and K. E. Petersen. 1998. 
Proceedings of the IEEE. Washington, DC: IEEE.
 73. Wise, K. D., M. G. Robinson, and W. J. Hillegas. 1981. Solid 
state processes to produce hemispherical components for 
inertial fusion targets. J Vac Sci Technol 18:1179–82.
 74. Tjerkstra, R. W. 1999. Isotropic etching of silicon in fluoride 
containing solutions as a tool for micromachining. PhD diss., 
University of Twente, Twente, the Netherlands.
 75. Petersen, K. E. 1982. Silicon as a mechanical material. 
Proceedings of the IEEE. 70:420–57.
 76. Kuiken, H. K., J. J. Kelly, and P. H. L. Notten. 1986. Etching 
profiles at resist edges. J Electrochem Soc 133:1217–32.
 77. Kern, W. 1978. Chemical etching of silicon, germanium, 
gallium arsenide, and gallium phosphide. RCA Rev 
39:278–308.
 78. Hu, S. M., and D. R. Kerr. Observation of etching of n-type 
silicon in aqueous HF solutions. J Electrochem Soc 114:414.
 79. Hoffmeister, W. 1969. Determination of the etch rate of 
silicon in buffered HF using a 31Si tracer method. Int J Appl 
Radiation Isotopes 2:139.
 80. Muraoka, H., T. Ohashi, and T. Sumitomo. 1973. 
Controlled preferential etching technology. Semiconductor 
Silicon. Pennington, NJ: The Electrochemical Society, pp. 
327–38. 
 81. Seidel, H. 1989. Mikromechanik. Ed. A. Heuberger. 
Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Verlag.
 82. Bogenschutz, A. F., K.-H. Locherer, W. Mussinger, and W. 
Krusemark. 1967. Chemical etching of semiconductors in 
HNO3-HF-CH3COOH. J Electrochem Soc 114:970–73.
 83. Dash, W. C. 1956. J Appl Phys 27:1193.
 84. Sirtl, E., and A. Adler. 1961. Z Metallkd 52:529.
 85. Jenkins, M. W. 1977. J Electrochem Soc 124:757.
314   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 315]
 86. Schimmel, D. G. 1979. Defect etch for <100> silicon evalu-
ation. J Electrochem Soc 126:479–83.
 87. Theunissen, M. J., J. A. Apples, and W. H. C. G. Verkuylen. 
1970. Applications of preferential electrochemical etching 
of silicon to semiconductor device technology. J Electrochem 
Soc 117:959–65.
 88. Meek, R. L. 1971. Electrochemically thinned N/N+ epi-
taxial silicon: method and applications. J Electrochem Soc 
118:1240–46.
 89. van Dijk, H. J. A., and J. de Jonge. 1970. Preparation of thin 
silicon crystals by electrochemical thinning of epitaxially 
grown structures. J Electrochem Soc 117:553–54.
 90. Shengliang, Z., Z. Zongmin, and L. Enke. 1987. Fourth 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’87). Tokyo, Japan.
 91. Lehmann, V. 1993. The physics of macropore formation in 
low doped n-type silicon. J Electrochem Soc 140:2836–43.
 92. Barla, K., G. Bomchil, R. Herino, and J. C. Pfister. 1984. 
X-ray topographic characterization of porous silicon layers. 
J Cryst Growth 68:721–26.
 93. Arita, Y. 1978. Fomation and oxidation of porous silicon 
by anodic reaction. J Cryst Growth 45:383–92.
 94. Higashi, G. S., Y. J. Chabal, G. W. Trucks, and K. 
Raghavachari. 1990. Ideal hydrogen termination of the Si 
(111) surface. Appl Phys Lett 56:656–68.
 95. Allongue, P., V. Kieling, and G. Gerischer. 1995. Eching 
mechanism and atomic structure of H-Si (111) surfaces 
prepared in NH4F. Electrochim Acta 40:1353–60.
 96. Gerischer, H., and M. Lubke. 1987. The electrochemi-
cal behaviour of n-type silicon (111)-surfaces in fluoride 
containing aqueous electrolytes. Ber Bunsenges Phys Chem 
91:394–98.
 97. Kooij, E. S., and D. Vanmaekelbergh. 1997. Catalysis and 
pore initiation in the anodic dissolution of silicon in HF. J 
Electrochem Soc 144:1296–301.
 98. da Fonseca, C., F. Ozanam, and J.-N. Chazalviel. 1996. In 
situ infrared characterization of the interfacial oxide dur-
ing the anodic dissolution of a silicon electrode in fluoride 
electrolytes. Surface Sci 365:1–14.
 99. Matsumura, M., and S. R. Morrison. 1983. Anodic 
properties of n-Si and n-Ge electrodes in HF solution 
under illumination and in the dark. J Electroanal Chem 
147:157–66.
 100. Gerischer, H., and M. Lubke. 1988. Electrolytic growth and 
dissolution of oxide layers on silicon in aqueous solutions 
of fluorides. Ber Bunsenges Phys Chem 92:573–77.
 101. Serre, C., S. Barret, and R. Herino. 1994. Characterization 
of the electropolishing layer during anodic etching of 
p-type silicon in aqueous HF solutions. J Electrochem Soc 
141:2049–53.
 102. Matsumura, M., and S. R. Morrison. 1983. Photoanodic 
properties of an n-type silicon electrode in aqueous solu-
tion containing fluorides. J Electroanal Chem 144:113–20.
 103. Eddowes, M. J. 1990. Anodic dissolution of p- and n-type 
silicon: kinetic study of the chemical reaction. J Electroanal 
Chem 280:297–311.
 104. Allongue, P., V. Costa-Kieling, and H. Gerischer. 1993. 
Etching of silicon in NaOH solutions: parts I and II. J 
Electrochem Soc 140:1009–18 (Part I); 1018–26 (Part II).
 105. Palik, E. D., O. J. Glembocki, and J. I. Heard. 1987. Study of 
bias-dependent etching of Si in aqueous KOH. J Electrochem 
Soc 134:404–09.
 106. Linde, H., and L. Austin. 1992. Wet silicon etching with 
aqueous amine gallates. J Electrochem Soc 139:1170–74.
 107. Price, J. B. 1973. Anisotropic etching of silicon with KOH-
H2O- isopropyl alcohol. Eds. H. R. Huff, and. R. R. Burgess, 
Semiconductor Silicon. Princeton, NJ: The Electrochemical 
Society, pp. 339–53.
 108. Finne, R. M., and D. L. Klein. 1967, A water-amine-com-
plexing agent system for etching silicon. J Electrochem Soc 
114:965–70.
 109. Reisman, A., M. Berkenbilt, S. A. Chan, F. B. Kaufman, and 
D. C. Green. 1979. The controlled etching of silicon in cat-
alyzed ethylene-diamine-pyrocathechol-water solutions. 
Electrochem Soc 126:1406–14.
 110. Seidel, H., L. Csepregi, A. Heuberger, and H. Baumgartel. 
1990. Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon in alkaline 
solutions—part II: influence of dopants. J Electrochem Soc 
137:3626–32.
 111. Kendall, D. L., and G. R. de Guel. 1985. Micromachining 
and micropackaging of transducers. Ed. C. D. Fung. New York: 
Elsevier.
 112. Lee, D. B. 1969. Anisotropic etching of silicon. J Appl Phys 
40:4569–74.
 113. Noworolski, J. M., E. Klaassen, J. Logan, K. Petersen, and 
N. Maluf. 1995. Eighth international conference on solid-
state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, 
Sweden.
 114. Waggener, H. A., and J. V. Dalton. 1972. Control of silicon 
etch rates in hot alkaline solutions by externally applied 
potentials. J Electrochem Soc 119:236C.
 115. Weirauch, D. F. 1975. Correlation of the anisotropic etch-
ing of single-crystal silicon spheres and wafers. J Appl Phys 
46:1478–83.
 116. Clemens, D. P. 1973. Anisotropic etching of silicon on 
 sapphire. J Electrochem Soc 407, 120:C240–C240.
 117. Bean, K. E., R. L. Yeakley, and T. K. Powell. 1974. Orientation 
dependent etching and deposition of silicon. J Electrochem 
Soc 121:87C.
 118. Declercq, M. J., J. P. DeMoor, and J. P. Lambert. 1975. A 
comparative study of three anisotropic etchants for silicon. 
Electrochem Soc Abstracts 75-2:446.
 119. Wu, X. P., Q. H. Wu, and W. H. Ko. 1986. A study on deep 
etching of silicon using ethylene-diamine-pyrocathechol-
water. Sensors Actuators 9:333–43.
 120. Declercq, M. J., L. Gerzberg, and J. D. Meindl. 1975. 
Optimization of the hydrazine-water solution for anisos-
tropic etching of silicon in integrated circuit technology. J 
Electrochem Soc 122:545–52.
 121. Mehregany, M., and S. D. Senturia. 1988. Anisotropic etch-
ing of silicon in hydrazine. Sensors Actuators 13:375–90.
 122. Asano, M., T. Cho, and H. Muraoko. 1976. Applications 
of choline in semiconductor technology. Electrochem Soc 
Extend Abstr 354:911–13.
 123. Tabata, O., R. Asahi, and S. Sugiyama. 1990. Anisotropic 
etching with quaternary ammonium hydroxide solutions. 
Technical Digest: Ninth Sensor Symposium. Tokyo, Japan.
 124. Pugacz-Muraszkiewicz, I. J., and B. R. Hammond. 1977. 
Application of silicates to the detection of flaws in glassy 
passivation films deposited on silicon substrates. J Vac Sci 
Technol 14:49–53.
 125. Williams, K. R., and R. S. Muller. 1996. Etch rates for micro-
machining processes. J Electrochem Soc 137:3612–32.
 126. Peeters, E. 1994. Process development for 3D silicon micro-
structures, with application to mechanical sensor design. 
Ph.D. diss., Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium.
 127. Lambrechts, M., and W. Sansen. 1992. Biosensors: microelectro-
chemical devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics Publishing.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   315

[Page 316]
 128. Palik, E. D., V. M. Bermudez, and O. J. Glembocki. 1985. 
Ellipsometric study of the etch-stop mechanism in heavily 
doped silicon. J Electrochem Soc 132:135–41.
 129. Clark, L. D., and D. J. Edell. 19897. Proceedings: IEEE micro 
robots and teleoperators workshop. Hyannis, MA.
 130. Schnakenberg, U., W. Benecke, and B. Lochel. 1990. 
NH4OH-based etchants for silicon micromachining. Sensors 
Actuators A A23:1031–35.
 131. Bean, K. 1978. Anisotropic etching of silicon. IEEE Trans 
Electron Devices ED–25:1185–93.
 132. Barth, P. 1984. Si in biomedical applications. Micro-
electronics—photonics, materials, sensors and technology.
 133. Linde, H., and L. Austin. 1992. Wet silicon etching with 
aqueous amine gallates. J Electrochem Soc 139:1170–74.
 134. Tabata, O., R. Asahi, H. Funabashi, K. Shimaoka, and S. 
Sugiyama. 1992. Anisotropic etching of silicon in TMAH 
solutions. Sensors Actuators A A34:51–57.
 135. Tabata, O. 1995. Eighth international conference on solid-state 
sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 136. Reay, R. J., E. H. Klaassen, and G. T. A. Kovacs. 1994. 
Thermally and electrically isolated single-crystal silicon 
structures in CMOS technology. IEEE Electron Device Lett 
15:309–401.
 137. Steinsland, E., M. Nese, A. Hanneborg, R. W. Bernstein, H. 
Sandmo, and G. Kittilsland. 1995. Eighth international con-
ference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). 
Stockholm, Sweden.
 138. Wise, K. D. 1985. Micromachining and micropackaging of 
transducers. Eds. C. D. Fung, P. W. Cheung, W. H. Ko, and 
D. G. Fleming. New York: Elsevier.
 139. Seidel, H. 1987. The mechanism of anisotropic silicon 
etching and its relevance for micromachining. Fourth 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’87). Tokyo, Japan. 
 140. Ternez, L. 1988. Ph.D. diss., Uppsala University.
 141. Gravesen, P. 1986. Silicon sensors. Status report for the indus-
trial engineering thesis. Lyngby, Denmark: DTH.
 142. Ohwada, K., Y. Negoro, U. Konaka, and T. Oguchi. 1995. 
Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems conference. 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
 143. Baum, T., and D. J. Schiffrin. 1997. AFM study of surface 
finish improvement by ultrasound in the anisotropic etch-
ing of Si <100> in KOH for micromachining applications. J 
Micromech Microeng 7:338–42.
 144. Bressers, P. M. M. C., J. J. Kelly, J. G. E. Gardeniers, and 
M. Elwenspoek. 1996. Surface morphology of p-type (100) 
silicon etched in aqueous alkaline solution. J Electrochem 
Soc 143:1744–50.
 145. Klaassen, E. H., R. J. Reay, C. Storment, J. Audy, P. Henry, 
P. A. P. Brokaw, and G. T. A. Kovacs. 1996. Proceedings: 
solid- state sensors and actuators workshop. Hilton Head 
Island, SC.
 146. Puers, R. 1991. Proceedings: themadag sensoren. Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
 147. Buttgenbach, S. 1991. Mikromechanik. Stuttgart, Germany: 
Teubner Studienbucher.
 148. Samaun, S., K. D. Wise, and J. B. Angell. 1973. An IC 
piezoresistive pressure sensor for biomedical instrumenta-
tion. IEEE Trans Biomed Engr 20:101–09.
 149. Nunn, T., and J. Angell. 1975. Workshop on indwelling pressure 
transducers and systems. Cleveland, OH.
 150. Greenwood, J. C. 1969. Ethylene diamine-cathechol-
 water mixture shows preferential etching of p-n junction. 
J Electrochem Soc 116:1325–26.
 151. Bogh, A. 1971. Ethylene diamine-pyrocatechol-water 
mixture shows etching anomaly in boron-doped silicon. 
J Electrochem Soc 118:401–2.
 152. Brodie, I., and J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrica-
tion. New York: Plenum Press.
 153. Heuberger, A. 1989. Mikromechanik. Heidelberg, Germany: 
Springer Verlag.
 154. Rehrig, D. L. 1990. In search of precise epi thickness mea-
surements. Semicond Int 13:90–95.
 155. Palik, E. D., J. W. Faust, H. F. Gray, and R. F. Green. 1982. 
Study of the etch-stop mechanism in silicon. J Electrochem 
Soc 129:2051–59.
 156. Jackson, T. N., M. A. Tischler, and K. D. Wise. 1981. An electro-
chemical P-N junction etch-stop for the formation of silicon 
microstructures. IEEE Electron Device Lett EDL–2:44–45.
 157. Faust, J. W., and E. D. Palik. 1983. Study of the orientation 
dependent etching and initial anodization of Si in aqueous 
KOH. J Electrochem Soc 130:1413–20.
 158. Kim, S. C., and K. Wise. 1983. Temperature sensitivity 
in silicon piezoresistive pressure transducers. IEEE Trans 
Electron Devices ED–30:802–10.
 159. Kloeck, B., S. D. Collins, N. F. de Rooij, and R. L. Smith. 
1989. Study of electrochemical etch-stop for high-precision 
thickness control of silicon membranes. IEEE Trans Electron 
Devices 36:663–69.
 160. McNeil, V. M., S. S. Wang, K.-Y. Ng, and M. A. Schmidt. 
1990. Technical digest: 1990 solid state sensor and actuator 
workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 161. Palik, E. D., O. J. Glembocki, and R. E. Stahlbush. 1988. 
Fabrication and characterization of Si membranes. J 
Electrochem Soc 135:3126–34.
 162. Hirata, M., K. Suzuki, and H. Tanigawa. 1988. Silicon dia-
phragm pressure sensors fabricated by anodic oxidation 
etch-stop. Sensors Actuators 13:63–70.
 163. Theunissen, M. J. 1972. Etch channel formation during 
anodic dissolution of n-type silicon in aqueous hydroflu-
oric acid. J Electrochem Soc 119:351–60.
 164. Wen, C. P., and K. P. Weller. 1972. Preferential electro-
chemical etching of p+ silicon in an aqueous HF–H2SO4 
electrolyte. J Electrochem Soc 119:547–48.
 165. van Dijk, H. J. A. 1972. Method of manufacturing a semi-
conductor device and semiconductor device manufactured 
by said method. US Patent 3,640,807.
 166. Saro, P. M., and A. W. van Herwaarden. 1986. Silicon 
cantilever beams fabricated by electrochemically con-
trolled etching for sensor applications. J Electrochem Soc 
133:1722–29.
 167. Mlcak, R., H. L. Tuller, P. Greiff, and J. Sohn. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort 
Lauderdale, FL: IEEE.
 168. Yoshida, T., T. Kudo, and K. Ikeda. 1992. Proceedings: IEEE 
micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’92). Travemunde, 
Germany: IEEE.
 169. Shockley, W. 1963. Method of making thin slices of semi-
conductive material. US Patent 3,096,262.
 170. Peeters, E., D. Lapadatu, W. Sansen, and B. Puers. 1993. 
Seventh international conference on solid-state sensors and actu-
ators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan.
 171. Peeters, E., D. Lapadatu, R. Puers, and W. Sansen. 1994. 
Phet, an electrodeless photovoltaic electrochemical etch-
stop technique. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 3(3):113–23.
 172. Kelly, J. J., and H.G.G.Philipsen. 2005. Anisotropy in the 
wet-etching of semiconductors. Curr Opin Solid State Mat 
Sci 9:84–90.
316   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 317]
 173. Baum, T., and D. J. Schiffrin. 1998. Mechanistic aspects of 
anisotropic dissolution of materials: etching of single- cystal 
in alkaline solutions. J Chem Soc Far Trans 94:691–94.
 174. Hines, M. A., Y. J. Chabal, T. D. Harris, and A. L. Harris. 
1994. Measuring the structure of etched silicon surfaces 
with Raman spectroscopy. Chem Phys 101:8055.
 175. Palik, E. D., H. F. Gray, and P. B. Klein. 1983. A Raman 
study of etching silicon in aqueous KOH. J Electrochem Soc 
130:956–59.
 176. Raley, N. F., F. Sugiyama, and T. Van Duzer. 1984. (100) 
Silicon etch-rate dependence on boron concentration 
in 
ethylenediamine-pyrocatechol-water 
solutions. 
J 
Electrochem Soc 131:161–71.
 177. Wu, X. P., Q. H. Wu, and W. H. Ko. 1985. Third international 
conference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers 
’85). Philadelphia.
 178. Abu-Zeid, M. M., D. L. Kendall, G. R. de Guel, and R. 
Galeazzi. 1985. Abstract 275. JECS 400.
 179. Seidel, H. 1990. Technical digest: IEEE solid-state sensor and 
actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 180. Steinsland, E., M. Nese, A. Hanneborg, R. W. Bernstein, H. 
Sandmo, and G. Kittilsland. 1995. Eighth international con-
ference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). 
Stockholm, Sweden.
 181. Ghandi, S. K. 1968. The theory and practice of micro-electron-
ics. New York: Wiley.
 182. Glembocki, O. J., R. E. Stahlbush, and M. Tomkiewicz. 
1985. Bias-dependent etching of silicon in aqueous KOH. 
J Electrochem Soc 132:145–51.
 183. Elwenspoek, M., and J. P. van der Weerden. 1987. Kinetic 
roughening and step free energy in the solid-on-solid model 
and on naphtalene crystals. J Phys A Math Gen 20:669–78.
 184. Bennema, P. 1984. Spiral growth and surface roughening: 
developments since Burton, Cabrera, and Frank. J Cryst 
Growth 69: 182–97).
 185. Jackson, K. A. 1966. Crystal growth. International conference 
for crystal growth. Boston, June 20–24, 1966.
 186. Madou, M. J., and S. R. Morrison. 1989. Chemical sensing 
with solid state devices. New York: Academic Press.
 187. Madou, M. J., K. W. Frese, and S. R. Morrison. 1980. 
Photoelectrochemical corrosion of semiconductors for 
solar cells. SPIE 248:88–95.
 188. Madou, M. J., B. H. Loo, K. W. Frese, and S. R. Morrison. 
Bulk and surface characterization of the silicon electrode. 
Surf Sci 108:135–52.
 189. Levy-Clement, C., A. Lagoubi, R. Tenne, and M. Neumann-
Spallart. 1992. Photoelectrochemical etching of silicon. 
Electrochim Acta 37:877–88.
 190. Lewerenz, H. J., J. Stumper, and L. M. Peter. 1988. 
Deconvolution of charge injection steps in quantum yield 
multiplication on silicon. Phys Rev Lett 61:1989–92.
 191. Brantley, W. A. 1973. Calculated elastic constants for stress 
problems associated with semiconductor devices. J Appl 
Phys 44:534–35.
 192. Hesketh, P. J., C. Ju, S. Gowda, E. Zanoria, and S. Danyluk. 
1993. Surface free energy model of silicon anisotropic etch-
ing. J Electrochem Soc 140:1080–85.
 193. Sundaram, K. B., and H.-W. Chang. 1993. Electrochemical etch-
ing of silicon by hydrazine. J Electrochem Soc 140:1592–97.
 194. Morrison, S. R. 1980. Electrochemistry on semiconductors and 
oxidized metal electrodes. New York: Plenum Press.
 195. Gaburro, Z., N. Daldosso, and L. Pavesi, eds. 2005. 
Encyclopedia of condensed matter physics: porous silicon. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier Ltd.
 196. Canham, L. T. 1990. Silicon quantum wire array fabrica-
tion by electrochemical and chemical dissolution of wafers. 
Appl Phys Lett 57:1046–48.
 197. Lehmann, V., and U. Gosele. 1991. Porous silicon forma-
tion: a quantum wire effect. Appl Phys Lett 58:856–58.
 198. Richter, A., P. Steiner, F. Kozlowski, and W. Lang. 1991. 
Current-induced light emission from a porous silicon 
device. IEEE Electron Device Lett 12:691–92.
 199. Barrett, E. P., L. G. Joyner, and P. P. Halenda. 1951. The 
determination of pore volume and area distributions in 
pure substances. J Am Chem Soc 73:373.
 200. Brunauer, S., P. H. Emmett, and E. Teller. 1938. Adsorption 
of  gases in multimolecular layers. J Am Chem Soc 60: 
309–19.
 201. Bomchil, G., R. Herino, and K. Barla. 1986. Energy beam-
solid interactions and transient thermal processes. Eds. V. T. 
Nguyen, and A. Cullis. Les Ulis, France: Les Editions de 
Physique.
 202. Watanabe, Y., Y. Arita, T. Yokoyama, and Y. Igarashi. 1975. 
Formation and properties of porous silicon and its applica-
tions. J Electrochem Soc 122:1351–55.
 203. Tserepi, A., et al. 2003. Dry etching of porous silicon in high 
density plasmas. Physica Status Solidi (A) 197:163–67.
 204. Smith, R. L., and S. D. Collins. 1990. Thick films of silicon 
nitride. Sensors Actuators A A23:830–34.
 205. Unagami, T. 1980. Formation mechanism of porous sili-
con layer by anodization in HF solution.J Electrochem Soc 
127:476–83.
 206. Tjerkstra, R. W. 1999. Isotropic etching of silicon in fluo-
ride containing solutions as a tool for micromachining. 
PhD diss., University of Twente, Twente, the Netherlands.
 207. Jung, K. H., S. Shih, and D. L. Kwong. 1993. Developments 
in luminescent porous Si. J Electrochem Soc 140:3046–64.
 208. Zhang, X. G. 1991. Mechanism of pore formation on n-type 
silicon. J Electrochem Soc 138:3750–56.
 209. Lehmann, V. 1996. Ninth annual international workshop on 
micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’96). San Diego.
 210. Grüning, U., V. Lehmann, S. Ottow, and K. Busch. 1996. 
Macroporous silicon with a complete two-dimensional 
photonic band gap centered at 5 mm. Appl Phys Lett 
68:747–49. 
 211. Thönissen, M., and M. G. Burger, eds. 1997. Properties of 
porous silicon. Washington, DC: IEEE.
 212. Parkhutik, V. P., L. K. Glinenko, and V. A. Labunov. 1983. 
Kinetics and mechanism of porous layer growth during 
n-type silicon anodization in HF solution. Surf Technol 
20:265–77.
 213. Lehmann, V., and H. Foll. 1990. Formation mechanism 
and properties of electrochemically etched trenches in 
n-type silicon. J Electrochem Soc 137:653–59.
 214. Smith, L., S. F. Chuang, and S. D. Collins. 1988. J Electron 
Mater 17:533.
 215. Christophersen, M., J. Carstensen, A. Feuerhake, and H. 
Föll. 2000. Crystal orientation and electrolyte dependence 
for macropore nucleation and stable growth on p-type-
 silicon. Mater Sci Eng B 69-70:194 .
 216. Lehmann, V. 2006. Porous semiconductors-science and tech-
nology 5th international conference. Sitges, Spain.
 217. Cahill, S. S., W. Chu, and K. Ikeda. 1993. Seventh inter-
national conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan.
 218. Föll, H., S. Langa, J. Carstensen, M. Christophersen, and 
I. M. Tiginyanu. 2003. Pores in III-V semiconductors. Adv 
Mater 15:183–98.
Wet Chemical Etching and Wet Bulk Micromachining—Pools as Tools   317

[Page 318]
 219. Searson, P. C., S. M. Prokes, and O. J. Glembocki. 1993. 
Luminescence at the porous silicon/electrolyte interface. J 
Electrochem Soc 140:3327–31.
 220. Doan, V. V., and M. J. Sailor. 1992. Luminescent color 
image generation on porous Si. Science 256:1791–92.
 221. Lin, V. S., K. Motesharei, K. S. Dancil, M. J. Sailor, and M. 
R. Ghadiri. 1997. A porous silicon-based optical interfero-
metric biosensor. Science 278:840–43.
 222. Lammel, G., and P. Renaud. 2000. Two mask tunable opti-
cal filter of porous silicon as microspectrometer. Eurosensors 
XIV. Eds. R. de Reus, and S. Bouwstra. Copenhagen: MIC-
Mikroelektronik Center. 
 223. Canham, L. T. 1995. Bioactive silicon structure fabrication 
through nanoetching techniques. Adv Mater 7:1033.
 224. Armbruster, S., F. Schafer, G. Lammel, H. Artmann, C. 
Schelling, H. Benzel, S. Finkbeiner, F. Larmer, R. Ruther, 
and O. Paul. 2003 A novel micromachining process for the 
fabrication of monocrystalline Si-membranes using porous 
silicon. The 12th International Conference on Transducers, 
Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems.1:246–49.
 225. Mayer, G. K., H. L. Offereins, H. Sandmeier, and K. Kuhl. 
1990. Fabrication of non-underetched convex corners in 
ansisotropic etching of (100)-silicon in aqueous KOH with 
respect to novel micromechanic elements. J Electrochem Soc 
137:3947–51.
 226. Bryzek, J., K. Petersen, J. R. Mallon, L. Christel, and F. 
Pourahmadi. 1990. Silicon sensors and microstructures. 
Fremont, CA: Novasensor.
 227. Puers, B., and W. Sansen. 1990. Compensation structures 
for convex corner micromachining in silicon. Sensors 
Actuators A A23:1036–41.
 228. Sandmaier, H., H. L. Offereins, K. Kuhl, and W. Lang. 1991. 
Sixth international conference on solid-state sensors and actua-
tors (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 229. Long, M. K., J. W. Burdick, and E. K. Antonsson. 1999. MSM 
’99: modeling and simulation of microsystems, semiconductors, 
sensors and actuators. San Juan, Puerto Rico.
 230. Buser, R. A., and N. F. de Rooij. 1988. Monolithishes 
Kraftsensorfeld. VDI-Berichte Nr. 677.
 231. Zhang, Q., L. L. Liu, and Z. Li. 1996. A new approach to 
convex corner compensation for anisotropic etching of 
(100) Si in KOH. Sensors Actuators A 56:251.
 232. Enoksson, P. 1997. New structure for corner compensation 
in anisotropic KOH etching. J Micromech Microeng 7:141.
 233. Seidel, H. 1986. PhD thesis. FU Berlin, Germany.
 234. Abu-Zeid, M. M. 1984. Corner undercutting in aniso-
tropically etched isolation contours. J Electrochem Soc 
131:2138–42.
 235. Wu, X.-P., and W. H. Ko. 1989. Compensating corner 
undercutting in anisotropic etching of (100) silicon. Sensors 
Actuators 18:207–15.
 236. Wu, X., and W. H. Ko. 1987. Fourth international conference 
on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’87). Tokyo, 
Japan.
 237. Hubbard, Ted J. 1994. MEMS Design. PhD thesis. Caltech.
 238. Nikpour, B., L. M. Landsberger, T. J. Hubbard, M. Kahrizi, 
and A. Iftimie. 1998. Concave corner compensation 
between vertical (010)-(001) planes anisotropically etched 
in Si(100). Sensors Actuators A 66:299.
 239. Kim, B., and D. C. Dong-II. 1998. Aqueous KOH etching of 
silicon (110): etch characteristics and compensation meth-
ods for convex corners. J Electrochem Soc 145:2499.
 240. Mocella, M. T. 1991. The CFC-ozone issue in dry etch pro-
cess development. Solid State Technol April:63–64.
 241. Cho, S. T. 1995. Micromachining and microfabrication 
process technology II. Proceedings of the SPIE. Austin, TX: 
SPIE.
 242. Greiff, P. 1995. Micromachining and microfabrication pro-
cess technology. Proceedings of the SPIE. Austin, TX: SPIE.
 243. Weinberg, M., J. Bernstein, J. Borenstein, J. Campbell, J. 
Cousens, B. Cunningham, R. Fields, P. Greiff, B. Hugh, L. 
Niles, and J. Sohn. 1996. Micromachining and microfabrica-
tion process technology II. Austin, TX: SPIE.
 244. Craven, D., K. Yu, and T. Pandhumsoporn. 1995. 
Micromachining and microfabrication process technology. 
Proceedings of the SPIE. Austin, TX: SPIE.
 245. Joseph, J., M. Madou, T. Otagawa, P. Hesketh, and A. 
Saaman. 1989. Catheter-based sensing and imaging technol-
ogy. Proceedings of the SPIE. Los Angeles: SPIE.
 246. Madou, M. J., and T. Otagawa. 1989. Microelectrochemical 
sensor and sensor array. US Patent 4,874,500.
 247. Holland, C. E., E. R. Westerberg, M. J. Madou, and T. 
Otagawa. 1988. Etching method for producing an elec-
trochemical cell in a crystalline substrate. US Patent 
4,764,864.
 248. Madou, M. J., and M. Tierney. 1994. Micro-electrochemical 
valves and methods. US Patent 5,368,704.
 249. Seetharaman, S., H. Ke-Qin, and M. Madou. 2000. 
Microactuators toward microvalves for responsive con-
trolled drug delivery. Sensors Actuators B67:149–60.
 250. Hélin, P., T. Bourouina, H. Fujita, H. Maekoba, O. Cugat, 
and G. Reyne. 2000. Nano et micro technologies. Ed. D. 
Hauden. Paris: Hermes Science Publications.
 251. Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechanical 
systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.
318   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 319]
319
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Historical Note
Electrical Discharge Machining
Laser Beam Machining
Electron Beam Machining
Plasma Beam Machining
Questions
References
5
Thermal Energy-
Based Removing
Introduction
In thermal removing processes, thermal energy, provided by a heat 
source, melts and/or vaporizes the volume of the material to be removed. 
Among thermal removal methods, electrical discharge machining 
(EDM) is the oldest and most widely used. Electron beam machining 
(EBM) and laser beam machining (LBM) are newer thermal techniques 
also widely accepted in industry today. Plasma arc cutting using a plasma 
arc torch is mostly used for cutting relatively thick materials in the 
range of 3–75 mm and is less pertinent to most miniaturization science 
applications. In thermal removal processes, a heat-affected zone (HAZ), 
sometimes called a recast layer, is always left on the work piece. In EBM, 
LBM, and arc machining, deposition and removal methods are available. 
 
 
Overtaking the U.S.
In Physical Review, articles
by physicists in other
countries now outnumber
those by U.S. scientists.
6 thousand
5
4
3
2
1
0
* Twenty countries in Europe
Sources: Te American Physical Society
‘83
‘90
‘00 ‘03
ARTICLES PUBLISHED
W. Europe*
U.S.
Other
By writer’s country of origin
Pagoda (1.25 mm × 1.75 mm; material is Al-6061) produced by microelectrical 
discharge machining wire cutting (μ-EDM-WC) at the National Taiwan University 
(Prof. Y. S. Liao); see also Figure 5.10.

[Page 320]
320   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Additive thermal techniques involving EBM, LBM, 
and arc machining are covered in Chapter 9.
Historical Note
Among thermal methods, electrical discharge 
machining (EDM), using electrical sparks for 
cutting, is one of the oldest. In an “uncontrolled” 
fashion, EDM has existed ever since the first 
thunderstorm. The first widespread “controlled” 
application for shaping some of the toughest metals 
was developed during World War II. Although the 
EDM principle was discovered during the early 
1940s, it was not until the early 1950s that the 
first practical EDM machine was designed. In the 
United States, during the 1960s, EDM machining 
was used to create features in the 75-µm range; 
even more precise EDM, using rotating spindles, 
was pioneered in Japan in the late 1980s (5-µm 
size range). There are two major types of EDM: wire 
EDM and sinker EDM. Sinker EDM is the older of 
the two. Wire EDM was introduced as a machining 
process in 1969. EDM, until 10 years ago, found 
limited application in micromachining1; given 
its very good accuracy, the method is now being 
investigated for a wide variety of miniaturization 
problems. Electron beam machining (EBM) and 
laser beam machining (LBM), two other examples 
of thermal techniques, were developed in the 1960s 
and 1980s, respectively. In EBM, high velocity 
electrons are used instead of sparks, and in LBM 
intense photon pulses are used. Some authors group 
EBM, LBM, and  ion-beam  machining together as 
high-energy beam machining. Ion-beam machining 
is a mechanical removing technique and as such is 
covered in Chapter 6 on mechanical energy-based 
removing techniques. We only touch briefly on 
plasma arc cutting because the method has only 
limited utility in miniaturization science.
Electrical Discharge Machining
Introduction
Electrical discharge machining, more commonly 
known as EDM or spark machining, has tradition-
ally been used to machine unusual designs in hard, 
brittle metals. Metal is removed by high-frequency 
electrical sparks, which are generated by puls-
ing a high voltage between the cathode tool and a 
work piece anode. The work piece and the tool are 
both submerged in a dielectric fluid as shown in 
Figure 5.1. Electrodes are usually made from graph-
ite, copper, or silver. We cover two major types of 
EDM: wire EDM and sinker EDM.
Silicon-based machining often does not achieve 
the demands of applications like microsurgery, bio-
technology, fluidics, or high temperature environ-
ments. As a consequence, EDM methods (including 
µ-EDM) are providing more and more solutions 
for application, such as fuel-injection nozzles for 
automobiles (regulations on environmental laws 
are forcing manufacturers to improve designs and 
making them smaller and more compact) and 
miniaturization of medical tools.
Sinker Electrical Discharge Machining
Sinker or cavity-type electrical discharge machining 
(EDM) is a thermal mass-reducing process that uses 
FIGURE 5.1 (a) Discharge machining. Schematic illustra-
tion of the electrical discharge machining (EDM) process. 
Process is based on erosion of metals by spark discharge. 
The cavity is formed by the shape of the electrode. 
(b) Examples of cavities produced by the EDM process 
using shaped electrodes. Two round parts (rear) are the set 
of dies for extruding the aluminum piece shown in front.

[Page 321]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   321
a shaped conductive tool (the cathode) to remove 
electrically conductive material (anode). It does this 
by means of rapid, controlled, repetitive spark dis-
charges. A dielectric fluid is used to flush the removed 
particles, to regulate the discharge, and to keep the 
tool and work piece cool. With a gap between tool 
and work piece of about 25 µm and a voltage of, for 
example, 80 V, intense sparking occurs across the 
dielectric filled gap, melting and vaporizing metal 
from both pieces (ideally much more from the work 
piece than from the tool).
Resolidified small hollow spheres are washed 
away by the recirculating dielectric, for example, oil 
or deionized water (DI water). A servomechanism 
adjusts the work piece–tool gap, and DC current 
pulses produce sparks at a rate of up to 500,000/s. 
Each spark generates a localized high temperature 
on the order of 12,000°C in its immediate vicinity 
(the power concentration is 105–107 W/mm2). The 
tool wear ratio, a measure of work piece material 
removal to tool material removal, varies from 
about 3:1 for metallic electrodes to about 70:1 for 
the better carbon electrodes. The tool wear can be 
reduced to 1% or less with an adequate selection 
of tool and work  piece materials and appropriate 
generator settings.2 Volumetric metal removal rates, 
ranging from 0.001–0.1 cm3/h, are determined by 
thermal characteristics, such as conductivity and 
melting temperature of tool and work piece rather 
than hardness, and are small compared with more 
conventional machining methods. Metal removal 
rates increase as spark intensity (current) increases, 
but so does the surface roughness. Increasing the 
spark frequency, while keeping the other parameters 
constant, results in a decrease in surface roughness 
because the energy available is shared between 
more sparks, and smaller-sized surface craters are 
produced in the work piece. The frequency range 
of EDM machines is from 180 Hz, for rough cuts, 
to several hundred kilohertz, for fine finishing. 
Although sparks are effective for material removal, 
arcs result in bad surface quality. Arcs are created 
when the standby time is not long enough for the 
deionization of the dielectric to take place. Both 
short circuit and open circuit result in a stoppage 
of material removal. Thus, the goal of pulse con-
trol is to always create sparks and avoid arcs by 
optimizing the pulse width (on) and standby time 
(off). With carefully controlled conditions, it is 
possible to achieve tolerances as fine as 0.005 mm, 
but 0.02 mm is more typical. The accuracy of the 
process is closely  related to the spark-gap width: 
the smaller the gap, the higher the accuracy, but a 
smaller gap results in a lower working voltage and 
a lower removal rate. A typical surface finish is in 
the 1–3-µm range. Two layers are of concern in EDM 
products. One is a layer of melted and resolidified 
material usually 0.0025–0.05-mm thick, known 
as recast, which is left on the surface produced by 
EDM. This layer tends to be very hard and brittle 
and may have to be removed if high levels of fatigue 
resistance  are  required (e.g., with shot peening*). 
A second layer is the so-called heat-affected zone 
(HAZ) that can be removed through electrochemical 
abrasion. In Table  5.1 some key EDM features are 
summarized.
With EDM, holes as small as 0.3 mm in materials 
20 mm or more in thickness can be readily achieved. 
With efficient flushing, holes with an aspect ratio as 
high as 100:1 have been produced.3
* Shot peening is a process used as a decorative finish and/or to modify 
the mechanical properties of metals. It entails impacting a surface 
with shot (round metallic particles) with a force sufficient to create 
dimples and with enough shot so that those dimples overlap. 
TABLE 5.1 Electrical Discharge Machining Characteristics
Typical Use
Hard, Machining of Brittle Metals, Tool Making
Tool
Carbon, zinc, brass, copper, silver-tungsten, or copper-tungsten
Dielectric medium
Distilled water (DI), petroleum oils, silicones, triethylene, glycol water mixtures
Aspect ratio of holes
As high as 100 :1
Surface finish
1–3 μm but even 0.25 μm has been reported
Gap size/voltage
25 μm/80 V
Removal rate
0.001–0.1 cm3/h
Work piece
Conductor

[Page 322]
322   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
In general, EDM is one of the most widely used 
nonmechanical, noncontact machining processes 
in the industry today. Applications of this pro-
cess include extrusion dies, fuel injector nozzles, 
aircraft  engine turbine blades, and machining of 
difficult-to-machine materials like tool steel, tung-
sten carbide, and cemented carbides. EDM provides 
very good accuracy and repeatability; however, 
the  tradeoff is a very low material removal rate 
(0.001–0.1 cm3/h) for conductive and semiconduc-
tive materials only accompanied by thermal dam-
age of the machined surface as a result of high heat 
generated during the discharge pulses (recast layer 
of 20–50 µm). Finally, the severe electrode wear 
affects machining accuracy, and the process poses 
some fume and skin hazards to operators.
An excellent starting point on the Internet for 
studying EDM in more detail is EDM Talk (http://
www.edmmachining.com), the original EDM indus-
try bulletin board and online forum. EDM equip-
ment includes Fanuc’s Robocut (http://www.fanuc.
co.jp/en/product/robocut/index.html), Panasonic’s 
MG-ED82W (http://www.panasonicfa.com/?id=MG-
ED82W), and Agie’s Agie® Mondo Star™ 50 CNC 
EDM (http://www.agie.com). Also check SmallTec 
International (http://www.smalltec.com) for sinker 
EDM and wire-cutting EDM (EDM-WC). A typical 
EDM machine may cost $350,000, and a typical ser-
vice supplier is National Jet Company (Lavelle, MD), 
performing state-of-the-art micro-EDM (http://
www.najet.com). The EDM Handbook by E. Bud 
Guitrau constitutes excellent further reading.3
A recent variant, EDM-WC, promises to make yet 
more impact on the future of microelectromechani-
cal systems and is covered next.
Electrode Discharge Machining: 
Wire Cutting
One of the most interesting adaptations of EDM is 
the development of electrodischarge machining 
wire cutting (EDM-WC), also called wire electrode 
discharge grinding (WEDG), which can be used for 
cutting complex two- (2D) and three-dimensional 
(3D) shapes from electrically conducting materials.4 
EDM-WC, like EDM, is a thermal mass- reducing 
process that uses a continuously moving wire to 
remove material by means of rapid controlled 
repetitive spark discharges. In EDM-WC, the cutting 
electrode is a continuously moving thin copper or 
brass wire, 0.15–0.3 mm in diameter, or, for high-
precision cutting, stronger molybdenum-steel wire 
(0.15–0.03 mm). The wire is pulled from a supply 
reel past two fixed sapphire or diamond guides, 
one located above and one below the work piece, 
as shown in Figure 5.2, and collected on a take-up 
reel. This continuously delivers fresh wire to the 
work area. As much as 50 hours of machining can 
be performed with one reel of wire, which is then 
discarded. Deionized water is used as dielectric and 
as a flushing fluid. Flushing is essential for achiev-
ing high accuracy and preventing short-circuiting 
between the wire and part. The main advantage of 
EDM-WC is that it can mill through metals four or 
five times faster than EDM. Moreover, no expensive, 
shaped EDM electrodes are required. Linear cutting 
rates are still relatively slow, especially for thick sub-
strates: from 38–115 mm/h in 25-mm-thick steel.
Numerically controlled EDM-WC has revolution-
ized die making, particularly for plastic molders. 
EDM-WC is now common in tool-and-die shops. 
Shape accuracy in EDM-WC in a working environ-
ment with temperature variations of about 3°C is 
about 4 µm. If temperature control is within ± 1°C, 
FIGURE 5.2 Electrical discharge machining, wire cutting 
(EDM-WC). (a) Schematic illustration of the wire EDM pro-
cess. As much as 50 hours of machining can be performed 
with one reel of wire, which is then discarded. (b) Typical 
EDM-WC products.

[Page 323]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   323
the obtainable accuracy is closer to 1 µm.5 No burrs 
are generated, and because no cutting forces are pres-
ent, EDM-WC is ideal for delicate parts. No tooling 
is required, so delivery times are short. Pieces more 
than 16-in. thick can be machined. Tools and parts 
are machined after heat treatment; thus, dimen-
sional accuracy is held and not affected by heat treat 
distortion.
Service and equipment providers in the EDM- 
WC  arena include Small Tec International (http://
www.smalltec.com), Reliable, EDM Inc. (http://www. 
reliableedm.com), and XACT (http://www.xactedm.
com/index.html). Oki is a provider of brass wire for 
EDM-WC (OB wire) (http://www.okidensen.co.jp/
english/e_home.htm). Equipment may be bought 
from companies such AGIE (http://www.agie.com), 
Fanuc (http://www.fanuc.co.jp/en/product/index.htm), 
and Panasonic (http://www.panasonicfa.com/?id= 
Micro%20EDM). For further reading also consult 
the Wire EDM Handbook.6
Microelectrical Discharge Machining
When referring to microelectrical discharge machin-
ing (µ-EDM) one refers either to working with a small 
EDM machine (see Figure 5.3 for a hand-held EDM 
at Panasonic) or to working with smaller than usual 
electrodes (in sinker EDM) or with thinner wires (in 
EDM-WC).
In die-sinking µ-EDM, an electrode with micro-
features is used to produce its mirror image in the 
work piece. The Matsushita Research Institute Tokyo, 
Inc. developed such a microsinker EDM machine. 
This machine incorporates submicron movement 
resolution and uses a microtool (microelectrode).
The smallest microtools may be produced by 
the wire electrode discharge grinding method 
(see 
above) 
(http://www.panasonicfa.com/?id= 
Micro%20EDM). µ-EDM machining can produce a 
hole of 5–300 µm in diameter, with a depth three 
to five times the diameter, and at a precision of 
±  0.5 µm on its circularity. Under the right condi-
tions, the machine may result in a surface roughness 
of as little as 0.1 µm Rmax. The latter is achieved by 
minimizing the electrical discharge energy to an 
extremely small amount. These microholes can be 
used as nozzles for ink-jet printers, flow control ori-
fices,  and pinholes for x-ray measurements. There 
are also more applications other than simply drill-
ing microholes, such as microshafts, gears, springs, 
molds, dies, precision optics, and magnetic heads 
for digital video cameras.
In µ-EDM drilling, a microelectrode is used to 
“drill” microholes; a circular electrode is rotated at 
high speed (to help flushing of the liquid), and holes 
of 5 µm in diameter are reported. In µ-EDM milling, 
a simple-shaped electrode, rode or tube, is used to 
produce 3D cavities by adopting a contour motion.
The µ-EDM-WC technique can be used to make 
circular rods by rotating the work piece against the 
cutting wire as shown in Figure 5.4a, resulting in 
diameters as small as 5 µm and a surface roughness 
of 0.1 µm. The rods can have cross-sections such as 
triangular, rectangular, slit-type, and polygonal as 
well. The way to make a triangular shape is illus-
trated in Figure 5.4b.
Kuo et al.7 used µ-EDM-WC to make micropipes 
with an inner diameter of 23 µm, an outer diameter 
of 186 µm, and a length of 3 mm. These micropipes 
came with a variety of micronozzle exit shapes and 
different sizes at the ends; slit openings of 100 × 
10 µm, triangular openings with a base of 50 µm, 
and circular openings with a radius of 6 µm were 
demonstrated.8 The manufacturing process of those 
micropipes is illustrated in Figure 5.5 (steps a–d). 
µ-EDM-WC is first used to machine a stainless steel 
rod (a); then electroforming is used to deposit a Ni 
coat (b); the Ni deposit is subsequently sized by 
µ-EDM-WC (c); and finally the stainless steel core is 
removed (d). To separate the core from the deposit 
FIGURE 5.3 Handheld µ-EDM at Panasonic.

[Page 324]
324   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
after plating, it is necessary to reduce the deposit 
tension stress as much as possible. A sulfamate 
nickel-plating solution with a plating temperature 
of 50°C and a pH of 4 was selected for this experi-
ment because it can be operated with high current 
density and results in low residual stress. A sche-
matic side view of a typical micropipe with a circular 
exit is shown in Figure 5.6. None of the lithography 
techniques discussed in the preceding chapters 
can produce this type of intricate pipe as easily as 
µ-EDM-WC. It is of great value for a micromachinist 
to recognize at a glance which shapes are better pro-
duced by a lithography-based method and which are 
better produced by a truly 3D lathe-based method. 
Microtools produced by EDM-WC may be used as 
sinker EDM electrodes to enable µ-EDM.
The use of microelectrode arrays enables one to 
use µ-EDM in batch mode as pioneered by Taka-
hata.9 Takahata used the LIGA process (Chapter 10) 
to make the microelectrode array shown in 
Figure 5.6. Using the setup shown here, 400 holes 
through  50-µm-thick stainless steel were made in 
Wire guide
(ﬁxed)
Rod
Wire
(a)
120°
120°
120°
Code rod
Without rotation
Wire guide
Sliding wire
(b)
FIGURE 5.4 Microelectrical discharge machining, wire cutting (μ-EDM-WC) for a round rod profile (a) and for a triangu-
lar rod profile (b). (From Kuo, C.-L., T. Masuzawa, and M. Fujino. 1991. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems 
(MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan; and Kuo, C.-L., T. Masuzawa, and M. Fujino. 1992. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical 
systems (MEMS ’92). Travemunde, Germany. With permission.7,8)
FIGURE 5.5 Micronozzle fabrication process with microelectrical discharge machining, wire cutting (µ-EDM-WC). For 
fabrication steps (a–d), see text.

[Page 325]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   325
5 minutes (20–30 times faster than serial machin-
ing with a single electrode). Other structures made 
with this hybrid LIGA-EDM method are also shown 
in Figure 5.7.
A desk-top high-precision four-axes computer 
numerical controlled (CNC) machine for making 
microparts was developed by Liao et al.10 at the 
National Taiwan University. This multifunction high-
precision machine (accuracy of 1 µm) does on-machine 
assembly and on-machine metrology (Figure 5.8). 
Parts in the size range of 0.1–2 mm can be produced, 
and all manufacturing processes are completed on the 
same machine without moving the work piece.
This hybrid desk-top machine is capable of 
performing the following four functions. 1) Mill ing 
with a low-speed (0–3,000 rpm), a middle-speed 
(1,000–10,000 rpm), and a high-speed (2,000–
80,000 rpm) spindle. 2) µ-EDM with microelec-
trodes with a diameter as small as 8 µm and very 
high high-aspect ratios. These microelectrodes 
are made using the on-board µ-EDM-WC with 
a 0.02 mm ϕ brass wire (see next). 3) µ-EDM-WC 
that features microwire tension control and wire 
vibration suppression (Figure 5.9) and a novel 
mechanism that permits vertical, horizontal, and 
slanted wire cutting. 4) On-line measuring of the 
flatness, circularity, concentricity, dimensions, and 
geometric tolerances of the work piece.
The vertical, horizontal, and slanted cutting with 
the µ-EDM-WC tool has successfully fabricated com-
plex features and parts. An example is the impressive 
Chinese pagoda (1.25 mm × 1.75 mm) shown in the 
FIGURE 5.6 Schematic side view of micronozzle (see 
also Figure 5.5d). Schematic side view of a circular pipe 
with 6-mm exit hole. (From Kuo, C.-L., T. Masuzawa, and 
M. Fujino. 1992. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechani-
cal systems (MEMS ’92). Travemunde, Germany. With 
permission.8)
FIGURE 5.7 Microelectrode array fabricated using LIGA. This array toll enables the use μ-EDM in batch mode. (Takahata, K., 
and Y. B. Gianchandani. 2002. Batch mode micro-EDM for high-density and high-throughput micromachining. IEEE/ASME J 
Microelectromechanical Systems 11:102–110.9) Example products include copper electrode arrays and WC-Cu super hard gears.
FIGURE 5.8 High precision four-axes multipurpose CNC 
machine for making microparts developed by Y. S. Liao 
et al. at the National Taiwan University. (Ehmann, K. F., 
D. Bourell, M. L. Culpepper, T. J. Hodgson, T. R. Kurfess, 
M. Madou, and K. Rajurkar. 2007. Micromanufacturing: inter-
national research and development. New York: Springer.10)

[Page 326]
326   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
heading of this chapter. The vertical and horizontal 
µ-EDM-WC cuts to make this pagoda are shown in 
Figure 5.10.
High-speed micromilling with a single crystal 
diamond milling cutter is demonstrated in Figure 
5.11. The depth of the cut is 0.03 mm; the rotational 
speed is 80,000 rpm; and the feed rate is 20 mm/min.
We conclude this section with a table comparing 
EDM with ECM, a chemical etching technique cov-
ered in Chapter 4, using conventional mechanical 
machining (CNC machining; see Chapter 6) as a ref-
erence point. In Table 5.2 we list metal removal rates 
(MRRs), tolerance, surface finish and damage depth, 
and required power.
The metal removal rate by ECM is much higher 
than that of the EDM, with a metal removal rate 
0.3 that of CNC, whereas EDM is only a small 
fraction of the CNC material removal rate. Power 
requirements for ECM are comparatively high. The 
tolerance obtained by EDM and ECM is within the 
range of CNC machining, which means satisfac-
tory dimensional accuracy can be maintained. All 
the processes obtain satisfactory surface finishes. 
Depth of surface damage is very small for ECM, 
whereas it is very high in the case of EDM. For 
this reason, ECM can be used for making dies and 
punches. Capital cost for ECM is very high when 
compared with conventional CNC machining, and 
FIGURE 5.9 The μ-EDM-WC tool features microwire ten-
sion control and wire vibration suppression. The tool allows 
vertical, horizontal, and slanted wire cutting. μ-EDM-WC at 
the National Taiwan University (Prof. Y. S. Liao).
FIGURE 5.10 Vertical and horizontal μ-EDM-WC to make the pagoda in Al-6061. μ-EDM-WC at the National Taiwan 
University (Prof. Y. S. Liao).
FIGURE 5.11 High-speed micromilling with a single diamond crystal on a WC shank.

[Page 327]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   327
EDM has also a higher tooling cost than the other 
machining processes.
Laser Beam Machining
Introduction
The basic operating principle of the laser was put 
forth by Charles Townes and Arthur Schalow from 
Bell Telephone Laboratories in 1958, and the first 
laser, based on a pink ruby crystal, was demon-
strated in 1960 by Theodore Maiman at Hughes 
Research Laboratories. Lasers are defined as nar-
row beams (a divergence angle might be about 
1 mrad, i.e., 1 m spread over 1 km of travel length) 
of monochromatic and coherent light in the visible, 
infrared (IR), or ultraviolet (UV) ranges of the spec-
trum. The key components of a laser unit are the 
active medium (a gas, liquid, or solid in which the 
beam is generated), the power supply (which deliv-
ers energy to the laser medium in the form needed 
to stimulate its emission), and the optical cavity 
(where the beam characteristics are defined). Lasers 
can be run in continuous mode or in pulsed mode 
to enhance the irradiance. The word laser, we saw in 
Volume I, Chapter 5, stands for Light Amplification 
by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. In Volume I, 
Chapter 5 we explained the lasing action; here we 
detail laser use in subtractive manufacturing. In 
1960, the laser was said to be a “solution waiting for a 
problem,” but today lasers are used in a wide range of 
applications, and some laser types have even become 
commodity products (e.g., laser pointers). In Table 
5.3 we show the operating mode, wavelength, power, 
and example applications of some popular lasers 
(the list of potential applications is far from complete).
The CO2 laser is an example of a gas laser based 
on a mixture of helium (83%) and nitrogen (16%) 
with carbon dioxide (6%) as the lasing material. The 
CO2 laser produces a collimated coherent beam in 
the IR region (10.6 µm) characteristic of the active 
material (CO2). The wavelength is strongly absorbed 
by glasses or polymers; thus, either mirrors or ZnSe 
lenses with excellent IR transparency are used to 
handle the beam.
The neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet 
(Nd:YAG) laser is a solid-state laser producing a colli-
mated coherent beam in the near-IR region of wave-
length 1.06 µm, and can be pulsed or continuous. 
In pulsed mode, peak power pulses of up to 20 kW 
are now available. The shorter wave length allows the 
use of optical glasses to control the beam path.
Excimer (EXCIted diMER) lasers, invented in 
1975, are a family of pulsed lasers with a fast elec-
trical discharge in a high-pressure mixture of a rare 
gas (krypton, argon, and xenon) and a halogen gas 
(fluorine and hydrogen chloride) as the source of 
emission. The particular combination of rare gas and 
halogen determines the output wavelength. Excimer 
lasers cover a range of wavelengths in the UV range 
from 157 nm (F2) to 353 nm (XeF) with 193 nm (ArF), 
248 nm (KrF), and 308 nm (XeCl) being particularly 
useful intermediate wavelengths.* Peak powers typ-
ically range from 3 MW (F2) to 50 MW (KrF or XeCl) 
in pulses lasting a few tens of nanoseconds.
Machining with laser beams, first introduced in 
the early 1970s, is now used routinely in many indus-
tries. Laser machining, with long or continuous wave 
(CW), short, and ultrashort pulses, includes the fol-
lowing applications:
 
◾Heat treatment
 ◾Welding (see Volume III, Chapter 4 on packaging)
 
◾Ablation or cutting of plastics, glasses, ceram-
ics, semiconductors, and metals (this chapter)
* Recently, the 308-nm xenon chloride laser has gained much attention 
as a very effective treatment modality in dermatological disorders.
TABLE 5.2 Machining Characteristics of EDM and ECM
Process
MRR (mm3/min)
Tolerance (μm)
Surface Finish (μm)
Damage Depth (μm)
Power (W)
ECM
15,000
50
0.1–2.5
5
100,000
EDM
800
15
0.2–1.2
125
2,700
CNC
50,000
50
0.5–5
25
3,000
MRR, metal removal rate; tolerance, tolerance maintained; surface finish, surface finish required; damage depth, 
depth of surface damage; ECM, electrochemical machining; EDM, electrical discharge machining; CNC, computer 
numerical control machining.

[Page 328]
328   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 
◾Material deposition (see Chapter 9)
 
◾Etching with chemical assist, i.e., laser-assisted 
chemical etching (LACE; this chapter)
 
◾Laser-enhanced jet plating and etching (see 
Chapter 9 and this chapter, respectively)
 
◾Lithography (see Chapters 1 and 2)
 
◾Surgery (see Volume III, Chapter 10)
 
◾Photopolymerization (e.g., µ-stereolithography 
described in Chapter 9)
From this list, it is clear that lasers can be used 
for removal and for additive processes. We only con-
sider ablative or subtractive laser processes here, as 
illustrated in Figure 5.12; additive laser processes are 
reviewed in Chapter 9. Interestingly, the laser may 
also serve as its own process monitor. This multiuse, 
multirole, and in situ capability is not offered with 
any of the other advanced material processing techniq-
ues such as molecular beam epitaxy, chemical vapor 
deposition, deep reactive ion etching, and so on.11
Earlier uses of laser beam machining (LBM) 
were mostly scientific in nature, and industrial 
applications involved macroprocesses, like sheet 
metal cutting and welding for the automobile 
industry (Figure 5.13). Today, industrial lasers are 
also used in a wide variety of microfabrication 
tasks. R. Srinivasan and V. Mayne-Banton of IBM 
Research first reported micromachining with laser 
ablation in 1982.12 Initial studies by Srinivasan and 
coworkers showed that pulsed UV laser radiation at 
193 nm (an ArF excimer laser) can be used to etch 
organic polymers several micrometers in depth. To 
illustrate how fast laser machining has improved 
and how little yet is known of the fundamental 
underlying processes in this field, consider that 
it was only recently recognized that femtosecond 
laser pulses interact with matter in a manner that is 
totally different from traditional lasers with longer 
pulses. During machining with femtosecond lasers, 
much less heat dissipates in the substrate, and, as 
TABLE 5.3 Laser Types with Characteristics and Applications
Wavelength
Maximumm 
Power Output (W)
Operation 
Mode
Applications
Semiconductor lasers, also injection or junction laser
Single diodes
Infrared to visible (0.33–40 μm)
0.6 W (CW)
100 W (P)
CW and pulsed
Compact discs, laser printers, bar 
code scanners, optical 
communications
Diode laser 
bars
Infrared to visible
Up to 100 W
CW and pulsed
Pumping light source for solid 
state lasers
Solid-state lasers
Ti-sapphire
690–960
Tunable
Nd:YAG
1.064 μm
1000 W (CW)
2 108 W (P) 
CW and pulsed
Welding, hole piercing, cutting
Ruby 
694.3 nm
Several MW
Pulsed
Measurement instrumentation, 
pulsed holography
Gas/liquid lasers
CO2 (gas)
9.6 μm, 10.6 μm
1 W–40 kW (CW)
100 MW(P)
CW and pulsed
Heat treatment, scribing, welding, 
cutting
Excimer laser 
(gas)
193 nm, 248 nm, 308 nm (and 
others)
1 kW–100 MW
Pulse mode, 
pulse length 
10–100 ns
Micromachining such as flex circuit 
via drilling and wire stripping, 
laser chemistry, medicine
HeNe (gas)
632.8 nm (most prominent), 
1.15 μm, 3.39 μm
0.0005–0.05 (CW)
CW
Measurement instrumentation, 
holography, line-of-sight 
communications
Argon ion 
laser (gas)
515–488 nm (several)
0.005–20 (CW)
CW 
Printing technology, pumping laser 
for dye laser stimulation, surgery
Dye laser 
(liquid)
Continuous between infrared 
and UV (different dyes): 
0.38–1.0 μm
0.01 (CW) and 
1 106 (P)
CW and pulsed
Measurement instrumentation, 
spectroscopy, medicine, pollution 
detection
Source: Based on http://www.ilt.fraunhofer.de/eng/100048.html.

[Page 329]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   329
a consequence, ultrafast lasers present the potential 
for micromachined products of superior quality 
(http://www.clark-mxr.com/industrial/handbook/
index.htm).
Although the number of lasers delivered for strict 
micromachining applications has been low com-
pared with others so far, it is predicted that the next 
10 years will see a phenomenal market growth for 
this application.
Laser Parameters for Laser Material 
Removing—Laser Ablation
Introduction
Laser ablation is the process of removal of matter 
from a solid by means of an energy-induced tran-
sient disequilibrium in the lattice. The characteris-
tics of the released atoms, molecules, clusters, and 
fragments (the dry aerosol) depend on the effi-
ciency of the energy coupling to the sample struc-
ture, i.e., the material-specific absorbance of a 
certain wavelength, the velocity of energy delivery 
(laser pulse width),  and the laser characteristics 
(beam energy profile, energy density or fluency, and 
the  wavelength). Table 5.4 summarizes all the dif-
ferent laser parameters that can be controlled and 
their effect on materials processing.13 More specifi-
cally for micromachining purposes, the wavelength, 
spot size [i.e., the minimum diameter of the focused 
laser beam, d0 (Equation 5.9)], average laser beam 
intensity, depth of focus, laser pulse length, and 
shot-to-shot repeatability (stability and reliability in 
Table 5.4) are the six most important parameters to 
control. Additional parameters we will cover in the 
section below, not listed in Table 5.4, concern laser 
machining in a jet of water and laser-assisted chemi-
cal etching (LACE).
Like other thermal removing techniques, laser 
machining leaves a heat-affected zone (HAZ) on the 
work piece where molten material resolidified in situ 
or where material was sufficiently heated and cooled 
rapidly enough to result in embrittlement. This 
change in material properties can alter subsequent 
laser ablation and affect material performance.
FIGURE 5.12 (a) Schematic illustration of the laser-beam machining process. (b and c) Examples of holes produced in 
nonmetallic parts by LBM.
FIGURE 5.13 Laser manufacturing: (a) cutting; (b) welding.

[Page 330]
330   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The size of the HAZ is a function of the laser pulse 
duration and the thermal conductivity and specific 
heat of the work piece. The HAZ depends on the dis-
tance the heat is conducted within the material and 
varies with material and laser wavelength. The bet-
ter the material conduction (thermal diffusivity), the 
greater the extent of the HAZ is. Associated with the 
HAZ are a recast layer and the formation of burrs. 
During the ablation process, the expulsion of material 
in the plasma jet creates a compressive force on the 
molten pool of material under the laser spot. This will 
cause a portion of the liquefied material to be forced 
out of the ablation zone, and it will deposit onto the 
surrounding region. Debris is also a related problem 
of the ablation process. Particulates redeposit onto 
the surface as solid fallout of higher boiling point sec-
ond phases from the plume and as condensation of 
the primary material. Taken together, all the preced-
ing effects reduce the quality of the ablated region.
Based on pulse length, there are three major laser 
machining operation modes: short, ultrashort, and 
long or CW. Short means that the pulse is longer 
than 10 ps. Ultrafast or ultrashort means that the laser 
pulse has a duration somewhat less than 10 ps, usu-
ally some fraction of a picosecond. Long or continu-
ous wave lasers are lasers that are operated in a CW 
(pulse duration > 0.25 s) rather than a pulsed mode. 
Each operation mode has its own micromachining 
applications. Short pulses of coherent light replace 
electrons from the electron beam vacuum technol-
ogy (EBM; see below) as the cutting tool by vapor-
izing the substrate (subtractive process). No vacuum 
is required, but the removal rate is much slower 
than in EBM. For “hard to drill” materials and when 
holes are smaller than 150 µm, mechanical drill-
ing becomes less cost effective, and laser removing 
techniques become an attractive alternative. With 
ultrashort pulses, so much energy is deposited in the 
material at such a fast rate that the material is forced 
into a plasma state; the material goes from a solid to 
a gas phase without first going through a melt phase. 
This plasma then expands away from the material 
as a highly energetic gas, taking almost all the heat 
away with it. This newest operation mode avoids a 
lot of the problems associated with the HAZ and 
promises to open up a new universe of very accurate 
micromachined parts unavailable with long laser 
pulsing. Long-pulse or CW lasers can be used to melt 
the metal for welding (additive process).
Laser Wavelength
Laser wavelength has been identified as an 
important parameter influencing the efficiency of 
the energy transfer to the body of the irradiated 
sample (ablation characteristics). The selection of 
a wavelength with a minimum absorption depth 
helps ensure a high-energy deposition in a small 
volume for rapid and complete ablation. Several 
attempts have been made to describe the laser 
ablation phenomenon theoretically. It appears to be 
agreed now that, for very short wavelength radiation 
(∼200 nm), direct photochemical bond breaking 
plays an important role in the ablation process. 
At  that  wavelength, photons have enough energy, 
and a one- or two-photon absorption by materials 
might cause direct bond cleavage in the solid, 
leading to rapid decomposition of the material into 
highly volatile molecular fragments. However, at 
longer wavelengths (>300 nm), the single-photon 
TABLE 5.4 Laser Parameter and Related Processing 
Parameters
Laser Parameter
Influence on Material Processing
Power (average)
Temperature (steady state)
Process throughput
Wavelength (μm)
Optical absorption, reflection, 
transmission, resolution, and 
photochemical effects
Spectral line width 
(nm)
Temporal coherence
Chromatic aberration
Beam size (mm)
Focal spot size
Depth of focus
Intensity
Lasing modes
Intensity distribution
Spatial uniformity
Speckle
Spatial coherence
Modulation transfer function
Peak power (W)
Peak temperature
Damage/induced stress
Nonlinear effects
Pulse width (s)
Interaction time
Transient processes
Stability (%)
Process latitude
Efficiency (%)
Cost
Reliability
Cost
Source: Liu, Y. S. 1989. Laser microfabrication: thin film processes 
and lithography. Eds. J. Y. Tsao, and D. J. Ehrlich. New York: 
Academic Press. With permission.13

[Page 331]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   331
energy is not sufficient for bond breaking; two-
photon or multiphoton avalanche effect processes 
must be considered (see below). As mentioned 
above, a shorter absorption depth in the material 
to be machined means a higher laser energy density 
in metal.
The decay of the intensity of an electromagnetic 
wave with E along the x-axis and propagating in the 
z-direction in an absorbing material we derived in 
Volume I, Chapter 5 as:
 
I z
I e
m
z
( ) =
α
− 
(Volume I, Equation 5.110)
where α =
π
λ
4
ʹʹ
n  (with n′′ the imaginary part of 
refractive index). Thus, the penetration depth d is 
given as [when d = z, then I(z)/Im = e]:
 
d = 1/α = λ / 4πn′′ 
(5.1)
The surface condition also has some effect on the 
laser energy coupling. Rougher surface helps absorb-
ing more, and special surface treatments can en -
hance the absorption.
Example 5.1
For copper the complex refractive index at 
5893 Å is given as n = 0.62 + i2.57 and its reflec-
tivity R = 0.73. For a λ = 100 Å one obtains a d = 
6.2 Å and at a λ = 10µm, d = 62 Å.
Laser Spot Size
The laser beam spot size is another relevant factor 
influencing the efficiency and spatial resolution of 
laser ablation. Assuming cylindrical drilling, the 
ablated mass M, is given by:
 
M = ρπLr2 
(5.2)
where ρ = the mass density
L = the ablation depth
r = the crater radius
This means that a variation of the spot size r, at con-
stant ablation efficiency, leads to a quadratic varia-
tion of the signal intensity as a direct consequence of 
the ablated mass involved.
If the laser beam diameter is not of a controlled 
diameter, the ablation region may be larger than 
desired and result in excessive slope of the sidewalls. 
Diffraction causes light waves to spread transversely 
as they propagate; therefore, it is impossible to have 
a perfectly collimated beam. The spreading of a laser 
beam is in accord with the predictions of diffraction 
theory. If the objective is to create the smallest possi-
ble feature, it is important to be able to focus the laser 
beam to the smallest spot size. The latter depends on 
several factors, but crudely one can say that the small-
est spot that one can create is about half the wave-
length of the light used; if the wavelength of light is 
1 µm, then the smallest spot one can create is about 
0.5 µm (see Volume I, Equation 5.1 with NA = 1).
In a more rigorous description, we start from the 
irradiance distribution of a Gaussian TEM00* laser 
beam (Figure 5.14):
 
I r
I e
–
P
w z
e
r
w z
r
w z
( )
( )
( )
( )
=
π
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
=
 
(5.3)
where r = the radial distance across the beam
P = total power in the beam in watts
w(z) =  the radius or one-half the diameter of the 
1/e2 irradiance contour after the wave has 
propagated a distance z
Gaussian beams propagate as Gaussians, and the 
expression for the spot size w(z)—the radius of the 
1/e2 contour after the wave has propagated a distance 
z—is derived as:
 
w(z)
w
z
w
w
z
z
0
0
2
0
R
=
λ
π
1
1
2
2
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(5.4)
where λ = wavelength of light
w0 =  the waist radius of the 1/e2 irradiance con-
tour at the plane where the wavefront is 
* For the significance of the TEM00 laser beam designation, see 
Figure 5.19.
w
1
w0
w0
e
0
2
w0
Z
Irradiance surface
Asymptotic cone
FIGURE 5.14 Growth in beam diameter as a function of 
distance from the beam waist for a Gaussian laser beam 
profile.

[Page 332]
332   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
flat with all rays there moving in precisely 
parallel directions
zR =  Rayleigh range or confocal parameter, i.e., the 
distance over which the beam remains 
about the same size (or “collimated”)
In Figure 5.14 we show this growth in beam dia-
meter as a function of distance from the beam waist 
for a Gaussian laser beam profile. The point at z = 0 
marks the location of a beam waist, or a place where 
the wavefront is flat.
The Raleigh range (zR), also called the confocal 
parameter, defined as the distance over which the 
beam radius spreads by a factor of √2, is given by 
(see Figure 5.15):
 
z
w
R
0
2
= π
λ  
(5.5)
Far from the waist (z >> zR), the laser beam asymp-
totically approaches the value:
 
w(z)
z
w0
= λ
π
 
(5.6)
From Figure 5.14 we see that a Gaussian beam does 
not diverge linearly; near the laser, the divergence 
θ angle is extremely small; far from the laser, half 
the divergence angle is given as θ ≈ tan (θ); thus, the 
1/e2 irradiance contour asymptotically approaches a 
cone of angular radius:
 
θ ≈
θ
λ
π
=
λ
=
λ
tan( )
w(z)
z
w
0.637 w
0
0
=
=
1.27 d0
 
 
(5.7)
This laser beam divergence is illustrated in Table 
5.5, where we show the waist radius size w0 of the 
beam and the collimation distances for two lasers, 
one at λ = 10.6 µm and one at λ = 0.633 µm.
We learn that tightly focused laser beams expand 
quickly and weakly focused beams expand less 
quickly, but still expand. As a result, it is very dif-
ficult to shoot down a missile with a laser. We also 
recognize that longer wavelengths expand faster 
than shorter ones.
Now let us focus this Gaussian laser beam using a 
lens (Figure 5.16) and calculate what its electric field 
will be one focal length f  behind the lens. Gaussian 
beams focus as Gaussians.
If a “perfect” lens (no spherical aberration) is used 
to focus a collimated laser beam, the minimum spot 
size radius or the focused waist (w0) is limited by dif-
fraction only and is given by:
 
w
f
w
0
lens
=
λ
π
 
(5.8)
where f = the focal length of the lens.
This is the same result as for a diffracting beam 
with z = f (Equation 5.6). Light being focused 
behaves just like diverging light, only reversed, and 
the divergence angle θ, given by Equation 5.7, is 
equally valid. With d0 = 1/e2 the diameter of the 
focus (= 2w0) and with the diameter of the lens 
Dlens = 2wlens (or the diameter of the laser beam at 
the lens—whatever is the smallest), we obtain:
 
d
f
D
f
D
0
lens
lens
=
=
4
1 27
λ
π
λ
.
 
(5.9)
2
Z
2
0
w
0
w
0
w
R
ZR
Rayleigh range
Rayleigh range
Waist
FIGURE 5.15 The Raleigh range (zR), also called the confo-
cal parameter.
TABLE 5.5 Waist Spot Size w0 and Collimation 
Distances for Two Lasers at λ = 10.6 μm and 
λ = 0.633 μm
Waist Spot 
Size w0
Collimation Distance
λ = 10.6 µm
Collimation Distance
λ = 0.633 µm
0.225 cm
0.003 km
0.045 km
2.25 cm
0.3 km
5 km
22.5 cm
30 km
500 km
D
0
d
w
w(f)
z = f
0
FIGURE 5.16 A Gaussian laser beam is focused using a 
lens.

[Page 333]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   333
Thus, the principal way of increasing the resolu-
tion in laser machining, as in photolithography, is 
by reducing the wavelength, and the smallest focal 
spot will be achieved with a large-diameter beam 
entering a lens with a short focal length.
It is worth noting that ultrafast laser pulsing can 
create substantially smaller features than that of the 
central wavelength of the laser pulse itself. Because 
high-order nonlinear-optical processes are respon-
sible for cutting, there is effectively a threshold for 
cutting (see Figure 5.17). This means that careful 
control of the intensity can yield a very small hole. 
By focusing the ultrafast laser pulse into a small spot 
with a Gaussian intensity profile, one can adjust the 
intensity of the laser spot on the surface of the mate-
rial so that just the peak of the beam is above the 
ablation threshold; as a consequence, only mate-
rial in that very limited area of the laser spot will 
be removed. That limited area can be as small as 
one-tenth the size of the spot itself; therefore, the 
unique combination of multiphoton absorption and 
saturated avalanche ionization provided by ultrafast 
laser pulses makes it possible to machine materials 
on dimensions much smaller than 1 µm: holes as 
small as 100 nm have been made.
Depth of Focus or Depth of Field
Twice the Raleigh range or 2 zR is called the “depth 
of focus” because this is the total distance over 
which the beam remains relatively parallel, or “in 
focus” (see Figure 5.18). Or also, the depth of focus 
or depth of field (DOF) is the distance between the 
values where the beam is √2 times larger than it is 
at the beam waist (see again Figure 5.18). Based on 
Equations 5.5, 5.8, and 5.9, we then obtain:
 
DOF
2z
w
8
f
D
R
0
2
2
lens
2
=
π
λ
=
λ
π
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
 
(5.10)
The numerical aperture (NA) of a lens is given as 
nsinθ, and for small angles, one can derive that NA = 
D/2f with D the diameter of the lens and n the refrac-
tive index which in air = 1 (see Volume I, Chapter 5). 
Thus, we can recalculate the DOF also as:
 
DOF
/NA2
= 1 27
.
λ
 
(5.11)
Material processing with a very short depth of 
focus requires a very flat surface. If the surface has a 
corrugated topology, a servo loop connected with an 
interferometric auto-ranging device must be used.11
We want to contrast the results for resolution and 
depth of focus of laser beams obtained here with 
the resolution and depth of focus we calculated for 
other light sources in Volume I, Chapter 5 and in 
this volume, Chapter 1. In Volume I, Chapter 5 we 
saw that the Rayleigh criterion defines two inco-
herent light sources, separated by a distance d, as 
resolved when:
 
d
1.22 f
D
=
λ
 
(Volume I, Equation 5.12)
With an ideal lens system of focal length f, the 
Rayleigh criterion further yields a minimum spatial 
resolution as:
 
d
1.22
NA
=
λ
2
 
(Volume I, Equation 5.13)
x
Threshold for cutting
Beam focused to l/2
Beam proﬁle
Size of hole
FIGURE 5.17 Size of hole cut with a laser can be substan-
tially smaller than the beam size.
FIGURE 5.18 Depth of field (DOF) ranges.

[Page 334]
334   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
In this expression d is the smallest object that the 
lens can resolve and also the radius of the small-
est spot to which a collimated beam of light can be 
focused. From Equation 1.17 in Chapter 1 the DOF 
for an incoherent light source can be derived as:
 
DOF
1.22
2f
D
1.22 /NA
=
λ
λ
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
2
2
 
(1.17)
We contrast these earlier results with those 
obtained for laser beams in Table 5.6. Whereas reso-
lution is slightly worse for coherent light, its DOF is 
slightly better.
Laser beams can have any pattern, not just a 
Gaussian. The beam shape can even change with 
distance. Some beam shapes do not change with 
distance. These laser beam shapes are referred to 
as transverse electromagnetic (TEM) modes. Lasers 
can operate in various transverse modes as shown 
in Figure 5.19. Laser specifications will usually refer 
to the TEM00 mode. The 00 mode is the Gaussian 
beam. Higher-order modes involve multiplication of 
a Gaussian by a “Hermite polynomial.” The TEM00 
results in a single beam. The long narrow bore of 
a typical laser forces this mode of oscillation, and 
Equation 5.9 is only valid for this mode.
Laser Power
The laser power is also a critical parameter because 
it determines the damage impact on the irradiated 
solid. However, it must be considered in combina-
tion with the  wavelength (see above). To clarify 
this, a distinction must be made between the opti-
cal  penetration depth (Equation 5.1, wavelength-
 dependent) and the damage penetration depth 
(influenced by the power density as well). As we 
saw in Equation 5.1, the optical penetration depth 
is defined as the distance below the irradiated sur-
face over which the laser energy is deposited. The 
fraction of this distance over which the irradiation 
exceeds the ablation threshold is defined as the dam-
age penetration depth.
The laser intensity (W/cm2) is given by the peak 
power (W) divided by the focal spot area (cm2), and 
the peak power (W) is given as the pulse energy (J) 
divided by pulse duration (s). The intensity levels of 
a highly collimated, monochromatic, and coherent 
light beam at the work piece, which can be held in 
open air, may reach 106 W/mm2, enough to melt any 
metal. The laser fluency or energy density (J/cm2) 
equals the laser pulse energy (J) divided by focal 
spot area (cm2). A typical 50-µJ output of a KrF laser 
TABLE 5.6 Comparing Standard Lens Parameters for Coherent and Incoherent Light
Incoherent
Coherent (Gaussian Laser Beam)
Lens diameter
D
Dlens = 2wlens
Focal spot radius size
d
1.22 f
D
=
λ
d
f
D
f
D
0
lens
lens
=
=
4
1 27
λ
π
λ
.
Depth of focus
DOF
1.22
2f
D
1.22
NA
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
λ
λ
2
2
/
DOF
1.27
2f
D
NA
lens
2
=
λ
=
λ
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
1 27
.
/
FIGURE 5.19 Some transverse electromagnetic (TEM) modes: (a) irradiance; (b) electric field.

[Page 335]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   335
focused by an optics system with NA of 0.5 will pro-
duce a focal spot of 15–20-µm diameter and a cor-
responding fluence of 10–20 J/cm2.
The average on-axis laser beam intensity is related 
to the total laser power, P in watts, by:
 
I(r)
2P
w 0
2
=
π
 
(5.12)
where P = the total power in watts
w0 =  the Gaussian beam radius—the radius at 
which the intensity has decreased to 1/e2 
or 0.135 of its value on the axis
The average beam energy is of no use if it cannot 
be properly and efficiently delivered to the ablation 
region; thus, beam quality is not only measured by 
the brightness (energy) but also by its focusability 
and homogeneity.
Now we will have a look at a fifth important laser 
parameter influencing micromachining quality, that 
is, laser pulse length.
Laser Pulse Length
Long Pulses A further parameter with pulsed laser 
systems is the laser repetition rate, which expresses 
the number of pulses that are triggered per unit 
time. The laser pulse width determines the kinetics 
of the photon-induced disequilibrium on irradiated 
surfaces (for pulses longer than 100 ns the energy 
can be delocalized in thermal modes). It influences 
the role of the laser microplasma, too. The most fun-
damental feature of laser/material interaction in the 
long pulse regime (e.g., pulse duration 8 ns, energy 
0.5 mJ) is that the heat deposited by the laser in the 
material diffuses away during the pulse duration; 
that is, the laser pulse duration is longer than the 
heat diffusion time. This may be desirable for laser 
welding, but for most micromachining jobs, heat 
diffusion into the surrounding material is undesir-
able and detrimental to the quality of the machin-
ing (http://www.clark-mxr.com). Here are a couple 
of reasons why one should avoid heat diffusion for 
precise micromachining:
 
◾Heat diffusion reduces the efficiency of the 
micromachining process because it takes 
energy away from the work spot—energy that 
would otherwise go into removing work piece 
material. The higher the heat conductivity of 
the material, the more the machining efficiency 
is reduced.
 
◾Heat diffusion reduces the temperature at the 
machining spot, pinning the working tempera-
ture to not much above the melting point of the 
material, which is removed by melting. Boiling 
of the substrate ejects globs of molten material 
away from the work zone. Those globs fall back 
onto the surface, contaminating the sample. 
The droplets can be rather large and retain a 
fair amount of residual heat so that they bind 
strongly to the sample surface. Removal of these 
contaminants is often difficult or impossible 
without damaging the work piece. An air jet is 
sometimes used to physically project the melt 
phase away from the work zone. This results 
in a cleaner-looking cut but contaminates the 
sample downstream.
 
◾Heat diffusion reduces the accuracy of the 
micromachining operation. Heat diffuses away 
from the focal spot and melts an area that is 
much larger than the laser spot size. Therefore, 
it is difficult to do very fine machining; whereas 
the minimum laser spot size might be in the 
range of 1 µm or less, in many materials it is 
not possible to create features with dimensions 
much smaller than 10-µm diameter.
 
◾Heat diffusion affects a large zone around the 
machining spot, a zone referred to as the heat-
affected zone or HAZ. The heating (and subse-
quent cooling) waves propagating through the 
HAZ cause mechanical stress and may create 
microcracks (or in some cases, macrocracks) 
in the surrounding material. These defects 
are “frozen” in the structure when the mate-
rial cools, and in subsequent routine use these 
cracks may propagate deep into the bulk of the 
material and cause premature device failure. A 
closely associated phenomenon is the forma-
tion of a recast layer of material around the 
machined feature. This resolidified material 
often has a physical and/or chemical structure 
that is very different from the unmelted mate-
rial. This recast layer may be mechanically 
weaker and must often be removed.

[Page 336]
336   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 
◾Heat diffusion is sometimes associated with the 
formation of surface shock waves. These shock 
waves can damage nearby device structures or 
delaminate multilayer materials. Whereas the 
amplitude of the shock waves varies with the 
material being processed, it is generally true 
that the more energy deposited in the micro-
machining process, the stronger the associated 
shock waves.
The various undesirable effects associated with 
long laser pulse etching are illustrated in Figure 
5.20a and b.
Short Pulses We are particularly interested in femto-
second lasers with pulses more than 1 million times 
shorter than the several nanosecond-duration pulses 
used in traditional industrial laser micromachining 
systems (see above). Femtosecond lasers deliver an 
incredible amount of peak power, routinely up to 
5–10 GW (this is more than the average power deliv-
ered by a large nuclear plant) (http://www.clark-mxr.
com/industrial/handbook/introduction.htm). The 
laser intensity easily reaches the hundreds of tera-
watts per square centimeter at the work spot itself. 
No material can withstand the ablation forces at 
work at these power densities. This means that, with 
ultrafast laser pulses, very hard materials, such as 
diamond, as well as materials with extremely high 
melting points, such as molybdenum and rhenium, 
can be machined. The most fundamental feature of 
laser-matter interaction in the very fast pulse regime 
is that the heat deposited by the laser into the mate-
rial does not have time to move away from the work 
spot during the time of the laser pulse. The dura-
tion of the laser pulse is shorter than the heat diffu-
sion time. This regime has numerous advantages as 
listed below (http://www.clark-mxr.com/industrial/ 
handbook/introduction.htm):
 
◾Because the energy does not have the time to 
diffuse away, the efficiency of the machining 
process is high. Laser energy piles up at the 
level of the working spot, whose temperature 
increases instantly past the melting point of 
the material and keeps on climbing into what 
is called the plasma regime.
 
◾After the ultrafast laser pulse creates the plasma 
at the surface of the work piece, the pressures 
created by the forces within it cause the mate-
rial to expand outward from the surface in a 
highly energetic plume or gas. The internal 
forces that previously held the material together 
are vastly insufficient to contain this expansion 
of highly ionized atoms and electrons from the 
surface. Consequently, there are no droplets 
that condense onto the surrounding material. 
Additionally, because there is no melt phase, 
there is no splattering of material onto the sur-
rounding surface.
FIGURE 5.20 (a) Various undesirable effects associated with laser pulses that are too long, for example, pulse duration 
8 ns, energy 0.5 mJ (http://www.clark-mxr.com). (b) Example of a 25-μm (1 mil) channel machined in 1-mm (40 mils) thick 
INVAR with a nanosecond laser. INVAR is often called for in the design of machinery that must be extremely stable. This 
sample was machined using a “long” pulse laser. The laser pulse parameters are pulse duration 8 ns, energy 0.5 mJ. A 
recast layer can be clearly seen near the edges of the channel. Large debris is also seen in the vicinity of the cut.

[Page 337]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   337
 
◾Heating of the surrounding area is significantly 
reduced, and, consequently, all the negatives 
associated with a HAZ are no longer present—
 no melt zone, no microcracks, no shock wave 
that can delaminate multilayer materials, no 
stress that can damage adjacent structures, and 
no recast layer.
The many advantages associated with working in 
the femtosecond pulse range are illustrated in Figure 
5.21a and b.
With ultrashort laser pulsing, it is possible to accu-
rately control the depth of the cut by counting the 
number of pulses. Deep cuts (hundreds of microns) 
have been made this way, mostly by using an excimer 
laser, although it is now known that clean ablative 
etching, once the hallmark of excimer lasers, can also 
be achieved with pulsed laser sources at other wave-
lengths, including CO2, copper vapor, and Nd:YAG 
and its harmonics. The latter lasers can be as effective 
for high-quality ablative microma chining provided 
laser photons are strongly absorbed in submicron 
depths at the surface of the material on time scales 
that are less than the time it takes for heat to diffuse 
away from the irradiated region. Lasers providing 
ultrafast pulse durations of less than 10 ps have, in 
recent years, demonstrated remarkably clean micro-
machining of many materials.
Ultrashort laser pulses have opened up many new 
possibilities in laser-matter interaction and mate-
rials processing. The extremely short pulse width 
makes it easy to achieve very high peak laser inten-
sity with low pulse energies. The laser intensity can 
reach 1014–1015 W/cm2 with a pulse < 1 mJ when a 
subpicosecond pulse is focused to a spot size of a 
few tens of micrometers. The extremely high inten-
sity and short laser/matter interaction times lead to 
a highly nonequilibrium plasma state in the mate-
rial under irradiation, where electrons are driven 
to much higher temperatures than ions. The short 
duration means that the hydrodynamic motion of 
the matter under laser irradiation can be ignored, 
and there is essentially no fluid dynamics to con-
sider during the laser/matter interaction. The catch 
with ultrafast laser ablation is that throughput is low 
because the rate of removal of material is dependent 
on average power. The technology that makes these 
ultrafast laser pulses does not produce high average 
power. Additionally, the technology is very expen-
sive (a system specifically tailored to an application 
can cost in the six- to seven-figure range), and the 
covered areas are very small.
In the past two decades lasers have become a 
precise, fast, wearless, flexible tool used for cutting, 
drilling, marking, and welding. Many of today’s pro-
duction processes are unimaginable without the laser. 
FIGURE 5.21 (a) Advantages associated with working with very short laser pulses (<10 ps). (b) A channel machined in 
1-mm-thick INVAR, nickel/iron alloy under the same experimental conditions as the long pulse channel in Figure 5.20b, 
but with ultrafast pulses. The channel on the left was machined with 200-fs pulses, 0.5 mJ energy per pulse. It is obvi-
ous that the channel machined with femtosecond pulses is cleaner than the sample machined with nanosecond pulses 
( channel on the right). Note also the absence of a recast layer on the left channel. It is also clear that the machining 
process was more efficient—the channel is larger. The edges are straighter. Overall the quality of the micromachining 
is much higher.

[Page 338]
338   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Nevertheless, in some applications, as for example 
in the electronic or medical field, the laser is still 
too imprecise, too slow, or unacceptable because 
of material damages. High-power IR lasers, widely 
used in industrial material processing, are too 
“hot,” creating heat damage and debris; meanwhile, 
shorter wavelengths found in UV lasers create 
less heat and debris but lack power for efficient 
material processing. This dilemma is summarized 
in Figure 5.22. According to some, water jet-guided 
laser machining, discussed below, might provide the 
solution for this dilemma.
Shot-to-Shot Repeatability
The process of laser ablation requires threshold 
fluency, and, as we have seen above, fluency is 
the laser pulse energy per unit area, and it can be 
changed either by changing the laser pulse energy 
or by changing the ablation area. At fluencies below 
the threshold, only miniscule etching (<0.05 µm/
laser pulse) is observed, if any at all. However, when 
laser fluency is above the threshold, the etch depth 
per pulse increases rapidly with increasing laser 
fluency. The threshold fluency depends mainly on 
the target material structure and target absorption 
coefficients at the laser wavelengths. Absorption of 
laser radiation leads to a temperature increase in the 
target material. When laser pulse fluency is below 
the ablation threshold, the temperature increase 
is directly proportional to the laser pulse fluency, 
whereas when laser pulse fluency rises above the 
threshold, the temperature increases considerably 
more slowly. The absence of free electrons in a 
given substrate prevents the avalanche process from 
significantly starting and ultimately hinders the 
material ablation. In metals, there are always plenty 
of free electrons, and the avalanche process starts 
immediately, leading to reproducible machining 
(as we have seen, there may be other problems 
associated with heat diffusion). In semiconductors 
or insulators, there are naturally very few free elec-
trons. The avalanche process may start right away 
or may not, depending on the presence or absence 
of a free electron in the beam path. This variability, 
which is inherent to the physical process, leads to 
unstable machining rates. The laser may be perfectly 
stable, and the beam spot size and amount of 
energy in the pulse may be precisely the same from 
shot to shot, yet the material ablation can vary 
significantly. Using lasers working in the UV range, 
or using ultrafast lasers, the electromagnetic field is 
so high that “bound” electrons are knocked free so 
that a large quantity of free electrons can start the 
avalanche ionization process immediately, reliably, 
and reproducibly. The latter ensures an excellent 
shot-to-shot reliability independent of the material.
Water Jet-Guided Laser Machining
In water jet-guided laser machining, a thin jet of high-
pressure water (the diameter of the jet is between 
40 and 100 µm, and the water pressure is between 
20 and 500 bars) is forced through a nozzle (made 
of diamond or sapphire). The laser beam is focused 
through a water chamber (the water is deionized 
and filtered) into a nozzle as shown in Figure 5.23.
Leaving the nozzle, the laser beam is guided inside 
the water jet by total reflection at the water-air inter-
face and is directed onto the work piece where it is 
absorbed by the material. The laser beam melts or 
vaporizes the material, and the water jet expels the 
molten debris. At the end of each laser pulse, the 
plasma disappears, and only the water jet remains 
in contact with the surface. Before the next pulse is 
emitted, the water jet removes any heat induced in the 
material during the laser ablation. Thus, the pulsed 
mode of the laser ensures continuous alternation of 
FIGURE 5.22 The laser dilemma. According to Synova, S.A., their water jet-guided laser, the Laser-Microjet (LMJ) (see 
also Figure 5.23), promises a solution.

[Page 339]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   339
heating (during laser pulse) and cooling (between 
laser pulses). The water pressure value (20–500 bars) 
depends on the application, but the resulting force 
acting on the work piece is always very small, smaller 
than the force as a result of the cutting gas of con-
ventional lasers. Thus, the water jet is obviously not 
abrasive in this case (as it is in mechanical water jet 
machining described in Chapter 6); the material is 
solely ablated by the laser (thermally). The high speed 
of the water, up to 300 m/s at 500 bars, ensures fast 
removal of debris. Water jet-guided laser etching pre-
vents the problem of heat damage (microcracks, struc-
tural changes) inherent in any laser ablation process. 
The result is a heat damage-free material ablation.
The laser dilemma of high-power IR lasers that 
are too “hot,” creating heat damage and debris, and 
the shorter wavelengths UV lasers that create less 
heat and debris, but lack power for efficient mate-
rial processing, was summarized in Figure 5.22. 
Water jet-guided laser machining discussed here 
might provide a solution for this dilemma because it 
transforms a “hot” IR laser into a “cool” laser, avoid-
ing heat damage. Water jet-guided machining com-
bines high ablation efficiency, speed, and precision 
while avoiding material damage as demonstrated in 
Figure 5.24, where we compare laser ablation in Si 
using a conventional laser (Figure 5.24a) with jet-
guided laser machining using the Laser-Microjet 
from Synova (Figure 5.24b). The Laser-Microjet 
was conceived in 1993 by scientists at the Institute 
of Applied Optics of the Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology in Lausanne, Switzerland. Ten years 
later, this technology has proven its efficiency and 
reliability in many applications, especially of the 
semiconductor and microelectronics industries. The 
water jet-guided laser has indisputable advantages 
over the classical methods. The conventional laser 
kerv in Si exhibits typical heat damage with burrs 
and deposits, whereas the Laser-Microjet result 
exhibits neither burrs nor deposits.
Laser Etching with Chemical Assist
We just saw how water jet-guided laser machining 
helps keep a work piece clean; an air jet also may 
help to physically project the melt phase away from 
the work zone. This again results in a cleaner-looking 
cut but may contaminate the sample downstream. 
A third way to keep the work piece clean is the use of 
laser-assisted chemical etching (LACE).
FIGURE 5.23 (a) Schematic water jet-guided laser machining setup. See text. (b) Water jet-guided setup from Synova, 
S.A., the Laser-Microjet®.
FIGURE 5.24 Silicon wafer laser machining. (a) With a 
conventional laser and (b) with a Laser-Microjet. The con-
ventional laser kerv in silicon shows burrs and deposits, 
whereas the Laser-Microjet result has neither burrs nor 
deposits.

[Page 340]
340   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The laser cutting action can be assisted by dry 
or wet chemical etchants for building of higher-
quality complex 3D micromachines. The process is 
also called laser-induced chemical etching, in which, 
for example, chlorine is used as the etchant and is 
photodissociated to react with the substrate.14,15 If 
laser etching is performed in chlorine gas instead of 
open air, the silicon vapor and droplets leaving the 
work area combine with the chlorine to form SiCl4 
gas and are carried away from the work area. Silicon, 
when heated to its melting point, reacts nearly at the 
gas transport-limited rate with chlorine, enabling 
removal rates exceeding 105 µm3/s.16 The resulting 
hole is cleaner and more sharply defined, and debris 
does not splatter on the surface of the substrate; 
thus, an excellent spatial resolution results (1 µm 
x,y-resolution at a removal rate of 2.104 µm3/s).16,17 
The latter removal rate is several orders of magnitude 
faster than with electrical discharge machining 
(EDM) methods.
Flexible laser machining setups as shown in 
Figure 5.25 can be used for the machining of 3D 
parts by using highly localized laser microchemical 
reactions and an accurate computer-controlled x, y, 
z and θ translation table. This same type of setup can 
 accommodate additive processes (see Chapter 8), but 
it is more convenient to build separate, dedicated 
equipment, as illustrated in Figures 5.25.18
Remember LACE is not a parallel process and not 
fast enough for most manufacturing applications. 
The technique may have utility in specialty micro-
machining or for making molds.
At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Lincoln Laboratories, scanning of the laser beam at 
a rate of 7500 µm/s is used to remove Si layers in a 
Cl2 etchant. After a plane of 1 µm is removed, the 
focusing objective is lowered 1 µm, and a new pat-
tern is etched. With this technique, it is very easy to 
produce multilevel-type structures. Some example 
devices made this way are shown in Figure 5.26. 
The Lincoln group also demonstrated that struc-
tures as shown can be replicated by using simple 
hot embossing molding techniques.16
In addition to Cl2, reagents such as Br2, HCl, XeF2, 
KOH, and so on can also be used as the etchant in 
the laser photochemical etching of silicon. Table 5.7 
summarizes several kinds of substrates etched by 
laser processes with different etchants and laser 
wavelengths.11,20
Laser Machining Applications
Overview
Advantages of laser cutting over mechanical cutting 
vary according to the situation, but important factors 
are lack of physical contact (because there is no 
cutting edge that can become contaminated by the 
material or contaminate the material) and, to some 
extent, precision (because there is no wear on the 
laser). There is also a reduced chance of warping the 
material that is being cut because laser systems have 
a small heat-affected zone (HAZ). Some materials 
are also very difficult or impossible to cut by 
more traditional means. The laser has other distinct 
FIGURE 5.25 Laser microetching experimental setup: laser-assisted chemical etching (LACE). Etching/ablation of a 
 catheter tube.

[Page 341]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   341
advantages: aspect ratios for hole diameter to depth 
on the order of 1:50 are possible, and holes can be 
drilled in hard-to-reach areas and at difficult angles 
(e.g., 10° to the surface). A laser-based scribe can 
make narrower trenches than a mechanical diamond 
stylus. Disadvantages of laser cutting may include 
the high energy required. Also, when hundreds 
of holes all at the same angle are to be drilled, the 
job is better handled by an electron beam machine 
(EBM). However, if holes have to be drilled at many 
FIGURE 5.26 Some examples of laser-machined shapes. [Bloomstein, T. M., and D. J. Ehrlich. 1991. Sixth international 
conference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.19] The devices are built using chlorine-
 assisted laser etching (100 Torr Cl2). The beam spot used is 1 μm, and the objective is lowered in 1-μm increments after 
each plane is scanned at 7500 mm/s. Etch rate 100,000 mm3/s. (a) SEM micrograph of a microfluidic device layer cut into 
silicon. The white bar is a 100-μm marker. (b) SEM micrograph of a cone inside a dish cut into silicon. The dish has an 
upper radius of 80 μm and a lower radius of 35 μm with a radius curvature of 82 μm and spacer layers extending 8 μm 
inward. The clipped cone has an upper radius of 4 μm and lower radius of 16 μm. The laser was swept in a circular scan in 
each plane. The white bar is a 10-µm marker. (Courtesy of Dr. D. Ehrlich, Revise, Inc.)
TABLE 5.7 Examples of Etchants and Substrates Etched by the Laser Photochemical Process
Substrate
Etchant(s)
Etch Rate
Laser/Intensity
Semiconductors
Si
Cl2,HCl 
7 μm/s
Ar+/>5 MW/cm2
Si
KOH
15 μm/s
Ar+/~107 W/cm2
Si
NaOH
2 μm/min
CO2/NA
Ge
Br2
36 μm/s
Ar+/0.1 kW/cm2
GaAs
HNO3
2 μm/s
Ar+/60 MW/cm2
GaAs
CH3Br (750 Torr)
60 Å/s
Ar+ (257 nm)/1 KW/cm2)
GaP
KOH
600 Å/s
Ar+ (351 nm)/3.5 KW/cm2
InP
CH3Br (750 Torr)
9.4 Å/s
Ar+ (257 nm)/100 W/cm2
Insulators
SiO2
SiH4
40 Å/s
KrF/0.3 J/cm2
SiO2
NF3:H2
0.12 nm/s
ArF/7.7 mJ/cm2
Polyimide
KOH
0.3 μm/s
Ar+/0.03 MW/cm2
Polyimide
Air
0.15 μm/pulse
KrF/0.3 J/cm2
PMMA
Air
0.3 μm/pulse
ArF/0.25 J/cm2
Diamond
Cl2, O2,NO2
1,400 Å/pulse
ArF/30 J/cm2
Metals
Ti
NF3
0.29 Å/pulse
0.115 J/cm2
W
Cl2 (0.1 Torr)
240 Å/min
0.12 J/cm2
Al
Cl2 (0.1 Torr)
1.4 μm/s
1.0 J/cm2
Ag
Cl2 (0.1 Torr)
500 Å/min
N2 (337 nm)/0.12 J/cm2
Source: Helvajian, H. 1995. Microengineering technology for space systems. Ed. H. Helvajian. El Segundo, CA: 
Aerospace Corporation; and Eden, J. G. 1986. Photochemical processing of semiconductors: new applica-
tions for visible and ultraviolet lasers. IEEE Circuits Devices Mag 2:18–24.11,20

[Page 342]
342   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
angles, the laser may be the most cost-effective 
method. Lasers are most cost-effective for drilling 
holes between 0.01 and 1.5 mm. For larger holes, the 
cost of the large laser oscillator needed to produce 
the energy for vaporization becomes prohibitive, 
and because of the large amounts of material being 
vaporized, the hole produced suffers in terms of 
quality and controllable tolerance. With the very 
small holes, the high-power focusing lenses required 
to withstand the energies necessary for drilling 
holes smaller than 0.01 mm are limiting factors. The 
requirement for even smaller features necessitates 
the use of EBM (a thermal technique, see below), 
focused ion beam (FIB, a mechanical technique; see 
Chapter 6), or ultrafast laser pulsing (see above).
Both solid-state and gas lasers are commercially 
available and are touted for traditional machin-
ing operations in electronics such as postassembly 
processing, where site-specific action is necessary, 
for example, for drilling via holes, repair of embed-
ded interconnects, and thick/thin film resistor and 
capacitor trimming. The most popular lasers for cut-
ting materials are CO2 and Nd:YAG, although semi-
conductor lasers are gaining prominence because of 
their higher efficiency. Because laser micromachin-
ing or direct ablation needs high laser intensity or 
fluence, usually only excimer lasers are used, espe-
cially for hard materials.
In recent years, excimer lasers, providing ultrafast 
durations of < 10 ps (10–11 s) based on diode-pumped 
solid-state gain media, have demonstrated remark-
ably clean micromachining of many materials. 
Despite initially gaining a poor reputation for relia-
bility, during the past 25 years, excimer lasers have 
developed into mature industrial tools. For laser 
ablation of polymers, argon ion lasers, a kind of 
continuous laser, can also be used, and they can be 
modulated into different pulse widths, frequencies, 
and wavelengths. However, the excimer laser has 
several  distinct advantages, even for the dry etching 
of polymers, over the CO2 and Nd:YAG lasers. For 
example, the wavelengths are more compatible with 
the chemical bond energies in organic compounds 
and tend to produce less thermal damage. Excimer 
lasers, as we ascertained in Chapter 1, are also used 
in the newest lithography processes. A visual illus-
tration is obtained comparing the hole-drilling capa-
bilities of mechanical twist drill bits and excimer 
lasers in Figure 5.27. Here we compare 100-µm-
diameter holes drilled in 75-µm-thick high-density 
polyethylene with a drill bit and a KrF excimer 
laser. Although mechanically the hole is close to 
the minimum size that can be drilled, the improved 
quality of this and much smaller holes drilled by 
excimer lasers is obvious.
Laser machining with chemical assist takes care 
of some of the problems associated with long laser 
pulse operation, but, as we have already seen, ultra-
short laser pulsing takes care of most of them. Laser 
cutting machines have been used extensively in 
industry for cutting complex profiles in sheet and 
plate materials. Hard materials such as diamond, 
tungsten, and titanium can be cut without problems 
of tool wear because there is no contact between 
tool and work piece. For many applications, laser 
micromachining offers the advantage of more rapid 
prototyping as compared to, e.g., FIB machining or 
lithography techniques.
FIGURE 5.27 Holes drilled with twist drill bit (a) and KrF laser (b). (From Exitech.)

[Page 343]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   343
For a particular micromachining application the 
choice of laser type is now judged as much by crite-
ria such as process speed, part throughput, reliabil-
ity, service intervals, capital and operating costs of 
the overall machine tool rather than solely by the 
quality of the processed part.
Long Laser Pulse Machining Applications
A simple example of long laser pulse machining is 
a hole, laser drilled through glass or Si, that can be 
used as a high-aspect-ratio, through-the-wafer via.21,22 
This is illustrated for the electrical contact via of 
a solid-state capacitive pressure sen sor in Figure 
5.28.21 This compact pressure sensor incorporates 
electri cally conducting vias drilled through the 
glass cap by a CO2 laser. In contrast, the through-
the-wafer via connection fabricated by anisotropic 
etching has a large opening angle (54.7°) associated 
with the slow etching crystallographic planes of 
the Si substrate. Typically, the closest spacing for 
vias that are wet etched in a 300-µm-thick wafer is 
approximately 425 µm, thus limiting this method 
to a low density of via holes (different means of 
making vias are discussed in Volume III, Chapter 4).
When holes as shown in Figure 5.28 are laser 
drilled in a substrate, the expelled material solidi-
fies into dust; therefore, a moving protective tape 
is used in front of the laser lens to keep it clean. 
Debris also collects around the perimeter of the 
openings in, e.g., a silicon substrate, when drill-
ing, scribing, or trenching is done in air or an inert 
atmosphere.
To avoid the identified problems associated with 
long laser pulses, two methods can be used. One 
is to use laser-assisted chemical etching (LACE), 
as described above, which takes care of some of 
the mentioned problems; the other approach, tak-
ing care of most of the mentioned problems, is to 
use femtosecond laser pulses. The latter technique, 
as we have explained above, results in superior 
micromachining.
Short Laser Pulse or Excimer Laser Applications
Introduction Energy-deposition time with ultrafast 
excimer lasers is short compared with the electron-
phonon time (a few picoseconds); thus, thermal 
conduction and hydrodynamic motion are generally 
negligible, and ejected material carries away most of 
the deposited energy. As a result, there is minimal 
collateral damage to remaining material. In metals, 
laser energy is deposited over the skin depth rather 
than spread over a thermal conduction length, yield-
ing very high energy densities, temperatures (10 eV), 
and pressures (Mbar) during the pulse that are not 
that different from those in the sun (Figure 5.29). In 
Figure 5.29 we compare existence domains for vari-
ous types of plasmas as a function of temperature and 
density. In dielectrics, electrons that are produced by 
non linear light absorption initiate the breakdown, 
and full breakdown is achieved during each pulse.
Excimer laser materials processing, by provid-
ing solutions to critical problems in manufacturing 
of integrated circuits, hard disks, displays, inter-
connects, desktop printers, and telecommunication 
Wide anodic bond
Silicon
5000  A  Cr: Au
Laser-drilled vias
Solder
~6 mm
Glass
FIGURE 5.28 Electrical contact in a silicon capacitive pressure sensor using laser-drilled vias. (From Bowman, L., 
J. M. Schmitt, and J. D. Meindl. 1985. Micromachining and micropackaging of transducers. Eds. C. D. Fung, P. W. Cheung, 
W. H. Ko, and D. G. Fleming. Amsterdam: Elsevier. With permission.21)

[Page 344]
344   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
devices, has become a key enabling technology for 
the current revolution in information technology.
Ink-Jet Printers, Microvias, Catheters, and DVDs 
Exci mer lasers on production lines in Asia, Europe, 
and the United States now drill nozzle-hole arrays 
for most ink-jet printers. Earlier 300-dpi printers 
consisted of a 100-nozzle row of 50-µm-diameter 
holes made by electroforming thin nickel foil. Trying 
to fabricate more holes with smaller diameters 
reduced the already low 70–85% production yield 
even further. Increased printer quality is achieved 
by simultaneously reducing the nozzle diameter 
and decreasing the hole pitch. Modern printers like 
Hewlett Packard’s (Palo Alto, CA) DeskJet 800C 
and 1600C have nozzles with 28-µm diameters, 
which provide resolution of 600 dpi. Laser drilling 
of nozzle arrays allows average yields greater than 
99%. Excimer laser tools with appropriate CNC pro-
gramming can readily engineer custom-designed 
reverse-tapered, 2 1
2D and 3D structures. Some appli-
cations need a rifled, tapered hole to spin the drop-
let and optimize its accuracy of trajectory. Most of 
the ink-jet printer heads being currently sold (e.g., 
by Hewlett Packard and Canon) are excimer laser 
drilled on production lines in the United States and 
Asia. Figure 5.30 shows an excimer laser-drilled 
nozzle array in a modern print head.
Another example application of excimer lasers 
is drilling of microvia much smaller than the ones 
depicted in Figure 5.30. Packages on which chips 
are mounted for connection to other devices have 
to keep pace with the rapid advances made in ICs, 
so that speed, power, and area (real estate) do not 
become compromised. In multilayer sandwiches, 
blind via holes provide high-speed connections 
between surface-mounted components on the board 
and underlying power and signal planes while 
minimizing valuable real estate occupation. The 
cost  of drilling these vias on such high-density 
packages can represent  30% of the overall cost of 
the board. The process was first applied to volume 
production when the Nixdorf computer plant of 
Siemens introduced polyimide ablative drilling 
of 80-µm-diameter vias in multichip modules. 
Other mainframe computer manufacturers such as 
IBM rapidly followed suit and installed their own 
production lines for this applica tion. Trillions of 
vias have now been drilled with excimer lasers at 
FIGURE 5.29 Existence domains for various types of 
plasmas as a function of temperature and density. 
(Extreme measurements in laser generated plasmas, CLEFS 
CEA-No. 4, Autumn 2006.25)
FIGURE 5.30 KrF laser-drilled ink-jet printer nozzles in polyimide. (a) 30-μm diameter nozzle array. (b) Nozzles with 
 nonlinear tapers to aid the laminar flow of the droplet through the orifice. (From Excitech.)

[Page 345]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   345
yields greater than 99.99% and mean time between 
failure at greater than 1000 hours.
Preferential excimer laser etching of plastics 
against metals is illustrated by the stripping of 
insulation from insulation sleeving of wires with 
widespread use in preparing connection wires to 
computer hard-disk reader heads (see Figure 5.31).
In the biomedical industry, the drive for increased 
miniaturization with improved device functional-
ity is crucial to rapid progress, for example, in novel 
catheter-based sensors and actuators. Precision 
microdrilling with excimer lasers is routine when 
making delicate catheter-based probes. Here we 
explore, as a futuristic example, a fiberoptic-based 
sensor for analyzing arterial blood gases (ABGs) 
and pH. The use of fiberoptic sensors for ABG anal-
ysis provides clinical diagnostics at the patient’s 
bedside without the need for taking blood samples 
or doing an analysis in the blood gas laboratory 
(except for a much less frequent calibration of the 
in vivo sensors). Envision one lumen of a bilumen 
catheter for blood drawing and one for the sensing 
optical fiber as shown in Figure 5.32.
The hole at the side of a polyvinyl chloride bilu-
men sleeving tube through which blood is drawn 
(to collect blood for the blood gas lab for calibration 
of the in vivo sensor) is machined using a krypton 
fluoride (KrF) laser. The clean-cutting capability of 
the laser provides the catheter with the necessary 
rigidity that prevents kinking and blockage of the 
tube when inserted into the artery. The other impor-
tant components of this in vivo catheter are the oxy-
gen, CO2 sensors, and pH sensors on the side of a 
fiberoptic cable placed in the other lumen. These con-
sist of ∼50 × 15-µm rectangular holes machined in a 
100-µm-diameter acrylic [poly(methylmethacrylate) 
(PMMA)] optical fiber with an argon fluoride (ArF) 
laser. The holes are filled with reagents whose opti-
cal transmission depends on the O2, CO2, and pH 
levels of the surrounding blood.
For an alternative ABG and pH sensor made with 
Si bulk micromachining, see Figure 4.92 depicting 
an electrochemical ABG and pH sensor.
Another typical application of laser micromachin-
ing is to increase the density of optical storage media 
such as DVDs. Currently, the track spacing on a DVD 
is 400 nm, yielding approximately 6 GB of data stor-
age space. The initial target spacing for the next gen-
eration of laser micromachining systems is 100 nm, 
resulting in 25-GB storage capacity on a DVD.
FIGURE 5.31 Stripping of wires with excimer lasers.
FIGURE 5.32 Excimer laser manufacture of blood gas sensor. (a) KrF laser-drilled hole in side of polyvinyl chloride bilu-
men catheter. (b) ~50 × 15-μm rectangular holes machined in a 100-μm diameter acrylic [poly(methylmethacrylate) 
(PMMA)] optical fiber with an ArF laser. (From Excitech.)

[Page 346]
346   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The excimer laser also has brought more accuracy to 
corneal surgery and vision correction than ever before. 
One pulse of the excimer laser removes 0.25 µm of 
tissue. To put this into perspective, a typical human 
hair is 70 µm in thickness. Surgeons have never had a 
device as accurate as the excimer laser in eye surgery.
At the Laser Centrum in Hannover (LZH), Germany, 
researchers use femtosecond lasers for hole drilling 
with pulse durations shorter than 100 fs and pulse peak 
powers in the gigawatt range.10 Grooves of only 200-nm 
thickness can be cut. Some demonstration pieces are 
shown in Figures 5.33 and 5.34.
Machining inside Transparent Materials Ultrafast 
laser pulsing enables machining inside transparent 
bulk materials. A material such as a glass is transpar-
ent and does not absorb visible light—provided the 
intensity stays below the threshold for multiphoton 
absorption. One can exceed that threshold by focusing 
ultrafast laser pulses to a spot inside the material. When 
the intensity exceeds the threshold for plasma forma-
tion, very localized absorption occurs at the focal spot, 
and, as before, the plasma expands, but this time it is 
confined by the surrounding material. The effect of the 
expansion is to create a void within a very dense shell 
of material—a cavity within the glass itself. The pro-
cess is not limited to glass. Pits can be created in any 
material by focusing an ultrafast laser pulse inside the 
material, whether it is amorphous or crystalline.
Based on the above properties of femtosecond 
lasers, one can manufacture single-mode waveguides 
in glasses. Glass is transparent to incident, ultrafast 
laser pulses at 775 nm, enabling the local melting 
of the glass via confined multiphoton absorption 
and avalanche ionization. The glass then resolidi-
fies, changing its physical properties. The result is 
an index gradient that acts like a waveguide. Only 
ultrafast lasers are capable of producing this effect 
in transparent materials; with longer pulse lasers 
(nanoseconds), the glass incurs damage before the 
intensity reaches the threshold at which guides are 
formed. Femtosecond laser pulses can be used to 
induce localized refractive index increase in a wide 
variety of glasses, and this way optical waveguides 
have been produced in silicate, borosilicate, chalco-
genide, and fluoride glasses.
FIGURE 5.33 From the Laser Centrum at Hannover, Germany (LZH): laser machining in a wide variety of materials.
FIGURE 5.34 From the Laser Centrum at Hannover, 
Germany: Micromarking (G. Schröder’s hair). ArF laser-
micromachined 40-μm square holes through a human hair.

[Page 347]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   347
Summary: Laser Machining 
Applications and Comparisons
Subtractive and additive laser machining (see Chap-
ter 9) present several application opportunities in 
micromachining because of their versatility, site-
specific operation, and rapid prototyping capabil-
ity. Ultrafast laser machining, when lasers become 
less expensive, will make laser micromachining 
yet more attractive. There are some obvious draw-
backs with these direct write techniques: they are 
serial processes, and the deposition or removal rates 
limit the speed of the micromanufacture. However, 
for rapid prototyping, mold fabrication, and site-
specific manufacturing, laser machining has a very 
bright future, and, as we have remarked before, 
many microsystems might carry a bigger price tag 
than an IC, making a more expensive manufactur-
ing technology acceptable.
In Table 5.8 we list typical laser applications in 
different fields, and in Table 5.9 we compare laser 
micromachining with some other typical competing 
machining technologies.
A good further introduction to laser machin-
ing can be found in Laser Machining: Theory and 
Practice by George Chryssolouris23 and in an excel-
lent chapter by Henry Helvajian, “Laser Material 
Processing: A Multifunctional in situ Processing Tool 
for Microinstrument Development.”11 A very  infor-
mative laser handbook on the Internet can be 
found  at http://www.clark-mxr.com/industrial/
handbook/introduction.htm.  An  excellent tutorial 
on the Internet is by Dieter Schuöcker, Chair of 
Nonconventional Processing, Forming, and Laser 
Technology at the TU Vienna, Austria, in cooperation 
with Arnold Braunsteiner, at http://www.argelas.
org/files/tutorium/tutorium.htm. Laser tutorials may 
also befound at http://www.ilt.fraunhofer.de/eng/ 
100048.html by Fraunhofer Institut Lasertechnik, 
http://www.coherentinc.com/Literature/ by Coherent, 
and http://www.colemaneye.com/fundamentals/
laser.htm by Aldrich Computers & Consultants.
Also Rami Arieli’s “The Laser Adventure” at 
http://stwww.weizmann.ac.il/lasers/laserweb/
index.htm is a good laser introduction. A service 
TABLE 5.8 Laser Applications in Various Industrial Fields
Heavy Manufacturing
Light Manufacturing
Electronics
Medical
General
Profile cutting in sheet 
and plate metals
Profile cutting in plastics 
and wood
Via formation 
insulating material: 
Tab and MCM
Flow orifices <100 μm 
diameter
CVD diamond 
cutting
Seam and spot welding
Engraving
High-accuracy wire 
stripping
Drilling and cutting 
delicate or thermally 
sensitive materials
Ceramic and glass 
micromachining
Cladding and drilling
Drilling
Skiving of flexible 
circuits
Micromachining 
applications where 
edge quality and 
cleanliness are critical
Thin film 
patterning; 
microlithography
IC repair
TABLE 5.9 Comparing Laser Micromachining with EDM, Mechanical Machining, and Chemical Etching
Practical 
Resolution Limit
Attainable 
Aspect Ratio
Taper
Undesirable Side 
Effects
Status of Technology 
Development
Excimer laser
5 μm
>100:1
Yes
Recast layer
Low
CO2 laser
200 μm
100:1
Yes
Recast layer, burring, 
thermal
High
Nd:YAG
50 μm
100:1
Yes
Recast layer, burring, 
thermal
High
EDM
100 μm
20:1
No
Surface finish
Moderate
Chemical etch
250 μm
1:1.5
Yes
Undercutting
Moderate
Mechanical
Ø 100 µm
10:1
No
Burring
Moderate

[Page 348]
348   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
provider in the laser micromachining area with an 
excellent educative web site is Resonetics (http://
www.resonetics.com/MDmfg.htm). Another web 
site to bookmark is Sam’s Laser FAQ (http://www.
repairfaq.org/sam/lasersam.htm). A laser link page 
can be found at http://www.mysteries-megasite.
com/main/bigsearch/laser.html.
Electron Beam Machining
Electron beam removal of materials is another fast-
growing thermal technique. Instead of electrical 
sparks, this method uses a stream of focused, high-
velocity electrons from an electron gun to melt and 
vaporize the work piece material.24 In EBM, electrons 
are accelerated to a velocity of 200,000 km/s or 
nearly three-fourths that of light. As shown in Figure 
5.35, the process is performed in a vacuum chamber 
to reduce the scattering of electrons by gas mole-
cules in the atmosphere. The stream of electrons is 
directed against a precisely limited area of the work 
piece; on impact, the kinetic energy of the electrons 
is converted into thermal energy that melts and 
vaporizes the material to be removed, forming holes 
or cuts. Originally, in the early 1960s, the method 
was used for welding and annealing, but today it is 
also used for many IC and micromachining tasks. 
EBM equipment now is commonly used by the 
electronics industry to aid in the etching of masks 
and the fabrication of circuits in microprocessors; 
today, scanning electron beam lithography remains 
one of the best-demonstrated methods for micro-
fabrication in the sub-100-nm regime (see Part I). 
We will not repeat the electron beam lithography 
aspects of electron beam machines here but rather 
emphasize other machining applications. An elec-
tromagnetic coil or lens focuses the diverging 
electron beam to a power density of about 6500 
GW/mm2, high enough to vaporize the work piece 
material. A typical cross-sectional diameter of the 
beam is 10–200 µm at the point of impact on the 
work piece. A bias electrode switches the electron 
beam energy from the cathode (electron gun) on and 
off for pulsed drilling operations. The bias electrode 
also controls beam intensity. With additional coils, 
the beam can be deflected in any direction. With 
mechanical means, holes of a diameter of 0.8 mm 
are difficult to drill, and those less than 0.1 mm are 
nearly impossible. In contrast, EBM works well for 
deep holes of diameters less than 0.1 mm and is 
generally effective with a diameter-to-depth ratio of 
1:10 in hard-to-machine materials. A hole in a sheet 
1.25-mm thick up to 125 µm in diameter can be cut 
almost instantly with a taper of 2–4°. With multiple 
pulses, diameter-to-depth ratios can reach 1:100. For 
example, hole diameters of 0.1 mm can be drilled in 
materials up to 10-mm thick.
Once the vacuum is established (10–4 mm Hg), 
EBM can be extremely fast. The material removal 
rate is about 0.1 mg/s; hence drilling rates of 2000 
holes/s are routine with EBM. Typical tolerances are 
about 10% of the hole’s diameter (e.g., 0.005 mm on 
a 0.05-mm hole). The most suitable application is for 
work pieces requiring large numbers of simple small 
holes to be drilled or for drilling holes in materi-
als that are hard and difficult to machine with other 
processes. The equipment is very expensive, and the 
need to operate in vacuum adds considerably to the 
machining time. The cost of an EBM facility ranges 
from $75,000 to $1.5 million.
Plasma Beam Machining
Plasma arc cutting (also plasma arc machining) is 
mainly used for cutting thick sections of electri-
cally conductive materials (Figure 5.36). A high-
temperature plasma stream (up to 60,000°F) 
FIGURE 5.35 Schematic illustration of the electron beam 
machining process. Unlike LBM, this process requires a 
vacuum; therefore, work piece size is limited to the size of 
the vacuum chamber.

[Page 349]
Thermal Energy-Based Removing   349
interacts with the work piece, causing rapid 
melting. A typical plasma torch is constructed in 
such a way that the plasma is confined in a narrow 
column about 1 mm in diameter. The electrically 
conductive work piece is positively charged, and 
the electrode is negatively charged. Relatively large 
cutting speeds can be obtained: for example, 380 
mm/min for a stainless steel plate 75-mm thick at 
an arc current of 800 A. Tolerances of ±0.8 mm can 
be achieved in materials of thicknesses less than 
25 mm, and tolerances of ±3 mm are obtained for 
greater thicknesses. The HAZ for plasma arc cutting 
varies between 0.7 and 5 mm in thickness, and the 
method is used primarily for ferrous and nonferrous 
metals. The inert gas to form plasma also serves as 
a shielding gas. The torch and sometimes the work 
piece require cooling, and the process produces 
high noise levels. The technique is of marginal 
use in micromachining, except perhaps to cut the 
plasma arc-coated sensor substrates dis cussed in 
Chapter 9.
For a detailed history of plasma cutting, visit 
http://www.hypertherm.com/technology/plasma_
history.htm. A detailed analysis of the quality of 
the cut of a plasma arc is presented at http://archive. 
metalformingmagazine.com/1998/05/plasma/
plasma.htm.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Dr. Rodrigo Martinez, UCI Gradu-
ate now at ETH in Laussane.
Questions
Questions by Mr. Chuan Zhang, UC Irvine
 
5.1:  In the electrical discharge machining (EDM) 
process, the spark-gap width is an important 
parameter in determining the accuracy of 
the process. Discuss the pros and cons of a 
very small spark-gap width.
 
5.2:  What are the merits and drawbacks of elec-
trical discharge machining? List some appli-
cations of EDM.
 
5.3:  Sketch a way to make a 300-µm-diameter 
Ni rod with a polygonal cross-section using 
electro discharge machining wire cutting.
 
5.4:  Draw two shapes that are better produced by 
lithography, and two shapes that are better 
made by wire cutting discharge machining 
(WC-EDM).
 
5.5:  How can we perform µ-EDM in batch mode 
by relying on LIGA?
 
5.6:  Explain why the metal removal rate in EDM 
is much slower than that of ECM.
 
5.7:  Explain the energy conversion process in 
laser beam machining (LBM). How can we 
thermally remove materials by consuming 
electrical power?
 
5.8:  Why is the mechanism of laser ablation dif-
ferent for different laser light wavelengths?
 
5.9:  Why is a laser more efficient in machining 
than visible light? List the common applica-
tions of laser machining.
 5.10:  How can the quality of the ablated region 
be improved in the laser ablation process? 
Which factors affect the thickness of the 
heat-affected zone (HAZ)?
 5.11:  What are the important factors influencing 
the efficiency and spatial resolution of laser 
ablation? Explain why.
 5.12:  What is the difference between optical pene-
tration depth and damage penetration depth 
in laser machining?
 5.13:  How does the laser pulse length affect laser 
beam machining? Compare long laser pulse 
etching and short laser pulse etching.
 5.14:  How can water jet guided laser machining 
keep a workpiece clean? How does it work?
FIGURE 5.36 Plasma arc cutting.

[Page 350]
350   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 5.15:  What are the merits of laser etching with 
chemical assist (LACE)? What are the tech-
nical barriers for applying this technique in 
most manufacturing fields?
 5.16:  Laser machining offers advantages com-
pared to methods such as EDM, ECM, 
chemical etching, or stamping. A laser can 
easily cut complex parts with high toler-
ances. Excessively hard, pressure- and force-
sensitive, or very thin materials can be cut 
with a small focused beam. In many cases, 
laser cutting is preferred over stamping due 
to its high flexibility and noncontact charac-
teristics. Lasers also enable low-temperature 
deposition processes, rapid prototyping, 
mold fabrication, and site-specific manufac-
turing. It also has obvious drawbacks. What 
are they?
References
 
1. Kalpajian, S. 1984. Manufacturing processes for engineering 
materials. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
 
2. Snoeys, R., F. Staelens, and D. F. Dauw. 1986. Adaptive con-
trol optimization as basis for intelligent EDM die-sinking 
machines. Proceedings of the Winter Annual Meeting of ASME. 
Anaheim, CA, 22:63–78.
 
3. Guitrau, E. B. 1997. The EDM handbook. Cincinnati, OH: 
Hanser Gardner Publications.
 
4. Rain, C. 1981. Nontraditional methods advance machining 
industry. High Technology November/ December:55–61.
 
5. Saito, N. 1984. Recent electrical discharge machining (EDM) 
techniques in Japan. Bull Jpn Soc Precis Eng 18:110–16.
 
6. Sommer, C., and S. Sommer. 2000. Wire EDM handbook. 
Houston: Advance Publishing.
 
7. Kuo, C.-L., T. Masuzawa, and M. Fujino. 1991. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’91). Nara, 
Japan.
 
8. Kuo, C.-L., T. Masuzawa, and M. Fujino. 1992. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’92). 
Travemunde, Germany.
 
9. Takahata, K., and Y. B. Gianchandani. 2002. Batch mode 
micro-EDM for high-density and high-throughput micro-
machining. IEEE/ASME J Microelectromechanical Systems 
11:102–110.
 10. Ehmann, K. F., D. Bourell, M. L. Culpepper, T. J. 
Hodgson, T. R. Kurfess, M. Madou, and K. Rajurkar. 2007. 
Micromanufacturing: international research and development. 
New  York: Springer.
 11. Helvajian, H. 1995. Microengineering technology for space 
systems. Ed. H. Helvajian. El Segundo, CA: Aerospace 
Corporation.
 12. Srinivasan, R., and V. Mayne-Banton. 1982. Self-developing 
photoetching of poly(ethylene terephthalate) films by 
far-ultraviolet excimer laser radiation. Appl Phys Lett 
41:576–78.
 13. Liu, Y. S. 1989. Laser microfabrication: thin film processes and 
lithography. Eds. J. Y. Tsao, and D. J. Ehrlich. New York: 
Academic Press.
 14. Ehrlich, D. J., D. J. Silversmith, R. W. Mountain, and J. Tsao. 
1982. Fabrication of through-wafer via conductors in Si by 
laser photochemical processing. IEEE Trans Compon Hybrids 
Manuf Technol CHMT-5:520–21.
 15. von Gutfeld, R. J., and R. T. Hodgson. 1982. Laser enhan-
ced etching in KOH. Appl Phys Lett 40:352–54.
 16. Bloomstein, T. M., and D. J. Ehrlich. 1992. Laser-chemical 
three-dimensional writing for microelectromechanics and 
application to standard-cell microfluidics. J Vac Sci Technol 
B 10:2671–74.
 17. Shlichta, P. J. 1988. Laser micromachining in a reactive 
atmosphere. NASA Tech Briefs 12:84.
 18. Maeda, S., K. Minami, and M. Esashi. 1994. IEEE interna-
tional workshop on micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS 
’94). Oiso, Japan: IEEE.
 19. Bloomstein, T. M., and D. J. Ehrlich. 1991. Sixth international 
conference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers 
’91). San Francisco.
 20. Eden, J. G. 1986. Photochemical processing of semicon-
ductors: new applications for visible and ultraviolet lasers. 
IEEE Circuits Devices Mag 2:18–24.
 21. Bowman, L., J. M. Schmitt, and J. D. Meindl. 1985. Micro-
machining and micropackaging of transducers. Eds. C. D. Fung, 
P. W. Cheung, W. H. Ko, and D. G. Fleming. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier.
 22. Anthony, T. R., and H. R. Cline. 1976. Deep-diode arrays. 
J Appl Phys 47:2550.
 23. Chryssolouris, G. 1991. Laser machining. New York: Springer 
Verlag.
 24. Taniguchi, N. 1984. Research on and development of 
energy beam processing of materials in Japan. Bull Jpn Soc 
Precis Eng 18:117–25.
 25. Extreme measurements in laser generated plasmas, CLEFS 
CEA-No. 4, Autumn 2006.

[Page 351]
O u t l i n e
Introduction
History of Mechanical Machining
Absolute and Relative Tolerances in 
Manufacturing
Ultraprecision Mechanical 
Machining
Desktop Factory
Precision Mechanical Machining 
versus IC-Based Micromachining
Questions
References
6
Mechanical Energy-
Based Removing
Manufacturing dominates world trade. It is the main wealth creating activ-
ity of all industrialized nations and many developing nations. A manu-
facturing industry based on advanced technologies with the capability of 
competing in world markets can ensure a higher standard of living for an 
industrial nation.
P. McKeown
(1996)
351
Fanuc’s the ROBOnano Ui, an ultraprecision micromachining station (cost 
$1  million) and a Noh mask made with this machine (http://www.fanuc.co.jp/en/
product/ robonano/index.htm).
Commercial desktop factories (DTFs) at Sankyo Seiki.

[Page 352]
Introduction
In mechanical subtractive machining, physical re -
moval of unwanted material is achieved by me -
chanical energy applied at the work piece. In the 
ultraprecision range, the two major categories of 
mechanical material-removing technologies we 
detail in this chapter are single-point machin-
ing and abrasive machining (basically multipoint 
machining). Abrasive machining is a process that 
removes small amounts of material from a work 
piece in the form of tiny chips through the contact 
of small, hard, sharp, nonmetallic particles. In abra-
sive machining we review abrasive wheel machin-
ing, in particular electrolytic in-process dressing 
(ELID), ultrasonic machining (USM), water jet, 
abrasive water jet (AWJ), and abrasive jet machining 
(AJM). We also consider briefly two energetic beam 
mechanical machining methods, i.e., focused ion 
beam (FIB) and fast atom beam (FAB) machining. 
We also cover the miniaturization of mechanical 
machining equipment in a section on “desk-top fac-
tories.” The fact that it often takes a two-ton machine 
tool to fabricate microparts, where cutting forces 
are in the milli- to micro-Newton range, is a clear 
indication that a complete machine tool redesign is 
required for the fabrication of micromachines.
Whereas primary manufacturing processes in -
volve casting and molding, secondary manufacturing 
processes constitute the main mechanical removing 
techniques involving turning, drilling, and milling. 
Abrasive processes to superfinish a work piece are 
called tertiary manufacturing processes.
History of Mechanical Machining
Tool making for mechanical machining began per-
haps when humans learned to walk erectly and had 
their hands free to grasp objects of wood or stone 
and to shape them. Although tool-making hominids 
probably emerged millions of years earlier, we can 
only trace tool-making history back 2 million years to 
the oldest surviving and  recognizable flint hand axes.1 
Stronger, longer lasting tools resulted when metals 
such as copper and iron replaced wood and stone. 
Humans have been cutting metals for thousands of 
years to make the myriad tools, machines, and other 
devices that civilization demands.
The birth of more precise mechanical machining 
dates back to the invention of the lathe, attributed 
to Anacharis the Scythian and first depicted in an 
Egyptian low relief about 300 B.C. (Figure  6.1).1 
Hipparchus, in the second century B.C., and 
Ptole my, in 150 A.D., used graduated instruments 
for astronomy and sailing. Ptolemy’s astrolabe 
became the basic tool for observers of the skies 
for the next thousand years; the Arabs perfected 
it in the ninth century, and it remained in use for 
another 700 years (Figure 6.2).2 Precision machin-
ing with a hand-operated lathe got a boost in the 
mid-1600s from demands for more precision in 
building better instruments for time measurement.3 
Ruling engines for the control of diffraction gratings 
have driven state-of-the-art precision machine tool 
de sign since the late 1700s. More than a century 
ago, Rowland at the John Hopkins University built 
ruling engines with part-per-million accuracy.4,5 
Today, the mechanical technology on which pho-
tolithographic alignment systems are based is still 
grounded in the same ruling engine design. An 
American astronomer, David Rittenhouse, made 
the first diffraction grating in 1785, when he fab-
ricated a half-inch-wide grating with 53 apertures.6 
It is difficult to identify another single device 
that has provided more important experimental 
information to every field of science than the dif-
fraction grating.6 Rowland not only constructed 
sophisticated ruling engines, but he also invented 
352   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 6.1 First lathe as depicted in an Egyptian bas 
relief, about 300 B.C. Shown here in a line drawing. The 
man at left is holding the cutting tool. The man at right 
is making the work piece rotate back and forth by pulling 
on a cord or thong.

[Page 353]
the concave grating, a device of spectacular value to 
modern spectroscopists.
Tools driven by mechanical power brought on 
the machine age in the late 1700s.7 Diamond as a 
cutting tool was apparently first used in 1779 for 
making threads in hardened steel. The significance 
of diamond tools in precision machining was real-
ized in the 1850s. By 1920, the Lord’s Prayer had 
been engraved with a diamond tool into an area of 
100 µm × 40 µm. In the 1930s, watchmakers used 
diamond turning to make watch dial components 
with excellent surface finishes. In the 1940s, Moore 
Special Tool Company designed a jig grinder that 
allowed toolmakers to work with accuracies that 
were not achievable by any of the existing methods 
(http://www.mooretool.com).
In modern times, precision engineering was 
 initially pushed by nuclear programs and even tually 
by semiconductor manufacturing. By the 1960s 
demands from electronics, defense, and energy ap -
plications led to pioneering work on diamond turn-
ing from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
and Oak Ridge National Lab. In the 1970s, the need 
for large optics in space telescopes and “defense” sys-
tems triggered the application of precision machin-
ing to complex optical components.
Norio Taniguchi started working on process-
ing of materials to nanoscale precision as early as 
1940 and worked on achieving precision finishes of 
quartz crystals, silicon, and other hard and brittle 
materials by using ultrasonic machining (USM). 
Taniguchi coined the term nanotechnology and in 
1974 used the term to define ultraprecision machin-
ing. According to Taniguchi, ultraprecision machin-
ing is “the process by which the highest possible 
dimensional accuracy is achieved at a given point in 
time.” In an ultraprecision manufacturing system, 
all the material processing methods used in a con-
ventional manufacturing system, like removal, addi-
tion, joining, surface treatment, and assembly, are 
scaled down by orders of magnitude. The machine 
tool capabilities, metrology, and instrumenta-
tion used in these processes range in the orders of 
micrometers to nanometers.
Figure 6.3 includes the machine accuracy capa-
bilities Norio Taniguchi predicted along with the 
processes or tools used to achieve it.
In the past 25 years, great progress has been made 
in building machines that can be operated and con-
trolled automatically.
By 1977, highly precise instruments such as ser-
vomotors, feedback devices, and computers were 
implemented, paving the way for computer numeri-
cal control (CNC) machining, which is now stan-
dard in many types of machine tools. At the start, 
the smallest movement these machines could re -
producibly make was 0.5 µm.
A crucial development came in the 1980s, when 
advanced machine tools became equipped with pre-
cision metrology and control tools. These machines 
used laser interferometer and capacitance probe feed-
back controls, temperature control, and hydrostatic 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   353
FIGURE 6.2 Ptolemy’s astrolabe; front view (a) and back view (b).

[Page 354]
bearings and featured accuracies better than 0.1 µm. 
Precision manufacturing methods were extended for 
industrial use for cutting aluminum, which was used 
for making components for scanners, photocopying 
machines, and computer memory disks. Also in the 
1980s, cutting with very small diamond tools (e.g., 
22-µm diameter) was developed in Japan.
In the 1990s, precision manufacturing became 
accepted as another advanced tool in manufactur-
ing systems with some machining stations even 
allowing freeform machining. Large-scale adapta-
tion of CNC machining also occurred during this 
period as a result of the surge of the electronics and 
computer industries.
By 1993, 0.05 µm became possible, and today 
there is equipment available featuring 0.01 µm and 
even nanometer step resolution (http://www.fanuc.
co.jp/eindex.htm).10
This evolution closely follows the predictions 
sketched in Figure 6.3, where the Taniguchi curves 
show a machining accuracy for ultraprecision ma -
chining of  subnanometer resolution for 2008. The 
resolution of the steps a machine can make, of 
course, is a determining factor for the manufactur-
ing accuracy of the work piece.
Historically important milestones in new machin-
ing concepts include the introduction of ultrasonic 
techniques, focused ion beam, and desktop factories 
(DTFs).
The roots of ultrasonic technology can be traced 
back to research on the piezoelectric effect conducted 
by Pierre Curie around 1880. He found that asymmet-
rical crystals such as quartz and Rochelle salt (potas-
sium sodium titrate) generate an electric charge when 
mechanical pressure is applied. Conversely, mechan-
ical vibrations are obtained by applying electrical 
oscillations to the same crystals. This led to the dis-
covery of SONAR (sound navigating and ranging). In 
USM, the tool, made of softer material than that of 
the work piece, is oscillated at a frequency of about 
20 kHz with an amplitude of about 25.4 µm.
A liquid metal ion source used in focused ion 
beam machining (FIBM) was demonstrated between 
1978 and 1980. The latter technique, although very 
slow and expensive, represents the latest and most 
accurate means of mechanical precision machining. 
354   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Normal machining
Precision machining
Ultraprecision machining
(extreme accurate machining) 
Achievable
machining
accuracy
0.1 mm, 102
0.01 mm, 101
0.3 mm,
1 mm,
(Atomic
lattice
distance)
1900       1920         1940          1960          1980         2000          2020  
64 kb
4 kb
256 kb 
6 mb
1 mb
1.E+12
1.E+11
1.E+10
1.E+09
1.E+08
1.E+07
1.E+06
1.E+05
1.E+04
1.E+03
# of transistors/DRAM chip
Machine Tools
(Processing equipment) 
Lathes, milling machines
Measuring Instruments
(Inspection equipment)
Vernier calipers
Precision lathes, grinding machines,
lapping machines, honing machines
Mechanical comparators, micrometers, dial
indicators
(Curve generators)
Precision jig borers, jig grinding machines,
(Electric or pneumatic micrometers) 
Optical comparators
Precision grinding machines, precision
lapping machines (optical lens grinding
machines)
Precision diamond lathes
Optical or magnetic scales, electrical
comparators
Electronics comparators (noncontact)
(DUV mask aligner) 
precision diamond grinding machines,
ultraprecision grinding machines
Laser measuring instruments
(Electron beam lithographer)
Super high-precision grinding machines,
super high-precision lapping and
polishing machines
High-precision laser measuring instruments
Talysteps
Atom, molecule, or ion beam machining,
atom or molecule deposition
(Substance synthesizing)
Scanning electron microscopes,
transmission electron microscopes, electron
tion equipment, ion analyzers, x-ray 
microanalyzers, Auger analyzers, ESCA
Atom manipulation with proximal probes
STM and AFM
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 6.3 Progress of accuracy in machining. The development of achievable machining accuracy during the past 
100 years is shown in this figure under the generalized classification of normal machining, precision machining, and 
ultraprecision machining. (a) Left ordinate, achievable manufacturing accuracy over time based on Taniguchi. (Taniguchi, 
N. 1983. Current status in, and future trends of, ultraprecision machining and ultrafine materials processing. Annals 
CIRP 32:S573–82.8) Right ordinate, increase in transistor density over time according to Moore’s Law. (Gibbs, W. W. 1997. 
Scientific American September 22.9) (b) Machines, processing equipment, and metrology equipment by which the indicated 
resolution can be achieved and checked. By “ultraprecision machining,” Taniguchi means those processes/machines by 
which the highest possible dimensional accuracy is or has been achieved at a given point in time.

[Page 355]
In this case, a powerful, very thin beam of ions 
replaces the familiar mechanical tool. A variation of 
FIBM is fast-atom beam (FAB) machining, pioneered 
by Hatamura et al.11 in the early 1990s. In FAB, ion-
ized atoms, accelerated to about 100 km/s, are neu-
tralized and used as the mechanical cutting tool.
Desktop factories (DTFs) constitute a rather inter-
esting new manufacturing philosophy involving flex-
ible and modular table top-sized automated factories 
that feature minimal human participation in the 
manufacturing process. An example of such a factory 
is shown in Figure 6.4. Since the early 1990s progress 
has been made toward making such DTFs a reality. A 
DTF as shown here has the potential of becoming the 
factory of the future: a totally self-contained, robotic, 
desktop-size machine tool that only requires mate-
rials, power, and water as outside inputs, and out 
come the finished machined products. The first DTFs 
in research and development incorporated lathes, 
cleaning, gluing, punching, and drilling stations. 
The work piece is transported between these different 
machining functions by a “cart” moving from station 
to station. A first commercial manufacturing unit by 
Sankyo Seiki is shown as the inset in the header of 
this chapter. Sankyo Seiki Mfg. Co. Ltd. believes that 
DTFs might help manufacturing survive in Japan.12
Absolute and Relative Tolerances 
in Manufacturing
The application ranges of normal, precision, and 
ultraprecision mechanical machining, according 
to Norio Taniguchi, are shown in Figure 6.3. The 
Taniguchi curves, which dramatically illustrate 
improvement in mechanical manufacturing accu-
racies achieved in the second half of the twentieth 
century (left coordinate) are compared with Moore’s 
Law (right coordinate), which demonstrates the log-
arithmic progress in density of transistors on a chip 
during the past few decades. Mechanical machin-
ing and integrated circuit (IC) technology-based 
machining methods, as well as appropriate metrol-
ogy tools, are listed in the table on the right side of 
this figure (see also Evans13). As illustrated, ultrapre-
cision diamond machining reached a manufactur-
ing accuracy of better than 1 nm in the year 2000. 
In Chapter 2 we mentioned that the mirrors for an 
extreme ultraviolet camera are machined flat with 
an accuracy of 0.25 nm rms or better. At the same 
time, lithography methods only reached critical 
dimensions of 0.18 µm. However, this comparison 
is a bit misleading because the accuracy for mechan-
ical machining, which is truly 3D, pertains to the 
product surface finish, whereas for lithography- based 
methods, it is based on the accuracy of carving out 
very small features (e.g., 0.18 µm) in the x,y-plane. 
Photolithography-based IC methods are limited to 
2–2.5D shapes (projected shapes), and although the 
dimensions along the z-axis can also be controlled 
to the nanometer and subnanometer range, in the 
x,y-plane, the accuracy, which is mostly determined 
by the alignment accuracy of a large number of pho-
tomasks, is considerably less. In terms of attaining 
the smallest absolute sizes, mechanical machining 
is considerably inferior to lithography-based meth-
ods because the writing tool in mechanical machin-
ing is crude compared with writing with light or 
electrons—the smallest diamond styluses are still 
about 22 µm in diameter! In mechanical machining 
(for example, polishing of a mirror), the size of the 
grinding tool does not influence the resulting accu-
racy in the z-direction.
The discrepancy between the progress in tol-
erances predicted by the Taniguchi and Moore 
plots and the tolerances that are being achieved in 
 practice have been increasing, i.e., progress is slow-
ing down (see also Part I on lithography). Progress 
in mechanical machining is in large part based on 
continued improvement in positioning stages and 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   355
FIGURE 6.4 An example of a desktop factory at AIST, 
Japan.

[Page 356]
computer control. Because positioning stages for 
lithography and ultraprecision machining are the 
same, the fact that the progress is slowing for both 
is not that surprising. Reasons for the slowdown 
of IC technology are a bit more complicated, how-
ever. In lithography, subsequent layers need to be 
aligned, an operation not needed when diamond 
milling, e.g., a high- precision lens. The alignment 
operation in lithography may be checked by laser 
interferometer- controlled stages to an absolute pos-
itioning accuracy of <10 nm, thereby allowing the 
registration of successive layers to a similar preci-
sion. The reasons for the slowdown in electronic 
device miniaturization are obviously not because 
of lack of appropriate metrology equipment, but 
rather hinge on securing more mechanical stabil-
ity in the positioning stages and even more so on 
manufacturing cost and the fact that transistors 
are becoming too leaky at less than 30 nm, where 
quantum effects start playing a role.
To further extend manufacturing accuracy in 
electronics, one has to look beyond current manu-
facturing technologies and consider both top-down 
and bottom-up manufacturing methods or  perhaps 
hybrid approaches. Bottom-up methods, such as 
molecular engineering, and top-down  methods, 
such as e-beam nanofabrication of quantum devices, 
are bound to lead the way beyond the current 
limitations dictated by the Moore and Taniguchi 
curves. Micromachining of special  manufacturing 
tools will play a pivotal role for both those new bot-
tom-up and top-down techniques. For  example, the 
scanning tunneling microscope, based on micro-
machining ultrasharp tips on Si cantilevers,  creates 
machining opportunities with accuracies on the 
atomic level, well beyond the predictions of the 
Taniguchi and Moore curves.
For mechanical structures, operation in the micro- 
and nanodomain imposes barriers other than those 
described for electronic devices. New design phi-
losophies that are more error-insensitive with sim-
pler mechanisms, smaller numbers of parts, and, 
wherever possible, flexible members rather than 
rigid ones must be adopted. Also here bottom-up 
machining methods will play an important role (see 
Volume III, Chapter 3).
In Figure 6.5, we show, in a most generalized 
fashion, human manufactured objects (from an IC 
fabrication to a house) in terms of absolute size and 
relative tolerances (feature tolerance/object size). 
Mechanical machining is typically used to machine 
the bigger objects, e.g., a lens of an absolute size of 
10 cm or a parabolic astronomic mirror with a diam-
eter of several meters.3 Mechanical engineers define 
precision machining as machining in which the rel-
ative accuracy (tolerance/object size) is 10–4 or less 
356   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
House
Wooden table
Conventional and
ultraprecision manufacturing
Optical lens
Screw
Micromachine
Contact pad
Micro-/mesoscale manufacturing
NEMS
MEMS
Macroscale building
Precision machining
Accuracy ~ Object size
10
10
1
1
2
10-1
10-9
10-6
10-3
103
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
Relative accuracy [%]
Object size [m]
FIGURE 6.5 Various examples of human-engineered objects as a function of their relative (tolerance/object size) and 
absolute tolerance (size). The application field for precision machining at relative tolerances of 10−4 and less is also 
indicated. Object size versus relative accuracy for MEMS, NEMS, micro-/mesoscale manufacturing, and conventional/ 
ultraprecision engineering.

[Page 357]
of a feature/part size (see dividing line in Figure 6.5 
at a relative accuracy of 10–2%).4,5 For comparison, 
a relative accuracy of 10–3 in the construction of a 
house is considered excellent. It is important to real-
ize that, although IC techniques and silicon micro- 
and nanomachining (MEMS and NEMS) can achieve 
excellent absolute tolerances, relative tolerances 
here are rather poor compared with those achieved 
by most mechanical machining techniques. The 
decrease in manufacturing accuracy with decreasing 
size is rarely mentioned in discussions of Si microma-
chines; this probably is because Si micromachining 
originated from electrical engineering practice rather 
than mechanical engineering. The contrast is strik-
ing; in mechanical machining, relative tolerances of 
10−6 (ppm) are becoming standard, whereas in the 
IC industry, a 10−2 relative tolerance is considered 
good. The definition of precision machining, with 
relative tolerances of 10−4, excludes micromachining! 
To describe micromachining with the same termi-
nology, it must be expanded to cover all machining 
methods where the relative accuracies are at least 10−4 
or where absolute size in one or more dimensions is 
in the micrometer range.
In Figure 6.5 we also show the domains covered 
by the various machining options such as MEMS, 
NEMS, micro-/mesoscale manufacturing, and con-
ventional/ultraprecision engineering. We see that 
IC, MEMS, and NEMS processes cover smaller abso-
lute sizes, whereas their relative accuracies remain 
poor compared with those of conventional and 
ultraprecision manufacturing. IC-based machining 
in the relatively poor 10−1 to 10−2 relative accuracy 
range is also restricted in the types of engineering 
materials that can be used (Si, SiO2, Si3N4, Al, …). 
There is an important micro-/mesoscale machining 
size range for applications with sizes between 10 µm 
and 1 mm, bridging the gap between silicon-based 
IC manufacturing and MEMS/NEMS and conven-
tional miniature machining (Figure 6.6). This is a 
difficult size range to conquer: too large for IC man-
ufacturing techniques and too small for traditional 
machining. It forms the needed hand-shake technol-
ogy between the micro- and the macroworld. The 
bandwidth of sizes that can be attained with ultra-
precision machining makes it an attractive candi-
date for this application range. Ultrahigh-precision 
techniques cover a wide range of materials, and they 
are—in contrast to IC methods—truly 3D and may 
even produce freeform surfaces. A freeform surface 
is a kind of complex, irregular, asymmetric aspheri-
cal surface. Generally, it cannot be described with 
an equation but usually only by a series of digital 
points. Unfortunately, whereas microscale tech-
nologies are well established in the microelectron-
ics industry, the same cannot be said for mesoscale 
products involving complex 3D geometry and high 
relative accuracies in a range of nonsilicon materials. 
Thus, there is need for a strong focus on mesoscale 
manufacturing methods because our NEMS and 
MEMS devices would be rendered worthless if we 
cannot contact or package them.
“Precision machining,” when used by mechanical 
engineers, has typically been reserved for removal 
processes only, whereas “micromachining,” as used 
to describe IC, MEMS, and NEMS fabrication tech-
nology, covers both removal and forming processes. 
Precision machining and IC, MEMS, and NEMS are 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   357
FIGURE 6.6 Mesoscale machining.

[Page 358]
complementary; all strive to improve absolute and 
relative tolerances, with IC-, MEMS-, and NEMS-
based technology better at obtaining smaller fea-
tures (absolute tolerance) and traditional methods 
better at obtaining tighter relative tolerances. In 
this book, precision and ultraprecision machining 
encompasses removal and forming processes, with 
MEMS and NEMS as one of its newest disciplines.
The adjectives nontraditional and nonconven-
tional have been in use by mechanical engineers 
for at least the past 30 years to describe nonme-
chanical machining methods such as thermal, 
electrochemical, and chemical machining of high 
strength and corrosion- and wear-resistant materi-
als. However, the name nontraditional has become 
obsolete because “nonconventional” machining 
methods have found a wide range of commercial 
applications even with more readily machined 
materials.14 In this book we refer to all top-down, 
non-IC manufacturing techniques as traditional 
machining techniques. In our nomenclature, IC-, 
MEMS-, and NEMS-based micromachining tech-
niques are the nontraditional machining methods 
of our day. In making a manufacturing decision, it 
is not so much a question of which manufacturing 
technique is better or newer (very often, since the 
1960s, silicon was the answer, sometimes indepen-
dent of the question), but more which one is appro-
priate to use for the problem at hand.
Ultraprecision machining is significantly more 
expensive than normal machining and precision 
machining, especially when many abrasive machin-
ing steps are involved. Abrasive processes are fin-
ishing processes that are used to remove surplus 
material from the work piece surface. It is usually 
used on almost any surface that has been previously 
rough machined and is among the most expensive 
processes because it is generally slow in remov-
ing material. However, as we will learn, they can 
machine extremely hard surfaces and can be used 
on materials that are beyond the limits of virtu-
ally all other mechanical machining processes. In 
Table 6.1 available mechanical, electronic, and opti-
cal products are listed and categorized according to 
their tolerance band.
In general, to obtain the best possible accuracies 
with a given technique, materials such as wood or 
brick cannot be used; form-stable and workable 
materials such as aluminum, stainless steel, ceram-
ics, or glasses must be used. In other words, material 
properties and machining accuracy are intertwined.
Ultraprecision Mechanical Machining
Introduction
In mechanical removal processes, stresses induced 
by a tool overcome the strength of the material. The 
process can produce complex 3D shapes, with very 
good dimensional control and good surface finishes. 
The method tends to be wasteful of material and 
expensive in terms of labor and capital. How well 
a part made from a given material holds its shape 
with time and stress is referred to as the dimensional 
stability of the part and the material. To maximize 
dimensional stability, the machine design engineer 
tries to minimize the ratios of applied and residual 
stress to yield strength of the material. A good 
rule of thumb is to keep the static stress less than 
10–20% of yield. Increased heat at the work piece 
causes uneven dimensional changes in the part 
being machined, making it difficult to control its 
dimensional accuracy and tolerances. Thermal errors 
are often the dominant type of error in a precision 
machine, and thermal characteristics such as thermal 
expansion coefficient and thermal conductivity 
deserve special attention.5
Mechanical removal processes can be broken 
down into four commonly recognized categories: 
turning, milling, drilling, and grinding. Turning 
operations involve rotating a part and bringing it 
into contact with a fixed cutting tool. Mostly, turn-
ing makes parts that have a round cross-section 
such as screws, shafts, and pistons. Mills are used on 
a variety of materials, ranging from wood to met-
als, to shape a part. A mill’s working feature is its 
revolving armature that can have a number of dif-
ferent tool-bit shapes. These shapes are used to cut 
out the different features of a part. A “block” of bulk 
material (e.g., steel) or a rough casting is secured to 
the mill, and either a manual operator or program 
(CNC) operates the machine, maintaining the cut-
ting processes until the final milled product is pro-
duced. Machine drilling is normally done with a drill 
358   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 359]
press or a boring machine. Tools that are used to 
produce holes are called bits. They are held in place 
in the drill press by clamping them in a chuck or 
by inserting them into a tapered sleeve. Grinding is 
a finishing process that is used to remove surplus 
material from the work piece surface. It is usually 
used on almost any surface that has been previously 
rough machined and is among the most expensive 
processes because it is generally slow in removing 
material. These four processes are characterized by 
the fact that each process generates chips, and each 
of these process categories has unique characteris-
tics such as available materials, acceptable tolerance 
ranges, surface finish, part, and tooling costs.*
* A useful glossary for terms used in metal removal and manufacturing 
processes in general can be found at http://instruct1.cit.cornell.edu/
courses/orie310/mfgproc/mfgprocsummary.html, and an introduction 
to machine tools can be found at http://me.mit.edu/2.70/machine/out 
line.html and at http://engide.bizland.com/mfg-5-machine.htm.
A lathe is a machine for shaping a piece of material, 
such as wood or metal, by rotating it rapidly along 
its axis while pressing a fixed cutting or abrading 
tool against it. Lathes are among the more versatile 
of the machine shop tools. They have the capability 
of generating true round surfaces, flat surfaces, and 
also screw threads. The various operations of the 
lathe include turning, facing, boring, drilling, part-
ing, and threading.
Given that we are mostly interested in micro- 
and nanomachines, we focus our attention here 
on ultraprecision single-point machining and 
abrasive machining for finishing a product. The 
former is a type of ultraprecision machining where 
submicrometer form accuracy and nanometer-level 
surface finish are achieved by using high-precision, 
high-stiffness machine tools and single-point cutting 
tools. The latter is a process that removes small 
amounts of material from a work piece in the form of 
tiny chips through the contact of small, hard, sharp, 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   359
TABLE 6.1 Tolerances of Components of Some Commonly Available Products
Tolerance 
Band (±)
Mechanical
Electronic
Optical
Normal machining
200 μm
Normal domestic 
appliances and 
automotive fittings, etc.
General purpose electric 
parts, e.g., switches
Camera, telescope, and 
binocular bodies
50 μm
General purpose 
mechanical parts for 
typewriters, engines, 
etc.
Transistors, diodes, 
magnetic heads for tape 
recorders
Camera shutters, lens 
holders for cameras 
and microscopes
Precision machining
5 μm
Mechanical watch parts, 
machine tool bearings, 
gears, ball screws, 
rotary compressor parts
Electrical relays, resistors, 
condensers, silicon wafers 
TV color masks
Lenses, prisms, optical 
fiber and connectors 
(multimode)
0.5 μm
Ball and roller bearings, 
precision drawing wire, 
hydraulic servo-valves, 
aerostatic bearings, ink 
jet nozzles, 
aerodynamic gyro 
bearings
Magnetic scales, CCD 
(charged-coupled device), 
quartz oscillators, 
magnetic memory 
bubbles, magnetron, IC 
line width, thin film 
pressure transducers, 
thermal printer heads, 
thin film head discs
Precision lenses, optical 
scales, IC exposure 
masks (photo, x-ray), 
laser polygon mirrors, 
x-ray mirrors, 
monomode optical 
fiber and connectors
Ultraprecision 
machining
0.05 μm
Gauge blocks, diamond 
indenter tip radius, 
microtome cutter edge 
radius, ultraprecision 
x-y tables
IC memories, electronic 
video discs, LSI
Optical flats, precision 
Fresnel lenses, optical 
diffraction gratings, 
optical video discs
0.005 μm
VLSI, superlattice thin films
Ultraprecision 
diffraction gratings
Source: McKeown, P.A. 1986. Institute of Mechanical Engineers Proceedings 200:76.15

[Page 360]
nonmetallic particles. In the abrasive machining 
section we review abrasive wheel machining, in 
particular electrolytic in-process dressing (ELID), 
ultrasonic machining (USM), water jet, abrasive 
water jet (AWJ), and abrasive jet machining (AJM).
Single-Point Mechanical Machining
In mechanical single-point machining, various fac-
tors such as deformation of the work piece and tool, 
vibration, thermal deformation, inaccuracies of 
machine tools, and so on affect the machining accu-
racy. Tools for single-point machining include the 
following materials: carbon and medium alloy steels, 
high-speed steels, cast-cobalt alloys, carbides, coated 
tools, alumina-based ceramics, cubic boron nitride, 
silicon-nitride-base ceramics, diamond, and whis-
ker-reinforced materials. Single-point machining 
falls into these four types of machining: 1) straight 
turning, 2) cutting off, 3) slab milling, and 4) end 
milling as illustrated in Figure 6.7.
The types of chip formation in these mechanical 
single-point machining processes are continuous, 
discontinuous, built-up edge, and oblique cutting. 
Most machining operations involve oblique cutting 
and lead to the familiar rolled-up chips. Built-up 
edges affect the performance of a cutting tool 
because of their hardness and the perceived dulling 
of the tool. Chip breakers are used to prevent discon-
tinuous chips from forming (see Figure 6.8).
As in all metalworking processes where plastic 
deformation is involved, the energy dissipated in 
cutting is converted into heat that in turn increases 
the temperature in the cutting zone. Excessive heat 
decreases the strength, hardness, stiffness, and wear 
resistance of the cutting tool; tools also may soften 
and undergo plastic deformation, and thus the tool 
shape is altered.
Ultrahigh-precision machines with sharp single-
crystal diamond tools have made submicrometer 
precision machining possible. Single-point diamond 
turning is less labor intensive than grinding and 
polishing (see “Abrasive Machining” below). A well-
defined single-point tool is more predictable than a 
multipoint grinding wheel. Diamond-turned optical 
components have surfaces with a better metallurgical 
structure compared with the ones made from polishing 
and lapping. The time required to make optical qual-
ity mirrors and spheres using polishing and lapping 
methods is in the range of weeks, whereas the same or 
better quality parts can be completely fabricated from 
blanks using diamond turning in a few days.
A desktop high-precision four-axes CNC machine 
(four degrees of freedom)* for making microparts 
using milling and µ-ΕDM in a desktop machine was 
introduced in Chapter 5 (Figure 5.8). The single-
 crystal diamond cutter of this hybrid desktop 
machine was featured in Figure 5.11. In Figure 6.9a, 
we show a scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
photograph of a single-crystal diamond tool bit. The 
* The degrees of freedom (DOF) of a machine refers to the number 
of independent axes along which one can obtain relative motion 
between the tool and the work piece. One can achieve this either by 
moving the tool or moving the work piece. The DOF does not include 
the spindle rotation or tool translation that is responsible for the cut-
ting action. More than three DOF generally allows one to rotate the 
table or the work piece to achieve the correct angular relationship 
between the work piece and the cutter. This can help to reduce the 
number of separate fixturing steps and achieve smoother contours.
360   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 6.7 Single-point mechanical machining types.
FIGURE 6.8 Chip formation during diamond milling.

[Page 361]
radius of the edge on this bit is estimated at less than 
0.05 µm; with such a tool, submicrometer grooves 
equivalent to those produced by silicon microma-
chining can be generated (Figure 6.9b).16 The sin-
gle hard point on the lathe in Figure 6.10 may be 
made from natural or synthetic diamond. Synthetic 
diamonds are preferred because natural diamonds 
have flaws that at times make them unpredictable. 
Ultraprecision cutting tools need to be hard and 
sharp, as well as have enhanced thermal proper-
ties to maintain their size and shape while cut-
ting. High hot hardness means higher speeds and 
feed rates (higher production rates and lower costs). 
Advantages offered by diamond, the hardest mate-
rial known today, include:
 
◾Crystalline structure with a well-maintained 
sharp cutting edge
 
◾High thermal conductivity, the highest of any 
material at room temperature
 
◾Ability to retain high strength at high 
temperature
 
◾High elastic and shear moduli, which reduce 
deformation during machining
 
◾High wear resistance
 
◾Low friction
 
◾Produces a very accurate cut and good surface 
finish
 
◾Most effective in light uninterrupted finishing 
cuts
However, diamond is chemically attacked by 
ferrous materials at high temperatures and is gener-
ally unsuitable for the machining of steels and nickel 
alloys. This is because of the very high wear  rate 
of  the  diamond, resulting in nonviable tool costs 
for those applications. Diamond bits can be applied 
to most nonferrous metals, polymers, and crystals. 
Boron nitride in the forms of single-crystal cubic 
boron nitride (CBN) and microcrystalline cubic boron 
nitride (MCBN) under trade names such as Borazon 
or Borpax is used for precision cutting of hardened 
ferrous metals and high-temperature alloys.
Diamond machining is used for machining of 
nonferrous metals such as aluminum and copper, 
which are difficult materials on which to obtain 
a mirror surface by grinding, lapping, or polish-
ing. This is because these metals are relatively soft, 
and the abrasive processes scratch the finished 
surface and, furthermore, are unable to produce 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   361
FIGURE 6.9 Diamond ultrahigh-precision tools. (a) Single-crystal diamond tool. Angle of tool is 20°. Maximum depth 
of cut is 500 mm. (b) Microgroove produced by diamond machining a 100-mm-thick Al foil. Width is 85 mm and depth 
is 70 mm.
Toolholder
Diamond-cutting tool
Spindle
Vacuum chuck
Aluminum
foil
v
FIGURE 6.10 Diamond tool on a lathe for precision 
mechanical machining. Ultrahigh-precision milling of 
grooves in aluminum foil. The aluminum foil is 100 µm 
thick, and the grooves are 85 µm wide and 70 mm deep.

[Page 362]
high levels of flatness at the edges of the machined 
surface.
The single-crystal diamond tool refinements are 
not the only reason for the high precision achieved 
today; submicrometer precision is also achieved 
through high- stiffness machine beds, air bearings 
(air bearings with a rotational precision of  0.01 µm and 
better are available), and measurement systems such 
as laser interferometry. Furthermore, highly precise 
instruments such as servomotors, feedback devices, 
and computers have been implemented, and many 
types of machine tools are now equipped for  computer 
numerical control (CNC), further improving precision 
and reproducibility of the manufactured parts.
In mechanical micromachining processes, the 
effects of scaling on the process mechanism— 
including chip formation, cutting forces, vibration, 
process stability, and the surface integrity of the 
machined components—are some of the important 
issues that are not fully understood. The impact of 
work piece size on factors such as minimum chip 
thickness, surface quality, burr formation, built-up 
edge formation, and microstructure effects has been 
reported as summarized in Ehmann et al.12 These 
reports reveal that ploughing and elastic recovery 
of the work piece plays a more significant role the 
more closely the chip thickness approaches the cut-
ting edge radius of the cutting tool.
Various modeling techniques—including molec-
ular dynamics (MD) simulation, finite element 
method (FEM), multiscale simu lation modeling, 
and mechanistic modeling—have been attempted 
to characterize  micromachining processes better. 
Simulation technologies for mahining processes 
such as FEM simulation of cutting, kinematical sim-
ulation of grinding, computational fluid dynamics 
(CFD) simulation of abrasive flow machining, and 
CFD simulation of electrical discharge machin-
ing (EDM) have been used for machining at the 
microscale level. These methods expand the process 
know-how and help to control development costs 
and define process limits. Using a diamond tip and 
numerical control (NC), rice grain-sized cars were 
machined at Nippondenso. One of these cars was 
4.785 mm long, 1.73 mm wide, and 1.736 mm tall 
as shown in Figure 6.11.17 In 1995, the Guinness 
Book of Records awarded a world record certificate to 
Nippondenso Co., Ltd. (now DENSO Corporation) 
for the development of this world’s smallest motor-
ized car. The DENSO Micro-Car is a miniature ver-
sion of Toyota’s first passenger car, the 1936 Model 
AA sedan. Its size is astounding: 1/1000th the size of 
the original car, or about the size of a grain of rice.
The Micro-Car has 24 parts that come in 13 dif-
ferent types, including body, tires, spare tire, wheels, 
axle, bearings, headlights, rear lights, front bumper, 
rear bumper, step, number plate, and emblem. The 
shell of the car was made by the sacrificial mold 
technique. A piece of aluminum was NC-machined 
and plated with 30-µm-thick electroless Ni; after 
cutting off the lower part of the body with EDM, 
the Al was removed by KOH etching. Finally, the Ni 
362   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 6.11 Micro-Car and rice grains (a) and Micro-Car on sandpaper (grain size = 200 mm) (b). The car is 7 mm long, 
2.3 mm wide, and 3 mm high. (From Bier, W., G. Linder, D. Seidel, and K. Schubert. 1991. KfK Nachrichten 165;16 and 
Teshigahara, A., et al. 1995. J Microelectromech Syst 4:76. With permission.17)

[Page 363]
car shell was Au coated to protect it from oxidation. 
The stainless chassis and wheels were also made by 
NC machining, and the core shaft and coil of the 
motor were made by NC machining and EDM. Wet 
etching of aluminum-coated glass was used for the 
registration plate and the emblem. A 250-µm bear-
ing hole was drilled in the chassis for the zirconia 
wheel shaft. A stepping motor drives the car electro-
magnetically. The tube-shaped barium ferrite rotor, 
formed using grinding, was permanently magne-
tized with a special tool. The Micro-Car is powered 
via two 25-µm copper wires. Unfortunately, lubrica-
tion has drawbacks for microsystems, including high 
viscosity and adhesive effects. Therefore, the wear 
on the bearings is a limiting factor. Despite this, the 
car can run as fast as 100 mm/s, which is fast at this 
scale. The electromagnetic step motor is driven by 
an external magnetic field, and the car’s permanent 
barium ferrite rotor runs at a maximum speed of 
100 mm/s, developing a torque of about 10–6 Nm (at 
3 V and 20 mA). To assemble the various microparts 
into a complete car, a cyanoacrylate adhesive and a 
mechanical micromanipulator, ordinarily used for 
handling biological cells, were used.17
FANUC’s ROBOnano Ui is an ultraprecision 
 multifunction micromachining station capable of 
making such high-precision parts as the mold for 
diffraction gratings or aspheric lenses (http://www.
fanuc.co.jp/en/product/robonano/index.htm) 
(see 
the machine in heading of this chapter). This super-
precision micromachining equipment consists of 
a diamond milling tool rotating at high speed on 
a superprecision positioning table with 1-nm step 
resolution and a rotation resolution of 0.00001°. It 
is a five-axis mill with all linear slides on air bear-
ings. The machining operation is enclosed in an air 
shower with an environment controlled to within 
0.01°C. The single-crystal diamond cutting tool is 
capable of generating 3D free curved surfaces. The 
machine is compact with a footprint of 1.27 m × 
1.42 m and a height of 1.5 m and comes at a cost of 
$1 million. It is not available outside Japan at this 
time. Using this setup, FANUC succeeded in relief 
engraving a minute, mirror-surfaced Noh mask in 
copper with a “diamond end mill,” which results 
in a surface smoother than a mirror. The roughness 
of the forehead (Rmax) of the mask is 60 nm (see 
heading of this chapter). Thus, FANUC has realized 
a superprecision micromachining technique that 
allows mirror finishing in any direction except in a 
narrow groove. The machine was commercialized 
after 17 years of development by roughly 30 people. 
The ROBOnano is used to machine mirrors, filters, 
gratings, liquid crystal display panels, small lenses, 
and other small ultraprecise parts.
A similar milling machine from Germany is 
the 5-Axis-HP-Milling Center Gamma High Per-
formance 303 by WISSNER GmbH (Göttingen) 
shown in Figure 6.12. In Figure 6.13 a demonstra-
tion microstructure made on this machine, by the 
Fraunhofer Gesellschaft Institute for Production 
Systems (IPK) in Berlin, is shown.
A common limitation of the single-point dia-
mond turning and grinding machines is their 
inherent ability to generate only rotationally 
 symmetrical surfaces. Although these geometries 
cover the majority of requirements, there is an 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   363
FIGURE 6.12 5-Axis-HP-Milling Center Gamma High 
Performance 303 by WISSNER GmbH, Göttingen, Germany.
FIGURE 6.13 Demonstration on the 5-Axis-HP-Milling 
Center Gamma High Performance 303 by WISSNER GmbH 
(Göttingen, Germany) shown in Figure 6.12 by IPK (Berlin).

[Page 364]
increasing demand for optics to incorporate more 
random, freeform geometries. Examples of these 
“freeform” geometries might be advanced laser 
printer optics or “conformal” windows that blend 
into the leading edge of an aircraft’s wing. A new 
breed of multiaxis machines has been developed 
that are able to generate shapes that are no lon-
ger limited to rotational symmetry but extend to 
these freeform geometries. An example fabrication 
approach, to make, e.g., a freeform optical lens, 
is called computer-controlled fabrication (CCF). 
This may include 1) CNC grinding, 2) CNC lap-
ping, 3) profile measuring, 4) computer-controlled 
corrective lapping, and 5) CNC polishing. After 
CNC grinding, a basic freeform surface with “peak-
valley” structure is obtained. CNC lapping gets 
rid of the “peak- valley” and microcrack layer and 
decreases the surface  roughness without lower-
ing accuracy. A profile of the freeform lens is then 
measured with a computer-controlled coordinate 
measuring machine, and the machining error is 
obtained through a comparison between the mea-
sured data and theoretical profile data. A computer-
controlled corrective lapping (CCCL) process then 
provides the corrective NC code by using the error 
data. Profile measuring and CCCL are alternated 
until the required accuracy is reached. Finally, 
the freeform lens is polished on a CNC polishing 
machine tool to lower the surface roughness.
Moore Nanotechnology Systems LLC, a US com-
pany, developed the Nanotech 220UPL (Figure 6.14) 
that is considered by many the most accurate 
 diamond-turning machine in the world because 
of its groove-compensated air-bearing spindle 
that provides motion accuracy of less than 50 nm 
through its 1500-rpm speed range. Single-point 
diamond turning and deterministic microgrinding 
technologies are used for the production of plano, 
spherical, aspherical, conformal, and freeform 
optics as described above. The Nanotech 220UPL 
two-axis CNC single-point diamond turning lathe 
from Moore Nanotechnology Systems (Keene, NH) 
can be used to make many types of medical devices. 
Some applications include in vivo miniature pumps, 
injection-molded electroless nickel mold inserts 
for syringes, endoscopic lenses, or pipettes and 
implants.
Another trend in mechanical machining is toward 
flexible manufacturing. In response to the need for 
automation and the demands created by frequent 
design changes over a broad variety of products, 
the flexible manufacturing system (FMS) was devel-
oped. FMS is a combination of several technolo-
gies such as computers, CNC workstations, robots, 
transport bands, computer-aided design, and auto-
matic storage. The technique was developed to pro-
duce many varieties of a certain product in smaller 
quantities rather than many devices of one type. 
CNC workstations are linked by automatic work 
piece transfer and handling, with flexible routing 
and automatic work piece loading and unloading.18 
This philosophy also underlies desktop factory 
design (see “Desktop Machining” below).
Ultraprecision manufacturing is the commercially 
preferred technique for the production of computer 
hard disks, mirrors for x-ray applications, photo-
copier drums, commercial optics such as polygon 
mirrors for laser-beam printers, consumer electron-
ics such as mold inserts for the production of com-
pact disc reader heads and camcorder viewfinders, 
and high-definition television (HDTV) projection 
lenses and VCR scanning heads.
A tutorial on mechanical drilling and milling can 
be found at http://www.me.mtu.edu/~microweb. 
364   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 6.14 Moore Nanotechnology Systems LLC, a 
US company, developed The Nanotech 220UPL that is 
considered by many the most accurate diamond-turning 
machine in the world because of its groove-compensated 
air-bearing spindle that provides motion accuracy of less 
than 50 nm of the whole 1500-rpm range.

[Page 365]
For more information on estimating manufacturing 
accuracies, consult http://www.isr.umd.edu/Labs/
CIM/vm/ama/node19.html. Custom houses will 
typically report as best mechanical machining tol-
erances ±2 µm for cutting and ±0.4 µm for grind-
ing (e.g., Burman tool at http://www.burman.co.uk/
engineering/Machining.htm).
Abrasive Machining
Introduction
Abrasive machining is a process that removes small 
amounts of material from a work piece in the 
form of tiny chips through the contact of small, 
hard, sharp, nonmetallic abrasive particles. These 
abrasive particles may be attached to a spinning 
wheel (bonded), embedded in a slurry (loose), or 
impacted on a surface in a jet (impact). Abrasive 
methods in each of these categories are summa-
rized in Figure 6.15.
Common types of abrasive machining processes 
using bonded abrasives include grinding, honing,* 
and microhoning. Lapping,† buffing, polishing, 
and ultrasonic machining (USM) use loose abra-
sive grit. Honing, microhoning, and lapping are 
usually termed finishing operations (also tertiary 
manufacturing methods). In USM, also called 
ultrasonic impact grinding, high-frequency vibrations 
delivered to a tool embedded in an abrasive slurry 
create accurate cavities of virtually any shape. 
Water jet, abrasive water jet (AWJ), and abrasive jet 
machining (AJM) are examples of abrasive impact 
machining.
The abrasive grit or cutter needs to be harder 
than the material to be cut (see Table 6.2). Natural 
abrasives include emery, corundum, quartz, gar-
net, and diamond. However, natural abrasives con-
tain unknown amounts of impurities and possess 
* In honing, a simultaneous rotating and reciprocating motion 
between an abrasive stone and the work piece causes the removal of a 
small amount of material. The resulting work piece surface is one of 
high precision and uniform finish.
† The process of wearing down the surface of a softer material by rub-
bing it under pressure against the surface of a harder material that 
has been formed in the shape opposite to that desired on the softer 
material. Loose, wet abrasive generally is used between the two 
parts, but sometimes the abrasive is embedded in the lap in a rigid 
form (see diamond cutting tool).
nonuniform properties, and as a result, aluminum 
oxide and silicon carbide abrasives are made syn-
thetically. Conventional synthetic abrasives include 
aluminum oxide (Al2O3) and silicon carbide (SiC); 
superabrasives include cubic boron nitride (CBN) 
and diamond.
 
1. Aluminum oxide (Al2O3) known as Alundum 
or Aloxide. Various substances may be added to 
enhance hardness, toughness, and so on. Plain 
Al2O3 is white and used to grind steel, ferrous, 
and high-strength alloys.
 
2. Silicon carbide (SiC) known in trade as Carbo-
rundum and Crystalon. Harder than Al2O3 but 
not as tough. Used to grind aluminum, brass, 
stainless steel, cast irons, and certain brittle 
ceramics.
 
3. Boron nitride in the forms of single-crystal 
CBN and microcrystalline cubic boron nitride 
(MCBN) under trade names such as Borazon or 
Borpax. Used for hard materials such as hard-
ened tool steels and aerospace alloys.
 
4. Diamond, a pure form of carbon, both natural 
and artificial. Used on hard materials such as 
ceramics, cemented carbides, and glass.
The temperature increase during abrasive machin-
ing can be very high (3000ºF). Chips carry away 
heat, but a larger fraction of heat is conducted into 
the work piece. The effect of the temperature increase 
is more pronounced than in metal cutting, and the 
excessive temperature increase caused by grinding 
can temper or soften hardened metals. Abrasive 
machining is used when a very fine surface finish 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   365
Abrasive machining
Bonded
Loose
Impact
Grinding
  Surface
Cylindrical
Centerless
Internal
Creep-feed
Honing
Coated abrasives
Lapping
Ultrasonic machining
Barrel finishing
Bu ing
Polishing
Grit blasting
Hydrohoning
Water jet cutting
Abrasive jet cutting
Abrasive flow
machining
FIGURE 6.15 Categories of abrasive machining according 
to the matrix of the abrasive grit.

[Page 366]
and good dimensional accuracy are required and/or 
when the work piece materials are too hard or too 
brittle to work by other methods. The method is 
typically much slower than single-point mechanical 
machining (see above).
Grinding
Here, as a first example of an abrasive process and 
as an introduction to electrolytic in-process dress-
ing (ELID) (see next section), we survey grinding. In 
grinding, the chip-removal process uses an abrasive 
grain or grit as the cutting tool that is bonded to a 
very fast spinning grinding wheel (see Figure 6.16). 
The grinding wheel is usually disk shaped and is pre-
cisely balanced for high rotational speeds. Grinding 
wheels incorporate an abrasive from the list in 
Table 6.2. The properties of a grinding wheel that 
determine how it acts are the kind and size of abra-
sive, how closely the grains are packed together, and 
amount of the bonding material.
The individual abrasive grains have an irregular 
geometry and are spaced randomly along the pe riphery 
of the wheel. The radial position of these cutting grains 
varies, and the cutting edges are extremely small. The 
grain size is an important parameter in determin-
ing the quality of the surface finish and the material 
removal rate. Small grit sizes produce better finishes, 
and larger grit sizes permit larger material removal 
rates. Also, harder materials need smaller grain sizes 
to cut effectively, whereas softer materials require 
larger grit size. The grain size of the abrasives is mea-
sured as grit size: coarse grain 8–24, medium 30–60, 
fine 70–180, and very fine >220. The feeds and depths 
of the cut in grinding are small, whereas the cutting 
speed is high  (600 ft./min). As mentioned earlier, the 
temperature increase during abrasive machining can 
be very high (3000ºF). Chips carry away heat, but 
a larger fraction of heat is conducted into the work 
piece. The effect of the temperature increase is more 
pronounced than in metal cutting, and the excessive 
temperature increase caused by grinding can tem-
per or soften hardened metals. Burning chips are 
the sparks observed during grinding with no cutting 
fluid because the chips have heat energy to burn or 
melt in the atmosphere. Grinding may be classified as 
nonprecision or precision, according to purpose and 
procedure. In grinding, the chips are small but are 
formed by the same basic mechanism of compression 
and shear as in single-point machining (see above). 
There are three types of grain action in grinding:
 
1. Cutting: Grit can penetrate to the surface and 
performs chip removing.
 
2. Plowing: Grit can penetrate to the surface but can-
not perform cutting. The work surface deforms.
 
3. Rubbing: Grits rub to the surface, and energy is 
consumed without cutting.
Dressing a grinding wheel is the process of re -
sharpening the tiny cutting edges on a grinding 
wheel’s surface. Thus, dressing a grinding wheel is 
shaping the grinding face of the wheel; this is often 
done with computer-controlled shaping features 
with a diamond-dressing tool kept normal to the 
surface at point of contact (Figure 6.17). The dia-
mond dresses or turns the grinding wheel.
The machining energy in grinding is typically 
purely mechanical, but next we review a grinding 
366   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 6.2 Knoop Hardness for Various Materials
Common glass
350–500
Titanium nitride
2000
Flint, quartz
800–1100
Titanium carbide
1800–3200
Zirconium oxide
1000
Silicon carbide
2100–3000
Hardened steels
700–1300
Boron carbide
2800
Tungsten carbide
1800–2400
Cubic boron nitride
4000–5000
Aluminum oxide
2000–3000
Diamond
7000–8000
FIGURE 6.16 Common grinding wheels.

[Page 367]
process where electrochemistry plays a major role. 
In ELID, the material removal process (any material 
in this case) is purely mechanical, but an electro-
chemical dissolution process of the metal matrix 
dresses the abrasive wheel, with superabrasives 
embedded in a metal matrix, continuously.
Nanofinishing of Surfaces with 
Electrolytic In-Process Dressing
A nanosurface finish of a wide variety of brittle 
materials is becoming a more important demand 
in IC fabrication, MEMS, and NEMS. For example, 
a nanosurface finish is a necessity for printing 
nanowiring circuits using lithography techniques. 
The surface finish of Si wafers polished using 
chemomechanical polishing is found still less than 
ideal (see Chapter 1). To obtain a nanofinish, chip 
removal from the surface that is being grinded 
should be minimized. A nanosurface is only possible 
when the chip size of the material being removed 
reaches atomic level. Finishing with superabrasive 
grits [like diamond or cubic boron nitride (CBN)] 
is the method of choice to achieve these types of 
surfaces, but superabrasive grits need very good 
bonding strength to the matrix that holds them for 
better efficiency. Recent developments of ductile 
mode machining show that plastically deformed 
chip removal minimizes the subsurface damage 
of the work piece and that when chip deformation 
takes place in the ductile regime, a defect-free 
nanosurface is possible—completely eliminating 
the polishing process! Metal-bonded superabrasive 
grinding wheels in principle offer the solution here: 
they have the required higher bonding strength of 
the metal to the superabrasive grit and the required 
high mechanical stability. The major problems 
encountered using such superabrasive metal bonded 
wheels are that during grinding they get loaded and 
glazed. To avoid these difficulties, the wheel must 
be dressed periodically (see Figure 6.18), which 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   367
FIGURE 6.17 Shaping the grinding face of a wheel by dressing it with computer-controlled shaping features. Note that 
the diamond dressing tool is normal to the surface at point of contact.
FIGURE 6.18 The ELID setup (a) and the mechanism of ELID grinding (b). (Ohmori, H., and T. Nakagawa. 1990. Annals 
CIRP 39:329.19)

[Page 368]
makes the grinding process very tedious. It is here 
that electrolytic in-process dressing (ELID) provides 
an elegant solution that eliminates both the wheel 
loading and glazing problems.
ELID is a mechanical grinding operation where 
the abrasive grit, embedded in a metal matrix, is 
kept fresh by an electrochemical dissolution process 
of the metal matrix. The method applies to metal 
and nonmetal substrates.
The concept of ELID was developed by Ohmori, 
chief scientist at RIKEN.19 The system uses a metal 
bond grinding wheel (tool), a power supply, a grind-
ing fluid (electrolyte), and a counter electrode as 
sketched in Figure 6.18a. It is important to notice 
that the work piece is not in the electrical circuit; 
thus, the grinding action here is purely mechanical, 
and the electrochemical assist is only there to keep 
the abrasive grit fresh. The metal bond wheel is made 
the positive electrode, whereas a negative electrode is 
positioned about 0.1–0.3 mm below the wheel face. 
The grinding fluid is supplied between the two. The 
grinding wheel (tool) used is the metal bond wheel in 
which bonding material is composed mainly of cast 
iron and cobalt and is sintered with the abrasive grit. 
The wheel is dressed using electrolysis during grind-
ing, which helps to maintain larger grain protru-
sions and grit density. A DC pulse voltage is supplied 
between the two electrodes to electrolytically remove 
only the metal bond of the wheel, allowing efficient 
and automatic dressing of the wheel. This dressing is 
continued even during the grinding work to prevent 
reduced wheel sharpness from wear, thereby real-
izing highly efficient mirror-surface grinding. The 
mechanism of the ELID grinding method is sketched 
in Figure 6.18b. First the wheel bond is electrolyzed, 
which causes the abrasives to protrude appropri-
ately (1). This process at the same time produces a 
 nonconductive oxidized iron, which accumulates to 
form a coating on the wheel surface, automatically 
reducing the electrolysis current. Initial or predress-
ing is completed at this point (2). When the grinding 
work is started in this state, the nonconductive oxide 
layer on the wheel surface comes in contact with the 
surface of the work piece and is removed by friction. 
As this takes places, the abrasives start to grind the 
work piece, and subsequently start to gradually wear 
(3). This reduces the insulation of the wheel surface, 
allowing the electrolytic current to flow again. As a 
result, the whole process starts again with the elec-
trolysis of the wheel bond where the nonconductive 
oxide coating between the worn-out abrasives has 
become thin (4), allowing the abrasives to protrude 
again. This is called the ELID cycle. The ELID cycle 
varies according to the type of metal bond of the 
wheel used, electrolytic conditions, work piece, and 
grinding conditions. A surface finish of 2 nm may be 
achieved using ELID (20–50 N force for grinding).
ELID grinding is highly suitable for achieving 
nanosurface finishes on metals and  nonmetals alike. 
Different types of ELID process are amen able for 
machining and finishing of all types of microshapes, 
and a nanosurface finish can be achieved using 
 ductile mode machining on hard and brittle materi-
als. ELID grinding can produce ductile surfaces with-
out any subsurface damage, which eliminates the 
lapping and polishing processes. Thus, surface finish 
can be improved with higher accuracy and tolerance 
because the component is produced using only one 
process. The method is applied to process material 
such as silicon, glass, ceramics, extremely hard steel 
materials, and composite materials. Conventional 
applications include semiconductor substrates; elec-
tronic/optical components, such as lenses, magnetic 
heads, hard-disk substrates, and optical connectors; 
and the production of metal molds.
The major remaining difficulties with this tech-
nique are the lack of feedback devices to control the 
in-process dressing, optimization of machining con-
ditions, and modeling of ductile mode grinding.
For up-to-date information on ELID, visit the web 
site of NEXSYS (http://www.nexsys.co.jp/index_e.
htm) see Figure 6.19 for a NEXSYS desktop ELID 
machine. NEXSYS is an authorized RIKEN ven-
ture company established in June 1998 to provide 
services committed to spreading new fabrication 
technologies, mainly ELID mirror-surface grind-
ing method developed at the Materials Fabrication 
Laboratory of RIKEN (The Institute of Physical and 
Chemical Research).
Ultrasonic Machining
Diamond tool machining is not only limited in the 
number of feature shapes and sizes that are pos-
sible it is also time consuming. Electrical discharge 
368   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 369]
machining [(EDM), see Chapter 5)] is only suitable 
for use on conductive materials and because, just 
like laser beam machining [(LBM), see Chapter 5)], 
it is a thermal process, a heat-affected zone (HAZ) 
often has a negative impact on the end use of parts, 
especially in the case of high-reliability applications. 
In contrast, ultrasonic machining (USM) is a non-
thermal, non-chemical and non-electrical machin-
ing process that leaves the chemical composition, 
material microstructure and physical properties of 
the work piece unchanged. This mechanical process 
can be used to generate a wide range of intricate fea-
tures in both conductive and non-metallic materials 
with hardnesses of greater than 40 HRC (Rockwell 
Hardness measured in the C scale). The USM process 
can be used to fabricate precision micro-features, 
round and odd-shaped holes, blind cavities, and OD/
ID features. Multiple features can be drilled in paral-
lel, often reducing the total machining time signifi-
cantly. Ultrasonic waves are sound waves of frequency 
higher than 20,000 Hz and can be generated using 
mechanical, electromagnetic, and thermal energy 
sources. They can be produced in gases (including 
air), liquids, and solids. One of the first applications 
for ultrasound was SONAR (an acronym for sound 
navigation ranging). It was used on a large scale by 
the US Navy during World War II to detect enemy 
submarines. Today’s ultrasonic applications include 
medical imaging (scanning the unborn fetus), testing 
for cracks in airplane construction, and machining.
In ultrasonic machining (USM), also called ultra-
sonic grinding, high-frequency vibrations delivered 
to a tool tip, embedded in an abrasive slurry, by a 
booster or sonotrode, create accurate cavities of virtu-
ally any shape; that is, “negatives” of the tool. Almost 
any hard and brittle material, including aluminum 
oxides, silicon, silicon carbide, silicon nitride, glass, 
quartz, sapphire, ferrite, fiberoptics, and so on, can 
be ultrasonically machined. The tool does not exert 
any pressure on the work piece (drilling without 
drills) and is often made from a softer material than 
the work piece, e.g., from brass, cold-rolled steel, or 
stainless steel, and wears only slightly.20 Tool mate-
rial should be tough and ductile (low carbon steels 
and stainless steels give good performance). Tools 
are usually about 25 mm long, with a size equal to 
the “hole size” minus twice the size of abrasives. The 
mass of tool should be as small as possible so that it 
does not absorb the ultrasonic energy. The tool, typ-
ically vibrating at a low amplitude of 0.025 mm at a 
frequency of 20–100 kHz, is gradually fed into the 
work piece to form a cavity corresponding to the tool 
shape. The vibration transmits a high velocity to fine 
abrasive grains between the tool and the surface of 
the work piece. In the process, material is removed 
by microchipping or erosion with the abrasive par-
ticles. The grains are in a water slurry that also serves 
to remove debris from the cutting area. The high-
frequency power supply for the magnetostrictive or 
piezoelectric transducer stack that drives the tool is 
typically rated between 0.1 and 40 kW. Piezoelectric 
transducers use the inverse piezoelectric effect using 
natural or synthetic single crystals (such as quartz) 
or ceramics (such as barium titanate), which have 
strong piezoelectric behavior. Ceramics have the 
advantage over crystals in that they are easier to 
shape by casting, pressing, and extruding.
Because this method is nonthermal, nonelectri-
cal, and nonchemical, it produces virtually stress-
free shapes even in hard and brittle work pieces. 
Ultrasonic drilling is most effective for hard and 
brittle materials; soft materials absorb too much 
sound energy and make the process less efficient. 
In Figure 6.20, important components of a typical 
USM setup are shown.21 In the case of hard materi-
als, microchipping is possible because of the high 
stress produced by particles striking the surface. 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   369
FIGURE 6.19 Desktop ELID machine (500 mm × 500 mm × 
560 mm) from NEXSYS (http://www.nexsys.co.jp/index_e.
htm). ELID grinding is currently the best method to avoid 
high wheel loading and to generate mirror finish surfaces.

[Page 370]
In Figure  6.21, SEM photomicrographs are shown 
of 640-µm holes drilled in alumina by two differ-
ent techniques: USM (Figure 6.21a) and laser-beam 
machining (Figure 6.21b). The edges of the hole are 
much better defined with the ultrasonic technique. 
In Figure 6.22a, multiple channels and holes drilled 
all in parallel in a polycrystalline silicon slab are 
shown,21 and in Figure 6.22b, a coin grooved with 
USM is displayed.
The key to USM, besides the tool itself, is the 
abrasive: a slurry of water or oil and small abrasive 
particles (large = 0.5 mm average particle diameter 
or small = 0.008 mm  average particle diameter) of 
boron carbide, silicon carbide, or aluminum oxide. 
Boron carbide is the hardest abrasive and lasts the 
longest. The abrasives are suspended in water or oil 
at a concentration of 20–50 wt% and recirculated 
constantly to the work piece to supply fresh abra-
sive at the cutting site and remove abraded particles. 
The particle size and the amplitude of the vibrations 
used are typically made about the same. During 
one strike, the tool is moved down from its upper-
most position with a starting speed of zero; then it 
speeds up to finally reach a maximum speed at the 
mean tool position. The tool slows down and even-
tually reaches zero again. When the grit size is close 
370   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 6.20 Schematic showing key components of a typical ultrasonic machining installation. (a) Transducer assembly 
coupled to tooling assembly. (b) Close-up view of tooling assembly used to machine ceramics. (From Moreland, M.A. 
1992. Engineered materials handbook. Ed. S.J. Schneider. Metals Park, OH: ASM International. With permission.21)
FIGURE 6.21 Scanning electron microscopy photomicrographs of 640-mm holes drilled into alumina with two differ-
ent techniques. (a) Ultrasonic machining. (b) Laser-beam machining. (From Moreland, M.A. 1992. Engineered materials 
handbook. Ed. S.J. Schneider. Metals Park, OH: ASM International. With permission.21)

[Page 371]
to the mean position, the tool hits the grit with its 
full speed. The smaller the grit size, the lesser the 
momentum it receives from the tool. Therefore, 
there is an effective speed zone for the tool, and cor-
respondingly there is an effective size range for the 
grits. The size of the abrasive particles determines 
the roughness or surface finish and the speed of the 
cut. Material removal rates are low, usually less than 
50 mm3/min. The mechanical properties and fracture 
behavior of the work piece materials also play a large 
role in both roughness and cutting speed. For a given 
grit size of the abrasive, the resulting surface rough-
ness depends on the ratio of the hardness (H) to 
the modulus of elasticity (E). As this ratio increases, 
the surface roughness increases. For example, under 
identical ultrasonic cutting conditions, carbide with 
an H/E ratio of 1.26 has a resulting surface rough-
ness of 0.5 µm, and glass with an H/E of 8.1 ends up 
with a surface finish of 1.55 µm.21
Higher H/E ratios also lead to higher removal 
rates: 4 mm3/min for carbide and 11 mm3/min for 
glass. Thus, a low fracture toughness will result in 
a higher material removal rate and an increase in 
work piece roughness values. For a given material, a 
larger particle size results in a rougher surface. With 
a very fine particle size of 0.008 mm and a low H/E 
ratio (e.g., alumina with H/E 2.36), a 0.5-µm sur-
face roughness can be achieved.22 Holes as small 
as 0.076 mm have been drilled, but in production 
applications 0.25 mm is more the norm. The upper 
limit on cavity size is approximately 75 mm. With a 
250-µm-diameter hole, the aspect ratio is about 2.5; 
with increasing hole size, the aspect ratio increases. 
It is safe to assume that a ±10-µm tolerance can be 
achieved with the finest abrasive powders.
Rotary ultrasonic machining (RUM) enhances 
material removal rates, finish capabilities, and over-
all drilling efficiency. A 1/4-in. hole can be drilled 
5-in. deep into glass in about 2 minutes with a rotat-
ing ultrasonic tool. To make such high-aspect-ratio 
holes and deep cavities, it is often required that 
the work piece be removed periodically to ensure 
uninterrupted abrasive slurry flow to the cutting 
zone. Conventional USM is not capable of drilling 
microholes much smaller than 100 µm for lack of 
corresponding microtools. Using microelectrode 
discharge machining wire cutting (µ-EDM-WC; see 
Chapter 5) to make microtools (similar to the pipe 
structures shown in Figures 5.4 and 5.5), Sun et al. 
made holes as small as 15 µm in diameter.23 Surface 
roughness was typically about 0.2 µm, and ultra-
sonic drilling speed ranged from 2.0–6.0 µm/min.
Summarizing, with USM, operating costs are 
reasonably low and required operator skill level is 
modest (operator must wear eye goggles to pro-
tect against abrasive particles and microchips). The 
method is slow (usually less than 50 mm3/min), 
but under ideal conditions, penetration rates of 
5  mm/min can be obtained. The required power 
is usually between 0.1 and 40 kW. Normal hole 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   371
FIGURE 6.22 (a) Channels and holes ultrasonically machined in a polycrystalline silicon wafer. (From Moreland, M.A. 
1992. Engineered materials handbook. Ed. S.J. Schneider. Metals Park, OH: ASM International. With permission.21) 
(b) Coin with grooving carried out with USM.

[Page 372]
tolerances are 0.007 mm, and a surface finish of 
0.02–0.7 µm can be achieved. Computer-controlled 
standard USM equipment is available with a position 
resolution on all axes of 0.25 µm (see Figure 6.23).
Machines cost up to $20,000, and production rates 
of about 2500 parts per machine per day are typical. 
If the machined part is a complex element (e.g., a flu-
idic element) of a size >1 cm2 and the best material 
to be used is an inert, hard ceramic, this  machining 
method might well be the most appropriate. A typi-
cal ultrasonic service provider is Bullen Ultrasonics 
(Eaton, OH; http://www.bullen- ultrasonics.com).
Advantages and disadvantages of USM are sum-
marized in Table 6.3.
Water Jet Machining
In water jet machining, in industrial use since 1970, 
material is removed through mechanical impact; 
that is, erosion effects of a high-velocity (600–900 
m/s with pressures up to 400 MPa), small-diameter 
(in the range of 0.07–0.5 mm) jet of water.24 It is a 
nonthermal process that eliminates warping and 
avoids a heat-affected zone (HAZ). Water is most 
commonly used, but additives such as alcohols, oils, 
and glycerol are used when they can be dissolved in 
water. The exit orifice is often made of sapphire and 
ranges from 0.05–0.020 in. There are some advan-
tages one can list for water jet machining:
 
◾No heat is produced.
 
◾Cut can be started anywhere without the need 
for predrilled holes.
 
◾Burr produced is minimum.
 
◾Environmentally safe and friendly manu-
facturing.
The technique is mainly used to cut soft, nonme-
tallic materials such as Plexiglas®, cardboard, fabrics, 
foam rubber, wood, food, and so on. With a water 
jet nozzle of 0.13 mm  and a pressure of 379 MPa, a 
3-mm-thick, Plexiglas plate can be cut at speeds of 
0.9 m/min. Tolerances are a function of the material 
type and thickness, and they are  usually within ± 
0.1–0.2 mm.25 Edges in water jet machining have a 
sandblasted appearance. Harder materials exhibit 
a better edge finish. Finishes range from 63 rms* 
to very coarse depending on the material. In Figure 
6.24, we show a schematic illustration of water jet 
machining and examples of various nonmetallic 
parts cut by a water jet machine. When dealing with 
the choice of using laser machining (a thermal tech-
nique covered in Chapter 5) or water jet machining, 
one may use the following decision tree:
* Rms refers to the root mean square which is an average of peaks and 
valleys of a materials’ surface profile (see Equation 6.5). It is given in 
micrometers or microinches. Rms is also called Rq.
372   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 6.23 900-W Sonic Mill ultrasonic mill.
TABLE 6.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Ultrasonic Machining
Advantages
Disadvantages
Machining of any material regardless of 
conductivity
Low material removal rate
Precision machining of brittle hard materials
Tool wears fast
Does not produce electric, thermal, or 
chemical defects at the surface
Machining area and depth are restricted
Can drill circular or noncircular holes in very 
hard materials
Less stress because of its nonthermal nature

[Page 373]
 
1. Is the material reflective or heat 
conductive? 
Yes
 
 No
 
2. Is material thicker than 3/8“? 
Yes
 
 No
 
3. Is a heat affected zone (HAZ) 
a concern 
Yes
 
 No
 
LASER 
WATERJET
In Table 6.4 we compare advantages and disadvan-
tages of water jet and laser machining. In water jet-
guided laser machining (Chapter 5, Figure 5.23) the 
two techniques are combined. A thin jet of high-pres-
sure water (between 40 and 100 µm) and water at a 
pressure between 20 and 500 bars is forced through 
a nozzle (made of diamond or sapphire). The water 
jet is not abrasive in this case; the material is solely 
ablated thermally by the laser. The high speed of the 
water, up to 300 m/s at 500 bars, ensures fast removal 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   373
FIGURE 6.24 (a) Schematic illustration of water jet machining. (b) Examples of various nonmetallic parts cut by a water 
jet machine. (Courtesy of Possis Corporation.)
TABLE 6.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of Water Jet and Laser Machining
Waterjet
Laser
Advantages
Disadvantages
Advantages
Disadvantages
Water jet diameter 0.001–
0.014 in.
Spot size as small as 
0.0015 in.
Higher material thicknesses 
can be cut
Equipment cost
Narrow cut (0.020 in.) 
Equipment cost
No heat-affected zone
Pump maintenance 
(every 1000 h)
Low maintenance
Requires material that 
absorbs laser light; 
material limitations 
(e.g., laser reflective 
materials such as Cu 
and Al)
Does not produce electric, 
thermal, or chemical 
defects at the surface
Noise (80 db or more)
More compact nesting
Heat-affected zone 
(HAZ)
No part distortion
Need for filters
Faster cutting rates
Not dependent on material 
property; affected only by 
resistance to abrasion
Slow cutting rates
Holes as small as 
0.003–0.015 in.
User education in 
high-pressure 
plumbing
Tolerance of ±0.0003 in. 
through thin material
Finishes will range from 
63 rms to very coarse
Edge finish 125 rms
Water must be highly 
purified

[Page 374]
of debris. Water jet-guided laser etching prevents the 
problem of heat damage (microcracks, structural 
changes) inherent in any laser ablation process. The 
result is a heat damage-free material ablation.
Abrasive Water Jet Machining
By adding abrasives to the water jet, a much wider 
range of materials, including many more metals and 
ceramics, can be machined. Abrasive water jet (AWJ) 
has been in industrial use since 1982. The cutting 
action is a grinding process where the forces and 
motions are provided by water rather than a solid 
grinding wheel. The method is principally used for 
edge finishing, deburring, and polishing and has 
been increasingly used for treating hard-to-machine 
and multilayered materials and as an alternative 
tool for milling, turning, drilling, and polishing. In 
some applications AWJ is starting to replace electri-
cal discharge machining (EDM).
An abrasive jet uses water that is pressurized up 
to 400 MPa and then forced through a small sap-
phire orifice at 1000–2500 ft./s, or up to about 
2.5 times the speed of sound. Some abrasive is then 
pulled into this high-speed stream of water and 
mixed with the water in a ceramic mixer as shown 
in Figure 6.25. This jet of water and abrasive is then 
directed at the material to be machined. The jet 
drags the abrasive through the material in a curved 
path, and the resulting centrifugal forces on the par-
ticles press them against the work piece. AWJs can 
machine a wide range of thicknesses and materials, 
including metals, plastics, glass, and ceramics. 
Materials cut by the abrasive jet have a smooth, sat-
in-like finish, similar to a fine sandblasted finish. 
Abrasive jets abrade material at room temperature. 
As a result, there are no heat-affected zone (HAZ) or 
structural changes in the work piece. Abrasive jets 
can also machine hardened metals and materials 
with low melting points. Abrasive jets typically use 
garnet as an abrasive. Garnet is a reddish natural 
crystal, with a Mohs hardness* of 6.5–7.5. No nox-
ious gases or liquids are used in AWJ, nor are there 
any oils used in the machining process, so this is 
again a “green” machining approach. A wide range 
of conventional processes can be performed with 
this single tool such as drilling, sawing, broaching, 
profile milling, and so on. No heavy burrs are pro-
duced during the AWJ process. Parts can often be 
used directly without further deburring.
Common applications of AWJ machining include:
 
◾Fast and precise cutting of fabrics
 
◾Vinyl, foam coverings of car dashboard panels
 
◾Plastic and composite body panels used in the 
interior of cars
 
◾Cutting glass and ceramic tiles
Principles of Abrasive Water Jet Machining provides 
good further study.26 For a tutorial on AWJ and 
* Mohs hardness is defined by how well a substance will resist scratch-
ing by another substance. The scale consists of 10 minerals ranging 
from 1 for the softest (talc) to 10 for the hardest (diamond).
374   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 6.25 Abrasive water jet (AWJ) machining setup.

[Page 375]
AJM on the Internet, visit http://www.waterjets.
org/about_abrasivejets.html. Common water jet 
termi nology is explained at http://www.omax.com/ 
glossary.php. For a typical equipment supplier, visit 
Omax at http://www.omax.com.
Abrasive Jet Machining—Powder Blasting
Sandblasting in a pressurized air stream is used to 
remove paint, clean cathedrals, and decorate glass. 
On a finer level, powder blasting, using small par-
ticles (usually Al2O3 powder, particle size <100 µm) 
is used for device demarking in the electronics 
industry and in surface preparation before plating. 
On this level, sandblasting is called abrasive gas jet 
machining (AJM) or microabrasive blasting. In this 
type of machining, the work piece material (hard, 
brittle materials such as glass, silicon, tungsten, and 
ceramics) is removed by the mechanical impact of a 
high-velocity (vparticle = 80–300 m/s) stream of abra-
sive-laden inert gas or air. The impact causes crack 
generation on the target surface.27,28 Using masks, 
the method is also put to use in rapid prototyping29 
and etching of shallow intricate holes in electronic 
components such as resistor paths in insulators and 
patterns in semiconductors. The process is fast and 
directional, and removal rates of up to 25 µm/min 
have been achieved. Another application is the cre-
ation of thousands of holes at once at low cost, high 
speed, and high accuracy for flat panel displays.14,28
Recent efforts are in fine-tuning the technique for 
mesoscale MEMS applications. The required equip-
ment, as schematically illustrated in Figure 6.26, is 
relatively inexpensive.
The setup consists of the powder blaster that regu-
lates the flow of abrasive powder accelerated to the 
nozzle. An air dryer is connected to the powder res-
ervoir to avoid moisture-induced particle agglomer-
ation. To obtain an homogeneous scan of the work 
piece surface, the sample is placed on an x,y-trans-
lation stage. A dust collector recovers the used alu-
mina powder. The applied pressure can typically be 
regulated between 1 and 5 bars.
A schematic diagram showing the principle of 
powder blasting microerosion process is presented 
in Figure 6.27. The different elements shown are 
elucidated next. A nozzle (e.g., from tungsten) pro-
vides the focusing and acceleration function for the 
abrasive stream generated by the blaster. A protec-
tive mask with an erosion rate much smaller than 
that of the substrate is also shown. In combination 
with suitable masks, for example, an electroplated 
photolithographically patterned Cu layer, mini-
mum feature sizes of less than 50 µm, an aspect 
ratio of 2.5, and a depth of >1 mm in glass have 
been demonstrated. Polymer negative resist foils 
(e.g., ORDYL BF 400, specially developed for pow-
der blasting) can also be used as mask, but in that 
case feature sizes are limited to 75 µm and an aspect 
ratio of 1.5 (http://www.el.utwente.nl/tdm/mmd/
education/ 
d-opdrachten/powderblasting.html). 
Wensink et al. made a comparison study of various 
mask materials in powder blasting, and the same 
group is striving to decrease the minimum feature 
size to less than 10  µm (http://www.el.utwente.nl/
tdm/mmd/ education/d-opdrachten/powderblasting.
html). The substrate in this type of machining may be 
glass, silicon, tungsten, or a ceramic. Finally, there is 
the abrasive powder.
Depending on the application aimed for, differ-
ent types of abrasive powders with various shapes 
and hardness can be used. The most common pow-
ders are:
 
◾Silicon carbide (SiC), because of its hardness, is 
the most efficient medium used for microabra-
sive blasting. It has a hardness of more than 9 
on the Mohs scale, just below diamond.
 
◾Crushed glass is a mild abrasive medium (Mohs 
hardness = 5–6), which is used when only a 
slight degree of abrasion is desired.
 
◾The spherical shape of glass beads keeps them 
from cutting into the surface of the part. It is 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   375
FIGURE 6.26 Schematic of powder blasting machine. 
(From Yamahata, C. 2005. EPF de Lausanne.30)

[Page 376]
typically used to perform light deburring or to 
apply a satin-like finish on a work piece.
 
◾Aluminum oxide is the most commonly used 
cutting abrasive because of the sharp shape of 
the particles and good hardness (Mohs hard-
ness = 9).
The rate of material removal in powder blasting 
is commonly evaluated from the erosion rate Erate, 
which is defined as:
 
E
weight of removed material
weight of impact
rate =
ing particles
 
(6.1)
Slikkerveer31 studied the mechanics of powder 
blasting in detail. In his analysis, he introduced the 
erosion efficiency, Eeff, as:
 
E
weight of removed material
E
eff
k
=
 
(6.2)
where Ek is the kinetic energy of the incoming parti-
cles. Combining Equations 6.1 and 6.2, one obtains:
 
E
1
2 E
v
rate
eff
particle
2
=
 
(6.3)
Notice that the erosion efficiency is a function of 
the kinetic energy only, whereas the erosion rate also 
depends on the particle velocity. Eeff was found to be 
a more useful parameter for comparison of powder 
blasting processes because the erosion caused by an 
individual particle impact directly depends on the 
kinetic energy of the particle. Slikkerveer et al.32 in 
particular studied the erosion of brittle materials by 
hard angular particles impact and proposed a model 
that was derived from the indentation fracture 
theory. From their model, they concluded that the 
main material characteristics influencing the ero-
sion efficiency are:
 
◾Density (ρ) of the particles, which figures in 
the evaluation of the kinetic  energy Ek
 ◾Young’s modulus of elasticity (E) of the substrate
 
◾Fracture toughness (K) of the substrate, which 
is a measure of the ability of a material to resist 
the growth of an existing crack or flaw
 
◾Indentation hardness (H) of the substrate, 
which characterizes a material’s local resistance 
to a permanent deformation (e.g., scratching, 
abrasion, or cutting)
Powder blasting has been shown to be an appro-
priate micromachining technique for hard, brittle 
materials. It is a fast, inexpensive, and accurate 
directional etch technique for brittle materials such 
as glass, silicon, and ceramics. The time to etch 
376   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 6.27 (a) Schematic diagram demonstrating the principle of the powder blasting microerosion process. 
(b) 400-µm deep-blasted glass structure. (From Yamahata, C. 2005. EPF de Lausanne30 and http://www.anteryon.com.)
FIGURE 6.28 Powder-blasted accelerometer in glass. 
A first exposure of the metalized glass substrate to the 
eroding powder beam defines the freestanding structure 
and electrical contact geometry. A second exposure from 
the back is used to thin the cantilever beam. (Belloy, E., 
A. Sayah, and M. A. M. Gijs. 2000. Sensors Actuators A 
86:231.36 Courtesy of Dr. M. Gijs, EPFL.)

[Page 377]
through a 500-mm-thick Pyrex wafer with one noz-
zle is approximately 20 minutes. The erosion process 
is caused by the impact of accelerated particles on 
brittle materials, a process that creates cracks. Powder 
blasting is mostly used with a powder beam at nor-
mal incidence angle to the substrate (θ = 90°). Belloy 
et al.33 described how, by exploiting oblique powder 
blasting (θ = 80°–40°) and underetching phenom-
ena of the mask on a glass substrate, a new family of 
3D structures can be realized. Using this technique, 
a glass cantilever accelerometer beam with inertial 
mass was structured (Figure 6.28). Using the same 
method, Solignac et  al.34 fabricated capillaries for 
electrokinetic experiments in soda lime microscope 
glass slides, and Bornand et al.35 fabricated magnetic 
cores from ferrite wafers for millimeter-size trans-
formers for low power applications.
Surface Finish
The desired work piece surface determines the type 
of finishing operation. To rate the final surface finish 
of a work piece, one uses one of two criteria: the Ra or 
the Rq (formerly rms) value. Both are generally given 
in micrometers or microinches. Ra is known as the 
arithmetic mean value: with reference to Figure 6.29, 
it takes the average of the absolute values of the devi-
ations for the centerline of the surface:
 
R
|a| |b| |c |
n
a =
+
+
+ ⋯
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(6.4)
The Ra in an older convention is also called the 
arithmetic average. The Rq value, which was formerly 
called the rms, calculates the root mean square of 
the values of the deviations from the centerline:
 
R
a
b
c
n
q
2
2
2
=
+
+
+ ⋯ 
(6.5)
Other measurements of surface roughness exist, 
but these two are the most common. In particular, 
rms or Rq is the most prevalent. In general, Rq val-
ues are 1.1–1.4 times the Ra values, but, of course, it 
depends on the exact surface topology.
In Figure 6.30 we represent a chart of the typi-
cal Ra readings associated with different machining 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   377
FIGURE 6.29 Surface roughness and center line.
Flame cutting
Snagging (coarse grinding)
Sawing
Planing, shaping
Drilling
Chemical machining
Milling
Broaching
Reaming
Electron beam machining
Laser machining
Electrochemical machining
Turning, boring
Barrel ﬁnishing
Electrochemical grinding
Roller burnishing
Grinding
Honing
Electropolishing
Polishing
Lapping
Superﬁnishing
Electrical discharge machining
Process
µm
µin.
50
2000
25
1000
12.5
500
6.3
250
3.2
125
1.6
63
0.8
32
0.4
16
0.2
8
0.1
4
0.05
2
.025
1
.012
0.5
Average application
Less frequent application
FIGURE 6.30 Typical arithmetic average roughness, Ra, for various machining methods. (Kalpakjian, S. 1984. 
Manufacturing processes for engineering materials. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.37)

[Page 378]
processes. Notice the bottom few processes— lapping 
and superfinishing—that are typical abrasive 
ma chining processes. Electropolishing comes close 
in surface finish to these abrasive methods but is 
generally not as good a finish as the abrasives. Also 
notice the very small numbers with which we are 
dealing. Remember a human hair is about 80 µm. 
In some cases we are machining to the hundredth of 
a micrometer! The ELID process, surveyed above, is 
even better. In Figure 6.31 we illustrate the increase 
in the cost of a machining process as a function of 
the surface finish required.
Focused Ion Beam Machining and Fast 
Atom Beam Machining
Focused Ion Beam Machining Some authors clas-
sify focused ion beam (FIB) milling as a thermome-
chanical technique. It is more widely accepted now 
as a pure mechanical machining technique in which 
the drill bit is replaced with a stream of energetic 
ions—call it ion blasting. A liquid metal ion source 
(e.g., gallium) is used rather than the wide argon ion 
beam in dry etching (see Chapter 3), and the ion 
beam is focused down to a submicrometer diameter. 
The liquid metal source uses a capillary feed (or nee-
dle) system and an acceleration voltage of 5–50 keV. 
Beam spots smaller than 50 nm are possible. FIB has 
been used for maskless implantation, metal pattern-
ing, and IC repair (see Figure 6.32).
More recently, it has been shown that FIB also 
constitutes a production technique of micrometer-
sized objects in an arbitrary material without the 
requirements of anisotropy or lithography. Vasile 
et al., for example, described a 360° rotation mount-
ing device used analogously to a lathe with a 20-keV 
Ga ion beam as the cutting tool for in-vacuum 
micromachining.38,39 The ion beam they used is 
0.3 µm  in diameter, and they crafted tungsten nee-
dles, hooks, tuning forks, and specialized scanning 
probe tips. Some of these tungsten microstructures 
are shown in  Figure 6.33. The first microstructure 
(Figure 6.33a and b) is a parasol-shaped scanning 
probe, which can be used to probe underneath resist 
lips and other concave features. The disc structure 
sits on a 1.5-µm square shank and is 4 µm in diam-
eter and about 0.7 µm thick. The shank segment 
just before the disc is deliberately thinned to 0.4 µm 
at the thinnest point. The microshovel shown in 
Figure 6.33c is another illustration of the truly 3D 
aspect of this new manufacturing technique. The 
resolution limit to the fabrication process of these 
various tungsten structures mainly comes from the 
grain structure of the material. Start-to-finish fabri-
cation time for the objects shown was ∼2 hours. It 
should be noted that this expensive serial technique 
378   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
20001000 500 250 125
63
32
16
400
300
200
100
Machining cost (%)
Surface ﬁnish
Ra(µin.)
As cast
sawed,
etc.
Semi-
ﬁnish
turn
Finish
turn
Rough turn
Grind
Hone
FIGURE 6.31 Increase in the cost of machining and finish-
ing a part as a function of the surface finish required.
Milling
Deposition
Ion beam is
scanned over
substrate
Sputtered material
from substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Secondary ions
and electrons
from substrate
Biased
MCP
Imaging, doping
Deposited ﬁlm
Ion beam is
scanned over
substrate
Ion beam is
scanned over
substrate
Volatile reaction
products
Precursor
molecules
Gas nozzle
FIGURE 6.32 Uses of focused ion beam (FIB).

[Page 379]
might make sense for the fabrication of an atomic 
force microscope tool set, but to make a microshovel 
as shown in Figure 6.33c is of course merely meant 
as a fancy demonstration  of the technique.
In ion-beam sputtering, a broad surface area is 
bombarded with energetic ions from inert gases 
such as argon, and momentum transfer kicks off 
atoms from the target. The technique was discussed 
in detail in Chapter 3. In reactive ion-beam etching, 
also reviewed in Chapter 3, a flux of reactive particles, 
such as CF4
+ and F+, is directed at the work piece in 
a narrow beam. In the latter process, both momen-
tum transfer and chemical reactions are involved in 
the etching process, and the process cannot be solely 
characterized as mechanical. In reactive ion etching, 
the etching is almost exclusively by chemical reac-
tion with the reactive species formed in the plasma; 
the method must be regarded as a dry chemical etch-
ing technique rather than a mechanical technique. 
The latter techniques are almost exclusively used in 
semiconductor settings. It is possible with these ion-
machining techniques, in combination with a mask, 
to etch almost any material in a very controlled fash-
ion (dimensions <100 nm).
Fast Atom Beam Machining A variation on FIB 
machining is fast atom beam (FAB) machining. In 
FAB, ionized atoms, accelerated to about 100 km/s, 
are neutralized and used as the mechanical cutting 
tool. For example, the etching rate of GaAs with 
chlorine atoms at 60°C is 0.15 µm/min, and vertical 
walls are obtained. The work piece is mounted on a 
lathe as in FIB, and by rotating it with respect to a 
Ni mask, the different faces of the GaAs work piece 
are etched, and 3D structures are created. Hatamura 
et  al.11 produced a multifaced microstructure, a 
micro-gojyunoto (named after an old Japanese tem-
ple tower) of 280 × 100 × 100 µm this way. A hole 
etched in a polyimide sheet enabled the erection of 
the temple with the help of the rotational robot hold-
ing the temple. More recently the same group has 
extended the FAB capabilities into the nanodomain 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   379
FIGURE 6.33 FIB-manufactured tungsten structures. (a) Specialized scanning tip probe parasol. (b) Side view of a para-
sol structure. The shank is 1.5 mm2 and thinned down locally to 0.4 mm. The disk is 4 mm in diameter. (c) Microshovel. 
(From Vasile, M. J., C. Biddick, and S. A. Schwalm. 1994. J Vac Sci Technol B12:2388. With permission.39 Courtesy of 
Dr. M. J. Vasile, Louisiana Tech University.)

[Page 380]
by producing ultrafine stairs, 30 nm wide and 30 
nm high. Their results show that these FAB methods 
are effective in producing 3D microstructures and 
nanostructures. Combinations of these methods 
will make it possible to produce functional nano-
structures on 3D microstructures. As we will detail 
in Volume III, Chapter 4 on packaging, assembly, 
and self- assembly, Hatamura et al. came up with 
several intriguing microassembly ideas, just as in 
the erection of the microtemple mentioned above.
Desktop Factory
Despite all the progress in mechanical micromachin-
ing reported thus far, the fact that it often takes a 
two-ton machine tool to fabricate microparts where 
cutting forces are in the milli- to micro-Newton 
range is a clear indication that a complete machine 
tool redesign is required for the fabrication of micro- 
and nanomachines.40 Even with the advancement in 
the precision and tolerances achieved in mechanical 
machining, ultraprecision machining is still mostly 
carried out on large equipment. This equipment 
consumes significant amounts of floor space and 
energy. Figure 6.34 illustrates the volumetric uti-
lization [V = volume of machine tool (M)/volume 
of work piece (W)] of conventional and mesoscale 
machine tools.41 The ideal equipment should be of 
the same scale as the final product to constitute an 
optimized manufacturing system (V = 1).
The size of the equipment producing precision 
parts has been reduced, but the optimal size has not 
yet been attained. Along this line, in Japan, the con-
cept for desktop flexible manufacturing systems, or 
more simply “desktop factory” (DTF), for building 
micromachines was proposed in the early 1990s.42 
This effort was supported by Japan’s MITI (Agency 
of Industrial Science and Technology). In Korea, the 
government started a new DTF national effort at the 
end of 2004, and similar projects are now underway 
in the EEC.12 The proposed manufacturing units 
would be tabletop size and include universal chuck 
modules to which work pieces would be continu-
ously clamped through most of the manufacturing 
process. By 1999 the world’s first prototype of a DTF 
(50 cm × 70 cm) combining miniature machine tools 
and manipulators was developed at AIST in Japan as 
shown in Figure 6.4. The factory combined a lathe, 
milling machine, press machine, a transfer arm, and 
a two-fingered hand.  A next portable factory made 
at AIST, requiring a single 100-V AC outlet only, was 
 packaged in a suitcase (625 mm long, 490 mm wide, 
and 380 mm high with a weight of about 34 kg). 
DTFs like these have the potential of becoming the 
factory of the future: totally self-contained, robotic, 
desktop-size machine tools that only require mate-
rials, power, and water as outside inputs. A first 
commercial desktop manufacturing unit by Sankyo 
Seiki is shown as the inset in the header of this chap-
ter. Sankyo Seiki’s management believes that DTFs 
might help manufacturing survive in Japan.12
As an example of a thermal micromachine tool, 
consider the Panasonic hand-held µ-EDM dis-
cussed in Chapter 5 (Figure 5.3). Another DTF 
reviewed in Chapter 5, combining thermal and 
mechanical machining, is the high-precision four-
axes CNC machine developed by Liao et al. at the 
National Taiwan University. Parts in the size range 
380   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
1.00E+03
1.00E+00
1.00E–03
1.00E–06
1.00E–09
1.00E–12
Machine tool volume – M[m3]
Volumetric utilization V = M/W
Conventional
Mesoscale
1.E–12
1.E–09
1.E–06
1.E–03
1.E+00
Workpiece volume - W[m3]
V = 10,000
V = 1,000
V = 100
V = 10
V = 1
FIGURE 6.34 Volumetric utilization (V = volume of machine tool/volume work piece) of conventional and mesoscale 
machines. (Vogler, M.P., et al. 2002. Transactions of NAMRI/SME 30:653.41)

[Page 381]
of 0.1–2 mm can be produced on this machine tool, 
and all manufacturing processes are completed on 
the same machine without moving the work piece. 
This multifunction high-precision machine (accu-
racy of 1 µm) is capable of performing four different 
functions: milling, µ-EDM, µ-EDM-WC, and on-line 
measuring of the flatness, circularity, concentricity, 
dimensions, and geometric tolerances of the work 
piece (Figure 5.8).
In one scenario, DTFs become very automated and 
require very few human operators, so that exporting 
these machines—and thus transferring manufac-
turing from rich to poor countries—does not make 
sense anymore because no labor costs are saved. In 
the capitalistic/nationalistic approach, these micro-
manufacturing stations are owned by big central-
ized national entities. The other scenario, promoted 
by, for example, MIT’s Neil Gershenfeld, sees desk-
top manufacturing becoming as popular as desk-
top publishing and the manufacturing equipment 
would be owned by as many people as possible.43 
In the latter, more socially responsible approach, 
manufacturing becomes much less centralized, and 
many more people get involved. In either case, the 
impact on society would be dramatic. The dilemma 
is similar to that of solar energy versus oil; solar 
energy is widely spread out and difficult to own/
control whereas the Bush family and cohorts try to 
own oil that, because it is more centralized, is easier 
to control.
Besides high-accuracy cutting, detailed above, 
there is also significant progress to report in die 
punching. The miniature die press from Aoki and 
Takahashi was one of the first examples of prog-
ress in the direction of microdie punching machine 
tools.44 Aoki et al. pushed the art of die forming with 
a press for 3D, metallic medical microcomponents 
to new limits.44 Medical forceps, for insertion into 
an endoscope used to remove diseased tissue, have 
been fabricated as an example of the new capabili-
ties. The forceps have a diameter of 0.6–1 mm and 
a length of 10 mm, with assembly holes measuring 
0.3 mm, and 0.2-mm long teeth in the cutting tool. 
The final manufacturing time, including assembly, 
is about 3 min/piece. Some of the other successes in 
making DTFs are detailed in Table 6.5.
Precision Mechanical Machining 
versus IC-Based Micromachining
In comparing IC-based micro- and nanomachining 
with precision mechanically machined structures, 
Slocum makes some important observations.4 He 
notes that, although IC-derived micro- and nano-
machines are impressive for their small size, their 
relative accuracy is two orders of magnitude worse 
than is typically achieved in mechanical precision 
machining, which, moreover, makes for much more 
complex designs (see also Figure 6.3). For more than 
100 years, precise mechanical machined devices have 
been designed and built with mechanical removal 
techniques achieving part-per-million (ppm) relative 
tolerances, and recently ultraprecision mechanical 
machining has entered the realm of 0.1 ppm relative 
tolerances. Typical IC-derived micro- and nanoma-
chines, on the other hand, Slocum points out, are 
comparable with the macromachines of the early 
1700s with respect to complexity and relative toler-
ance. Although the surface roughness of IC-derived 
micro- and nanomachines appears high compared 
with the specular finishes of precision-machined 
bearing surfaces, in reality, the absolute roughness 
is about the same. Another key issue Slocum brings 
up is that of metrology systems; verification of the 
fabricated geometry and tolerances is much more 
difficult for IC-derived micromachines because 
measurement of a displacement of 1 part in 10,000 
will typically get one down to the nanometer level.
Higher-accuracy machining is needed to provide 
computer memory disks and optical mirrors and 
lenses with accuracies to a fraction of the wave-
length of light. The micro- and nanofabrication 
techniques that are currently used in IC-derived 
micro- and nanomanufacturing have serious limita-
tions in terms of the materials that can be used and 
the creation of complicated shapes with the required 
surface quality.
A better understanding of the limits of ultrapre-
cision mechanical machining and nontraditional 
IC-based machining methods would help the me -
chanical engineer make the best choice in machining 
tools. At the same time, as IC-based micro- and nano-
machine complexity increases, it seems appropriate 
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   381

[Page 382]
for the designers of these types of micro- and nano-
structures, who are typically electrical engineers, to 
study ultraprecision machine design.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Dr. Rodrigo Martinez and Dr. Chunlei 
Wang.
Questions
Questions by Dr. Madou assisted by Mr. Chuan Zhang, 
UC Irvine
 6.1:  What are some commonly recognized catego-
ries of mechanical removal processes? 
 6.2:  What is the meaning of relative and absolute 
tolerance? Is it sufficient to use only absolute 
tolerances in describing the precision of a 
micromachining process?
 6.3:  What are the merits of single crystal diamond 
cutting tools? 
 6.4:  Illustrate the importance of material proper-
ties in determining machining accuracy.
 6.5:  List some important trends and their con-
sequences in the development of automated 
mechanical machining equipment (consider 
only single-point mechanical removal) for 
the manufacturing of the future. 
 6.6:  What are the requirements for a material to 
be used as an abrasive grit? List some conven-
tional abrasives.
 6.7:  How does the grit size affect the quality of 
surface finish and the material removal rates? 
How should the grit size be chosen when 
dealing with different materials? 
382   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
TABLE 6.5 Desktop Factories
Developed by
Equipment Category
Dimension of the 
Equipment
Features of the Equipment
Kitahara et al.45
Microlathe
32 mm length
x-y driving unit driven by laminated 
piezoactuators, main shaft device driven 
by a micromotor
Lu and 
Yoneyama46
Microlathe
200 mm length
Cutting mechanism directly observed by 
optical microscope
Nakao and 
Hatamura47
Nanomanufacturing factory
1.6 m × 0.9 m × 1.6 m
Fast atom beam (FAB) etching 
technology, concentrated motion 
manipulator, multidirectional SEM and 
an image-driven operating system
Vogler et al.41
Mesoscale machine tool 
(mMT) systems
25 mm × 25 mm × 25 mm
Air turbine spindle, piezoelectric friction 
drive, voice coil drives
McKeown48
Three-axis ultraprecision 
aspheric generator
High-stiffness servo drives and 
hydrostatic bearings, servo resolution of 
1.25 nm in the x- and z-axes
Hatamura et al.11
Integrated manufacturing 
system for 3D 
microstructures
1.6 m × 0.9 m × 1.6 m
Fast atom beam etching, 3D assembly 
using a concentric manipulator, 
multiview scanning electron microscope 
(SEM)
Ruiz-Huerta49
CNC micromachining tool
130 mm × 160 mm × 85 mm
PC-based control
Mishima et al.50
Microfactory
Floor area: 50 × 70 cm
A microlathe, a micropress machine, a 
micromilling machine, a microtransfer 
arm, and a micro two-fingered hand 
NIST (National 
Institute for 
Science and 
Technology) 
Molecular measuring 
machine (M3)
Images and measures to nanometer 
accuracy the positions of features 
located anywhere within the area of 
50 mm × 50 mm and up to 100 µm high
Takeuchi et al.51
5-axis control ultraprecision 
machining center
20-mm stroke for vertical 
movement, 1-mm 
minimum feature size
Air-borne linear guide and air slide for 
the translational axes

[Page 383]
 6.8:  Why must the grinding wheel be dressed peri-
odically during the grinding  process? How 
does electrolytic in-process dressing (ELID) 
solve this problem?
 6.9:  Why are soft materials unsuitable to be 
machined with ultrasonic drilling? How do 
hardness and modulus of elasticity impact 
the removal rates?
 6.10:  What are the advantages and disadvantages 
of water jet machining? If we have a piece of 
copper plate 1 in. thick and the heat- affected 
zone (HAZ) is of great concern, should 
we choose laser machining, water jet machin-
ing, or abrasive water jet machining? Why?
6.11:  How can a wider range of materials be 
machined by adding abrasives to a water jet? 
List some applications of abrasive water jet 
machining.
6.12:  Show how the erosion efficiency depends on 
the kinetic energy in powder blasting. What 
other factors influence the erosion efficiency?
6.13: What are the major applications of focused 
ion beam (FIB)? How do we operate FIB in 
different modes for different applications?
6.14:  What are the merits of ultrasonic machin-
ing? How does a rotary setup enhance its 
performance?
6.15:  Explain the working principle of ultrasonic 
machining. Why does it produce stress-free 
shapes?
6.16:  What are the differences and similarities 
between focused ion beam (FIB) machining 
and fast atom beam (FAB) machining?
6.17:  Why are micromanufacturing researchers 
developing desk top factories (DTFs)? Why 
should the ideal equipment be of the same 
size scale as the final product?
6.18:  What are the merits and drawbacks of pre-
cision mechanical machining compared 
with IC-based micromachining? List two 
examples that are better machined with pre-
cision mechanical machining and two with 
IC-based micromachining.
6.19:  What are the advantages of electrodischarge 
wire cutting (EDWC) compared with sinker 
EDM?
6.20:  Fill in the blanks:
 
 Precision machining is defined at a relative 
tolerance of or less of a feature/part size and 
covers both and processes.
6.21:  Give a history of mankind’s manufactur-
ing methods, including major events, rough 
dates, and examples.
6.22: What are the underlying reasons that both 
Taniguchi and Moore curves have started 
showing signs of a slowdown in progress of 
manufacturing accuracy and of transistor 
density over time, respectively?
References
 
1. Hodges, H. 1970. Technology in the ancient world. New York: 
Barnes & Noble.
 
2. Burke, J. 1978, Connections. Boston: Back Bay Books.
 
3. Zuurveen, F. 1994. Precisie-Technologie-Jaarboek 1994. 
Eindhoven, the Netherlands: NVFT.
 
4. Slocum, A. H. 1992. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechani-
cal systems (MEMS ’92). Travemunde, Germany.
 
5. Slocum, A. H. 1992. Precision machine design. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
 
6. Palmer, C. 2000. Diffraction grating handbook, 4th ed. 
Rochester, NY: Richardson Grating Laboratory.
 
7. Compton’s interactive encyclopedia, 1994. Elmhurst, IL: 
Interactive Multimedia.
 
8. Taniguchi, N. 1983. Current status in, and future trends of, 
ultraprecision machining and ultrafine materials process-
ing. Annals CIRP 32:S573–82.
 
9. Gibbs, W. W. 1997. Gordon E. Moore interview. Scientific 
American September 22.
 10. Szepesi, D. 1993. Sensoren en Actuatoren in de Werktuigbouw/
Machinebouw, Centrum voor Micro-Electronica. The Hague, 
the Netherlands.
 11. Hatamura, Y., M. Nakao, T. Sato, K. Koyano, K. Ichiki, H. 
Sangu, M. Hatakeyama, T. Kobata, and  K. Nagai. 1994. 
Construction of 3D micro structure by multi-face FAB, co-
focus rotational robot and various mechanical tools. IEEE 
international workshop on micro electro mechanical systems 
(MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan.
 12. Ehmann, K. F., D. Bourell, M. L. Culpepper, T. J. Hodgson, 
T. R. Kurfess, M. Madou, K. Rajurkar, and R. DeVor. 2007. 
Micromanufacturing: international research and development. 
New York: Springer.
 13. Evans, C. 1989. Precision engineering: an evolutionary view. 
Bedford, UK: Cranfield Press.
 14. Snoeys, R. 1986. Advances in non-traditional machining. 
Anaheim, CA.
 15. McKeown, P. A. 1986. High precision manufacturing 
and the British economy. Institute of Mechanical Engineers 
Proceedings 200:76.
 16. Bier, W., G. Linder, D. Seidel, and K. Schubert. 1991. Kernfors-
chungszentrum Karlsruhe. KfK Nachrichten 23:2–3, 165–73.
 17. Teshigahara, A., M. Watanabe, N. Kawahara, Y. Ohtsuka, 
and T. Hattori. 1995. Performance of a  7-mm microfabri-
cated car. J Microelectromech Syst 4:76–80.
Mechanical Energy-Based Removing   383

[Page 384]
 18. Boothroyd, G., and W. A. Knight. 1989. Fundamentals of 
machining and machine tools. New York: Marcel Dekker.
 19. Ohmori, H., and T. Nakagawa. 1990. Mirror surface grind-
ing of silicon wafer with electrolytic in-process dressing. 
Annals CIRP 39:329–32.
 20. Bellows, G., and J. B. Kohls. 1982. Drilling without drills. 
Am Mach Special Rep 743:173–88.
 21. Moreland, M. A. 1992. Engineered materials handbook. Ed. 
S. J. Schneider. Metals Park, OH: ASM International.
 22. Humphrey, E. F., and D. H. Tarumoto, eds. Fluidics. Boston: 
Fluidic Amplifier Associates.
 23. Sun, X.-Q., T. Masuzawa, and M. Fujino. Ninth annual inter-
national workshop on micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS 
‘96). San Diego.
 24. Grass, P., W. Koenig, F. U. Meis, C. Wulf, and H. Willerscheid. 
1984. Konturbearbeitung faserverstaerkter Kunststoffe. 
Wasserstrahlschneiden, laserstrahlschneiden und umriss-
fraesen im wettbewerb. VDI-Zeitschrift. 126(21): S.785ff.
 25. Benedict, G. 1987. Nontraditional manufacturing processes. 
New York: Marcel Dekker.
 26. Momber, A. W., and Kovacevic, R. 1998. Principles of abra-
sive water jet machining. Berlin: Springer.
 27. Dombrowski, T. J. 1983. The how and why of abrasive jet 
machining. Modern Machine Shop 76.
 28. Ligthart, H. J., P. J. Slikkerveer, F. H. in’t Veld, P. H. W. 
Swinkels, and M. H. Zonneveld. 1996. Glass and glass 
machining in ZEUS panels. Philips J Res 50:475–99.
 29. Kruusing, A., S. Leppävuori, A. Uusimäki, and M. 
Uusimäki. 1999. Rapid prototyping of silicon structures 
by aid of laser and abrasive-jet machining. SPIE Proceedings 
3680:870–78.
 30. Yamahata, C. 2005. Magnetically actuated micropumps. 
Thesis. EPF de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
 31. Slikkerveer, P. J. 1999. Mechanical etching of glass by powder 
blasting. PhD diss., Technische Universiteit Eindhoven.
 32. Slikkerveer, P. J., P. C. P. Bouten, F. H. in’t Veld, and H. 
Scholten. 1998. Erosion and damage by sharp particles. 
Wear 217:237–50.
 33. Belloy, E., P. Q. Pham, A. Sayah, and M. A. M. Gijs. 
2000. Eurosensors XIV. Eds. R. de Reus and  S. Bouwstra. 
Copenhagen: MIC-Mikroelektronik Centret.
 34. Solignac, D., A. Sayah, S. Constantin, R. Freitag, and M. A. 
M. Gijs. 2000. Powder blasting as a novel technique for the 
realisation of capillary electrophoresis chips. Eurosensors 
XIV. Eds. R. de Reus and S. Bouwstra. Copenhagen: MIC-
Mikroelektronik Centret.
 35. Bornand, E., F. Amalou, and M. A. M. Gijs. 2000. Eurosensors 
XIV. Eds. R. de Reus and S. Bouwstra. Copenhagen: MIC-
Mikroelektronik Centret.
 36. Belloy, E., A. Sayah, and M. A. M. Gijs. 2000. Powder blast-
ing for three dimensional microstructuring of glass. Sensors 
Actuators A 86:231–37.
 37. Kalpakjian, S. 1984. Manufacturing processes for engineering 
materials. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
 38. Vasile, M. J., C. Biddick, and S. A. Schwalm. 1993. 
Micromechanical systems. Eds A. P. Pisano, J. Jara-Almonte, 
and W. Trimmer. New York: ASME Press, p. 81.
 39. Vasile, M. J., C. Biddick, and S. A. Schwalm. 1994. 
Microfabrication by ion milling: the lathe technique. J Vac 
Sci Technol B12:2388.
 40. Ehmann, K. E., D. Bourell, M. L. Culpepper, T. J. Hodgson, 
T. R. Kurfess, M. Madou, K. Rajurkar, and D. DeVor. 2007. 
Micromanufacturing: international assessment of research and 
development. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. www.
wtec.org/micromfg/report/micro-report.pdf
 41. Vogler, M. P., X. Liu, S. G. Kapoor, R. E. DeVor, and  K. F. 
Ehmann. 2002. Development of meso-scale machine tool 
(mMT) systems. Transactions of NAMRI/SME 30:653–61.
 42. Higuchi, T., and Y. Yamagata. 1993. Proceedings: IEEE micro 
electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL.
 43. Gershenfeld, N. 2005. FAB: the coming revolution on your 
desktop—from personal computers to personal fabrication. New 
York: Basic Books.
 44. Aoki, I., and T. Takahashi. 1996. SPIE: micromachining and 
microfabrication process technology II. Austin, TX.
 45. Kitahara, T., Y. Ishikawa, K. Terada, N. Nakajima, and K. 
Furuta. 1996. Development of microlathe.  J Mechanical 
Engineering Lab 50:5, 117–23.
 46. Lu, Z., and T. Yoneyama. 1999. Micro cutting in the 
micro lathe turning system. Int J Machine Tools Manufact 
39:1171–83.
 47. Nakao, M., Y. Hatamura, and S. Tomomasa. 1996. 
Microrobotics: components and applications. Ed. A. Sulzmann. 
Boston: SPIE.
 48. McKeown, P. 1996. From micro- to nano-machining– 
towards the nanometre era. Sensor Review  16:4–10.
 49. Ruiz-Huerta, L., A. Caballero Ruiz, and E. Kussul. 2002. 
Guidelines for design low cost micromechanics. Proceedings 
ASPE. St. Louis, MO, October 20–25, 2002.
 50. Mishima, N., K. Ashida, T. Tanikawa, H. Maekawa, 
K.  Kaneko, and M. Tanaka. 2000. Micro-factory and a 
design evaluation method for miniature machine tools. 
Proc. of Int. Workshop on Microfactories, pp. 155–58.
  51. Takeuchi, Y., H. Yonekura, and K. Sawada. 2003. Creation 
of 3D tiny statue by 5-axis control ultraprecision machin-
ing. Computer Aided Design 35:403–09.
384   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 385]
PART III
Pattern Transfer 
with Additive 
Techniques
As an adolescent I aspired to lasting fame, I craved factual certainty, and 
I thirsted for a meaningful vision of human life—so I became a scientist. 
This is like becoming an archbishop so you can meet girls.
Matt Cartmill
If any student comes to me and says he wants to be useful to mankind 
and go into research to alleviate human suffering, I advise him to go into 
 Building structures with additive technologies. The Tower of Babel, c.1563 by 
Pieter Bruegel the Elder.

[Page 386]
386   Pattern Transfer with Additive Techniques
charity instead. Research wants real egotists who 
seek their own pleasure and satisfaction, but find it 
in solving the puzzles of nature.
Albert Szent-Györgi
Introduction to Part III
Chapter 7  Physical 
and 
Chemical 
Vapor 
Deposition, Thin Film Properties, 
and Surface Micromachining
Chapter 8  Chemical-, 
Photochemical-, 
and 
Electrochemical-Based Forming
Chapter 9  Thermal Energy-Based Forming 
Chapter 10 Micromolding Techniques—LIGA
Introduction to Part III
In Part III we cover additive (forming) processes, 
where materials are added, usually in a selective 
manner, to a work piece or a device under con-
struction. In manufacturing “forming” creates an 
original shape from a molten mass, a solution, the 
gaseous state, plasma, or solid particles, and during 
such processes cohesion is created among individual 
particles. Forming techniques are often accompa-
nied or followed by thermal processing to obtain 
desired material properties and substrate adhesion. 
Subtractive manufacturing techniques, covered in 
Part II, are categorized according to the energy used 
at the work piece as mechanical, chemical, or thermal. 
This classification—straightforward in the case of 
subtractive processes—breaks down quickly when 
applied to additive processes. Take physical vapor 
deposition (PVD), covered in Chapter 7, a method 
classified as a mechanical additive technique 
because material is deposited onto the work piece 
by direct line-of-sight impingement deposition. 
However, in additive techniques the depositing 
material itself might be generated through the appli-
cation of thermal energy (e.g., thermal evaporation) 
or mechanical energy (e.g., sputter deposition) to a 
source material. In such case, the rule is to catego-
rize the technique with the name of the process that 
brings the depositing material to the substrate, not 
for the process that generates the depositing mate-
rial. For example, laser ablation deposition, also 
called laser sputter deposition (Chapter 7), uses ther-
mal energy to ablate the material to be deposited 
but must be categorized as a mechanical method 
because the depositing material reaches the surface 
in a line-of-sight manner (mechanical). Most com-
plicated to categorize are forming methods where 
chemical and thermal effects are intertwined in 
the deposition process on the substrate itself. Along 
this line, laser-assisted chemical vapor deposition 
(LCVD) (Chapter 9) is called a thermal technique 
because the heat of the laser beam induces the local 
material deposition, but because it involves a chemi-
cal reaction at the surface it could also have been 
termed a chemical additive process. (Remember that 
subtractive laser machining is a purely thermal tech-
nique; see Chapter 5.) In such cases one could refer 
to the technique as thermochemical, as in the case of 
the thermal oxidation of Si in a stream of humidified 
oxygen at 900°C, but in practice one classifies such 
methods as either chemical or thermal, depending 
on the primacy of the chemical reaction or the heat 
application, with the lower-temperature processes 
typically classified as chemical (e.g., sol-gel, screen 
printing of organics, and ink-jetting) and the higher-
temperature processes as thermal (e.g., LCVD, screen 
printing of inorganics, and spray pyrolysis).
Although deposition methods in MEMS and 
NEMS, especially in the thin-film arena, are gener-
ally the same as in integrated circuits (ICs), additive 
processes in miniaturization science span a much 
wider and diverse range from inorganic to organic 
materials. Besides the typical microelectronic ele-
ments (Si, Al, Au, Ti, W, Cu, Cr, O, N, and Ni-Fe 
alloys), miniaturization science involves deposition 
of several nontypical elements such as Zr, Ta, Ir, C, 
Pt, Pd, Ag, Zn, In, Nb, and Sn. Moreover, a pleth-
ora of exotic compounds ranging from enzymes to 
shape memory alloys and from hydrogels to piezo-
electrics is used in miniaturization science. In com-
parison, the number of materials and compounds 
involved in IC fabrication is very limited. In min-
iaturization science, particularly in chemical sen-
sors and biomedical devices, modular, thick-film 
deposition technologies are more prevalent than in 
the IC industry.
In Table III.1 we list IC and MEMS/NEMS materi-
als, typical deposition techniques, and an example 

[Page 387]
Pattern Transfer with Additive Techniques   387
TABLE III.1 IC and MEMS/NEMS Materials, Deposition Method, and Typical Application
Material
Deposition Technique
Typical Application
Organic thin films
Hydrogel
Silk screen
Internal electrolyte in chem. sensors
Photoresist (0.1–2 µm)
Spin-on
Masking, planarization
Thick photoresist (10–1000 µm)
Casting
Mold for metal plating
DNA
Ink-jetting
DNA array for molecular diagnostics
Polyimide
Spin-on
Electrical isolation, planarization, microstructures
Metal oxides
Aluminum oxide
CVD, sputtering, anodization
Electrical isolation
Indium oxide
Sputtering
Semiconductor
Tantalum oxide
CVD, sputtering, anodization
Electrical isolation
Tin oxide (SnO2)
Sputtering
Semiconductor in gas sensors
Zinc oxide
Sputtering
Electrical isolation, piezoelectric
ZrO2
Thermal spray deposition 
from plasmas or flames
Coatings for aircraft engine parts and ZrO2 
sensors
Compound semiconductors
Cadmium sulphide (II–VI compound)
Spray pyrolysis (CVD)
Solar cell
Gallium arsenide (III–V compound)
Metalorganic CVD (MOCVD)
Optoelectronic devices
Gallium-aluminum arsenide
Molecular beam epitaxy 
(MBE)
A semiconductor alloy used as the light 
confinement layer in both single- and double-
heterostructure diode lasers
Noncrystalline silicon compounds
α-Si-H
CVD, sputtering, plasma CVD
Semiconductors
Polysilicon
CVD, sputtering, plasma CVD
Conductor, microstructures
Silicides
CVD, sputtering, plasma CVD, 
alloying of metal and silicon 
Conductors
Metals (thin films) with ρ in μΩ cm in 
parentheses
Silver (Ag) (1.58)
Evaporation, sputtering
Electrochemistry electrode
Aluminum (Al) (2.7)
Evaporation, sputtering, 
plasma CVD
Electrical interconnects, limited to operations 
<300°C
Chromium (Cr) (12.9)
Evaporation, sputtering, 
electroplating
Electrical conduction, adhesion layer (10–100 nm)
Gold (Au) (2.4)
Evaporation, sputtering, 
electroplating
Electrical interconnects for higher temperatures 
than Al, optical reflection in the IR
Iridium (Ir) (5.1)
Sputtering
Electrochemistry electrode, biopotential 
measurements
Molybdenum
Sputtering
Electrical conduction
Platinum (Pt) (10.6)
Sputtering
Electrochemistry electrode, biopotential 
measurements
Palladium (Pd) (10.8)
Sputtering
Electrical conduction, adhesion layer, 
electrochemistry electrode, solder wetting layer
Tungsten (W) (5.5)
Sputtering
Electrical interconnects at higher temperatures
Titanium (Ti) (42)
Sputtering
Adhesion layer
Copper (Cu) (1.7)
Sputtering
Low resistivity interconnects
Alloys with ρ in μΩ cm in parentheses
Al-Si-Cu
Evaporation, sputtering
Electrical conduction
Nichrome (NiCr) (200–500)
Evaporation, sputtering
Thin film laser-trimmed resistor
Permalloy™ (NixFey)
Sputtering
Magnetoresistor, thermistor
TiNi (80)
Sputtering
Shape memory alloy
(Continued)

[Page 388]
388   Pattern Transfer with Additive Techniques
application for the deposit. As in the case of subtrac-
tive processes (Part II), only the underlying physical 
and chemical principles of the various additive pro-
cesses dealt with in Part III are explored.
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) processes and 
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) are topics of 
Chapter 7. In the same chapter we survey thin-film 
properties and detail surface micromachining, an 
important application of thin-film deposition tech-
niques. In surface micromachining, features are built 
up, layer by layer, on the surface of a substrate (e.g., 
a single-crystal silicon wafer). Dry etching defines 
the surface features in the x,y-plane, and wet etch-
ing releases them from the plane by undercutting. In 
surface micromachining, shapes in the x,y-plane are 
unrestricted by the crystallography of the substrate.
In Chapter 8 we deal with additive chemical, 
photochemical, and electrochemical processes.* 
In chemical forming, chemical reactions create 
features by forming new compounds. The energy 
at work in these additive processes is chemical. 
Some of the best-known examples, with the 
chemical 
reaction 
dominant 
over 
the 
heat 
application, are sol-gel, reaction injection molding 
(RIM), colloidal processes, and self-assembled 
monolayers (SAMs). With the growth of the bio-
MEMS field, techniques for depositing organic 
materials for chemical and biological sensors, often 
arranged in some type of an array configuration, 
are gaining importance. The chemical-forming 
methods covered in Chapter 8 are geared toward 
* Under subtractive chemical processes (Part II), we grouped purely 
chemical processes and electrochemical and photochemical machin-
ing together; in Part III we treat additive chemical, electrochemical, 
and photochemical as clearly distinct processes.
bio-MEMS 
applications. 
In 
photochemical 
forming, photoenergy solidifies a material into a 
3D shape, as illustrated in rapid prototyping and 
microphotoforming (stereo lithography). In the case 
of electrochemical  forming, the energy at work is 
electrochemical. Electrochemical  and electroless 
metal depo sition are  gaining renewed interest 
because of their emerging importance in making 
mold inserts for replication methodologies in both 
MEMS and NEMS (see also Chapter 10).
Chapter 9 covers thermal forming techniques 
where thermal energy provided by a heat source 
“transforms” a material as in crystallization, sinter-
ing, alloying, annealing, decomposition, and pyroliz-
ing. Chemical and thermal forming techniques are 
often intertwined because reactions are induced 
by combining different chemicals and are aided by 
heat and catalysts. Along this line, screen printing 
is treated as a thermal process when dealing with 
inorganic material deposition (high temperature) 
and as a chemical process when depositing organics 
(low temperature). Similarly, the high-temperature 
ceramic application of tape casting (also called doc-
tor blading or knife coating when dealing with paper, 
polymers, and paints) is treated as a thermal process 
where it is called green tape technology.
Replication methods based on plastic molding 
and  LIGA—a sophisticated type of replication 
technique 
combining 
x-ray 
lithography 
with 
electroplating and plastic molding—are discussed 
in Chapter 10. Plastic molding techniques include 
RIM, 
thermoplastic 
injection 
molding 
(IM), 
and compression molding or hot embossing. Of 
the three, only RIM is a chemical-forming tech- 
nique; the other two are thermal methods. Plastic 
TABLE III.1 IC and MEMS/NEMS Materials, Deposition Method, and Typical Application (Continued)
Material
Deposition Technique
Typical Application
Chemically/physically modified silicon
n/p-type silicon
Implantation, diffusion, 
incorporation in the melt 
Conduction modulation, etch stop
Porous silicon
Anodization
Electrical isolation, light-emitting structures, 
porous junctions
Silicon dioxide
Thermal oxidation, 
sputtering, anodization, 
implantation, CVD
Electrical and thermal isolation, masking, 
encapsulation
Silicon nitride
Plasma-enhanced CVD 
(PECVD)
Electrical and thermal isolation, masking, 
encapsulation

[Page 389]
Pattern Transfer with Additive Techniques   389
molding technology often is the least expensive 
manufacturing technique available. One only has 
to look around the home or office to recognize the 
pervasive nature of highly intricate, very low-cost 
plastic parts surrounding us. This method has the 
capability of making truly 3D parts with a wide 
range of feature sizes. Master molds can be made 
with both nonlithography- (e.g., CNC-machined 
master mold) and lithography-based (e.g., LIGA 
mold) techniques.

[Page 390]
[empty page]

[Page 391]
391
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Physical Vapor Deposition
Chemical Vapor Deposition
Mechanical Properties of Thin Films
Surface Micromachining
Questions
References
7
Physical and 
Chemical Vapor 
Deposition—Thin 
Film Properties 
and Surface 
Micromachining
Introduction
Chapter 7 introduces physical vapor deposition (PVD) and chemical 
vapor deposition (CVD). PVD constitutes a group of direct line-of-sight 
impingement deposition techniques, and CVD represents a class of 
diffusive-convective mass transfer deposition techniques. Evaporation, 
sputtering, laser ablation deposition, ion plating, cluster deposition, 
 Surface micromachining. Clutch mechanism made in polysilicon. Gears are 50 μm 
across. Courtesy Sandia National Lab.

[Page 392]
392   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), and aerosol depo-
sition (AD) represent the PVD techniques discussed. 
CVD techniques covered are plasma-enhanced CVD 
(PECVD), high-density plasma CVD (HDPCVD), 
atmospheric pressure CVD (APCVD), low-pressure 
CVD (LPCVD), very low-pressure CVD (VLPCVD), 
electron cyclotron resonance CVD (ECRCVD), 
metalorganic CVD (MOCVD), and atomic layer 
deposition (ALD).
Epitaxial techniques arrange atoms in single-
crystal fashion on a crystalline substrate that acts 
as a seed crystal so that the lattice of the newly 
grown film  duplicates that of the substrate. If the 
film is of the same material as the substrate, the 
process is called homoepitaxy, epitaxy, or simply epi. 
Epi deposition represents one of the cornerstone 
techniques for building micromachines, and a sepa-
rate section reviews progress in epitaxial methods. 
Epitaxial techniques are usually chemical (CVD) in 
nature but may also be physical (e.g., MBE is a PVD 
technique).
The mechanical properties of thin CVD and PVD 
films are discussed next, and their applications in 
surface micromachining are detailed. We review 
thin film material properties in general, focusing 
on significant differences with bulk properties of 
the same material. Because of the complexity of the 
many parameters influencing thin film properties, 
we present the deposition of polysilicon as a case 
study. This is followed by a review of the main sur-
face micromachining processes. Bulk micromachin-
ing means that three-dimensional (3D) features are 
etched into the bulk of crystalline and noncrystal-
line materials (see Chapter 4). In contrast, surface 
micromachined features are built up, layer by layer, 
on the surface of a substrate (e.g., a single crystal sili-
con wafer). Dry etching defines the surface features 
in the x,y-plane, and wet etching releases them from 
the plane by undercutting. In surface micromachin-
ing, shapes in the x,y-plane are unrestricted by the 
crystallography of the substrate. For illustration, in 
Figure 7.1 we compare typical bulk micromachining 
etching (both dry and wet) with polysilicon surface 
micromachining. Not reflected in this figure is the 
fact that the surface micromachined devices typi-
cally end up a bit smaller than their bulk microma-
chined counterparts.
Physical Vapor Deposition
Introduction
Many different kinds of thin films in integrated cir-
cuits (ICs) and micro- and nanomachines are depos-
ited by evaporation and sputtering, both of which 
are  examples of physical vapor deposition (PVD). 
The technique represents a very versatile coating 
technology applicable to an almost unlimited com-
bination of coating substances and substrate mate-
rials. PVD reactors may use solid, liquid, or vapor 
as raw source material in a variety of configura-
tions and are used to apply a wide variety of metals, 
alloys, ceramics, and other inorganic compounds, 
and even certain polymers. However, in practice, the 
technique is mostly used to deposit metals. Possible 
substrates include semiconductors, metals, glass, 
and plastics. At the low pressures used in a PVD 
reactor, the vaporized material encounters few inter-
molecular collisions while traveling to the substrate. 
Consequently, modeling of deposition rates is a rela-
tively straightforward exercise in geometry.
Most PVD processes consist of the following ele-
mentary steps: 1) the synthesis of the coating vapor 
from the source material, 2) transport of the vapor 
to the substrate, and 3) condensation of vapors onto 
the surface of the substrate. These steps are generally 
Si
Si
Si
(a)
(b)
Photoresist
Photoresist
Structural polysilicon
Tin ﬁlm deposition and etching
KOH, EDP, TMAH, ...
Wet Etching
Dry Etching
Deep RIE (ICP-RIE)
Releasing
Si
FIGURE 7.1 Typical bulk micromachining (dry and wet) (a) 
versus polysilicon surface micromachining process steps 
(b). (Figure by Dr. Han Xu.) Acronyms such as RIE, ICP-RIE, 
EDP and TMAH are explained in this chapter.

[Page 393]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   393
carried out in a vacuum chamber; therefore, evacu-
ation of the chamber precedes the PVD processes. 
The substrates are held upside down to minimize 
particulate contamination. The PVD techniques 
may be grouped into five principal types: 1) thermal 
evaporation, 2) sputtering, 3) ion plating and cluster 
deposition, 4) laser sputter deposition or laser abla-
tion deposition, and 5) aerosol deposition as listed 
in Table 7.1. Ion plating and cluster deposition are 
based on a combination of evaporation and plasma 
ionization and offer some of the advantages inher-
ent to both techniques. In aerosol deposition, solid 
particles are impacted at high speed on a substrate. 
This promising new process, we will learn, deviates 
significantly from all other PVD processes.
PVD is applied in the fabrication of electronic 
devices, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), 
and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS), prin -
cipally for depositing metal to form electrical 
 connections. However, appli cations also include 
thin decorative coatings on plastic and metal parts 
such as trophies, toys, pens and pencils, watchcases, 
and interior trims in automobiles. The coatings in 
this case are thin films of aluminum (around 150 
nm) coated with clear lacquer to give a high-gloss 
silver or chrome appearance. Another use of PVD is 
to apply antireflection coatings of magnesium fluo-
ride (MgF2) onto optical lenses. Ion plating is widely 
used to coat titanium nitride (TiN) onto cutting 
tools and plastic injection molds for wear resistance, 
and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is particularly 
useful when dealing with complex compounds, as 
in the case of the deposition of high- temperature 
superconductor 
films 
(HTSC), 
for 
example, 
YBa2Cu3O7–x. Another example application of PLD is 
the deposition of the biocomp atible calcium-phos-
phate-based ceramic, calcium hydroxylapatite, or 
Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2. Aerosol impact deposition excels 
at making ceramic films at low temperature on all 
types of substrates.
Thermal Evaporation
Certain materials (mostly pure metals) can be depos-
ited onto a substrate by transforming them first 
from the solid source to the vapor state in a vacuum 
and then letting them condense on the substrate 
surface. Thermal evaporation represents one of the 
oldest thin film deposition techniques. Evaporation 
is based on the boiling off (or sublimating) of a 
heated material onto a substrate in a vacuum. From 
thermodynamic considerations, the number of mol-
ecules leaving a unit area of evaporant per second, 
i.e., flux F, is given by:
 
F
N e
0
KT
=
φe  
(7.1)
where N0 is a slowly varying function of temper -
ature (T) and Φe is the activation energy (in eV) 
required to evaporate one molecule of the material. 
The activation energy for evaporation is related to 
the enthalpy of formation of the evaporant, H, as 
H = Φe × e × N (Avogadro’s number) J/mol.
Table 7.2 suggests the need for a good vacuum 
during evaporation; even at a pressure of 10–5 Torr, 
TABLE 7.1 Principal Types of PVD Techniques
PVD Process
Features and Coating Materials
Thermal evaporation
Features: Equipment is relatively low cost and simple; deposition of compounds is difficult; 
coating adhesion not as good as for other PVD processes
Typical coating materials: Ag, Al, Au, Cr, Cu, Mo, W
Sputtering
Features: Better throwing power and coating adhesion than vacuum evaporation; can coat 
compounds; slower deposition rates and more difficult process control than vacuum evaporation
Typical coating materials: Al2O2, Au, Cr, Mo, SiO2, Si3N4, TiC, TiN
Ion plating and 
cluster deposition
Features: Best coverage and coating adhesion of PVD processes; most complex process control; 
higher deposition rates than sputtering
Typical coating materials: Ag, Au, Cr, Mo, Si3N4, TiC, TiN
Laser sputter 
deposition or laser 
ablation deposition
Features: Best for complex compound deposition
Typical coating materials: high-temperature superconductor YBa2Cu3O7–x and biocompatible 
calcium hydroxylapatite, or Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2
Aerosol deposition
Features: Lowest temperature deposition
Typical coating materials: ceramic coatings on all types of substrates

[Page 394]
394   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
4.4 contaminating monolayers per second will 
impinge on the substrate.1 For reference purposes, 
the number of atoms per unit area correspond-
ing to a monolayer for a metal is about 1015 atoms/
cm2. Moreover, to avoid reactions at the source (e.g., 
oxide impurities being formed), the oxygen partial 
pressure needs to be less than 10–8 Torr.
In a laboratory setting, metals are often evapo-
rated by passing a high current through a highly 
refractory metal. A refractory metal (for example, 
W or Mo) is formed into a suitable container [e.g., 
a tungsten crucible (boat) or filament] to hold the 
source material. Current is applied to heat the con-
tainer, which then heats the material in contact with 
it. One problem with this heating method is pos-
sible alloying between the holder and its contents so 
that the deposited film becomes contaminated with 
the metal of the container. This method is called 
resistive heating (Figure 7.2a). Resistive evaporation 
is simple but easily spreads contaminants present in 
the filament, and the small size of the filament lim-
its the thickness of the deposited film. Because heat-
ing is accomplished in a vacuum, the temperature 
required for vaporization is significantly below the 
corresponding temperature required at atmospheric 
pressure. Also, the absence of air in the chamber pre-
vents oxidation of the source material at the heating 
temperatures.
In industrial applications, resistive heating has 
been surpassed by electron beam (e-beam) and 
radiofrequency (RF) induction evaporation. In the 
e-beam mode of operation, a high-intensity e-beam 
gun (3–20 keV) is focused on the target material that 
is placed in a recess in a water-cooled copper hearth. 
As shown in Figure 7.2b, the e-beam is magnetically 
directed onto the evaporant, which melts locally. In 
this manner, the metal forms its own crucible, and 
the contact with the hearth is too cool for chemi-
cal reactions, resulting in fewer source-contamina-
tion problems than in the case of resistive heating. 
E-beam evaporation not only results in higher qual-
ity films, but it also provides a higher deposition rate 
TABLE 7.2 Kinetic Data for Air as a Function of Pressure
Pressure (Torr)
Mean Free Path (cm)
Number
Monolayer
Impingement Rate (s−1. cm−2)
Impingement Rate (s−1)
101
0.5
3.8 × 1018
4400
10−4
51
3.8 × 1016
44
10−5
510
3.8 × 1015
4.4
10−7
5.1 × 104
3.8 × 1013
4.4 × 10−2
10−9
5.1 × 106
3.8 × 1011
4.4 × 10−4
Source: Brodie, I., and J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrication. New York: Plenum Press. With permission.1
FIGURE 7.2 Thin film deposition by evaporation. 
(a) Typical evaporation setup. (b) Diagram of a mag-
netized deflection electron-beam evaporation system. 
(From Brodie, I., and J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of micro-
fabrication. New York: Plenum Press. With permission.1)

[Page 395]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   395
(50–500 nm/min). Two disadvantages of e-beam 
evaporation are that the process might induce x-ray 
damage and possibly even some ion damage to the 
substrate (at voltages >10 kV, the incident e-beam 
causes x-ray emission) and that the deposition 
equipment is more complex. X-ray damage may be 
avoided by using a focused, high-power laser beam 
instead of an e-beam. However, this technique is 
expensive and has not yet penetrated commercial 
applications.
In RF induction heating, a water-cooled RF cou-
pling coil surrounds a crucible with the material to 
be evaporated. Because about two-thirds of the RF 
energy is absorbed within one skin depth of the sur-
face, the frequency of the RF supply must decrease 
as the size of the evaporant charge increases. With 
a charge of a few grams of evaporant, frequencies of 
several hundred kilohertz are sufficient.
In Table 7.3, we compare the different heat sources 
available for thermal evaporation.
The substances used most frequently for thin-
film formation by evaporation are elements or 
simple compounds whose vapor pressures range 
from 1–10–2 Torr in the temperature interval from 
600–1200°C. Refractory metals such as platinum, 
molybdenum, tantalum, and tungsten do not eas-
ily heat to the temperatures required to reach that 
vapor pressure range. To obtain a deposition rate 
high enough for practical applications, the vapor 
pressure at the source must be above the background 
pressure and reach at least 10–2 Torr. An evaporation 
source operating at a vapor pressure of 10–1 Torr, for 
example, can deliver rates of about 1000 atomic lay-
ers per second. The rate of atoms or molecules lost 
from the source as a result of evaporation, flux F, 
in molecules/unit area/unit time (Equation 7.1), 
can also be expressed in the following relation-
ship derived from kinetic considerations on how 
the vapor pressure of  the evaporant relates to the 
evaporation rate:
 
F
P (T)
(2 MKT)
3.51310
P (T)
(MT)
v
1
2
22
v
1
2
=
π
=
 
(7.2)
where M = molecular weight of the evaporant
 
T = source temperature in Kelvins
 PV(T) = vapor pressure of the evaporant in Torr
Metal deposition rates of 0.5 µm/min are typical 
when operating in the 10-mTorr range. Whatever the 
vaporization technique, evaporated atoms leave the 
source and follow straight-line paths until they col-
lide with other gas molecules or strike the substrate 
to be coated. If a high vacuum is established, most 
atoms/molecules will deposit on the substrate with-
out suffering intervening collisions with other gas 
molecules. The fraction of particles scattered by col-
lisions (N/N0) with atoms of residual gas is propor-
tional to:
 
N
N
1
e
0
d
∝−
λ
 
 
(7.3)
where d =  distance between source and substrate 
(see Figure 7.3a)
 
λ = mean free path of the particles
At 10–5 Torr, the mean free path in air hovers 
about  5 m, and at about 0.5 m at 10–4 Torr (see 
Table 7.2). The source-to-wafer distance must be 
smaller than the mean free path of the residual gas. 
Typically, this distance is 25–70 cm. With λ > d, 
Equation 7.3 approaches 1, i.e., no particles are scat-
tered (N = N0).
On contact with the relatively cool substrate sur-
face, the energy of the impinging atoms is suddenly 
reduced to the point where they cannot remain in 
the vapor state; they condense and become attached 
to the solid surface, forming a deposited thin film. 
Reaching the substrate, atoms, depending on their 
energy, still may diffuse laterally over the surface 
according to:
 
D
D e
0
E
kT
D
=
−
 
(7.4)
TABLE 7.3 Comparison of Heat Sources for Evaporation
Heat Sources
Advantages
Disadvantages
Resistance
No radiation
Contamination
Electron beam
Low contamination
Radiation
RF
No radiation
Contamination
Laser
No radiation, low 
contamination
Expensive

[Page 396]
396   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
where ED is the activation energy for diffusion 
(~2–3 eV) and kT is the energy of the diffusing spe-
cies. For atoms, after arrival on the surface, to find the 
best energetic site one must either use energetic atoms 
or heat the substrate. In a low energy deposition sys-
tem, such as molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) (see Ion 
Cluster Beam Deposition—Nanoparticle Deposition 
section), arriving atoms (~0.1 eV) may form islands 
unless one picks the right substrate or the substrate is 
heated to high temperatures. On the other hand, in a 
high energy deposition system, such as in sputtering 
(~1 eV), one gets smoother films at lower substrate 
temperatures, but intermixing may occur.
In a configuration where the evaporant is held in 
a container with a small hole (i.e., in an effusion or 
Knudsen cell as shown in Figures 7.2a and 7.3a) rather 
than in an open containment structure, the flow 
through the exit orifice of the evaporant source can 
range from free molecular to viscous. If the Knudsen 
number (Kn, ratio of the mean free path, λ, to the 
orifice diameter, D) is greater than 1:
 
Kn
D
1
= λ >
 
(7.5)
an atom or molecule passes the orifice in a single, 
straight track and the flow is free molecular. If, on 
the other hand, the Knudsen number is <0.01, the 
flow is viscous, that is, the atom or molecule, before 
emerging from the orifice, bounces several times 
into the orifice’s sidewalls. A transition region exists 
between the two.
By kinetic molecular theory the mean free path 
relates to the total pressure as:
 
λ =
π
η
RT
2M
P
1
2
T
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(7.6)
where PT = pressure at the point of interest
 
 
R = ideal gas constant
 
 
η = gas viscosity
Low pressure, low molecular weight, and high vis-
cosity translate into a large mean free path. A high 
vacuum prevents oxidation of, e.g., aluminum and 
also ensures a purer material deposit with very little 
FIGURE 7.3 Geometric considerations in evaporation. 
(a) Geometric considerations of arrival rate A at an 
arbitrary surface element in an evaporation experiment. 
(b) Nonuniform thickness of deposits over varying topo-
graphy with θ = 0° (top) and θ ≠ 0°C (bottom).

[Page 397]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   397
gas inclusions. The arrival rate, A, at distance d from 
a small evaporation source follows the cosine law of 
deposition:
 
A
cos
cos
d2
∼
β
θ 
(7.7)
where β =  angle between the normal to the substrate 
and the radial vector joining the source to 
the arrival point being considered
 
θ =  angle between the normal to the evapo-
ration source and the same radial vector 
(see Figure 7.3a)
The deposition, according to Equation 7.7, is not 
spherical; maximum deposition occurs in direc-
tions normal to the evaporation source, where cosθ 
is maximum (θ = 0). With the substrate positioned 
at a distance d from the aperture and directly in 
line with the aperture, the arrival rate, A, or total 
number of molecules per second striking a unit area 
of substrate, is:
 
A
3.513 10
P (T)
d (MT)
22
v
2
1
2
=
 
(7.8)
(See also Equation 7.2 for the evaporation rate F.) The 
straight line or directional deposition of evaporant 
leads to difficulties in obtaining a continuous coat-
ing over topographical steps on a wafer, a problem 
known as shadowing. This is of particular concern in 
micromachining, where high-aspect-ratio features 
are common. Figure 7.3b illustrates a typical case. 
Because the thickness of the deposited film, t, is pro-
portional to the cosβ, the ratio of the film thickness 
shown in Figure 7.3b, at θ = 0°, is given as:
 
t
t
cos
cos
1
2
2
=
β
β
1  
(7.9)
In case of a steep wall, β2 ~ 70° and β1 ~ 0°, the 
ratio of t1/t2 is approximately 3. The thinner section, 
t2, is susceptible to cracking at the extreme ends of 
the interval. Two methods can help overcome this 
problem. The first requires heating of the substrate 
during deposition to 300–400°C to increase the 
surface mobility of the metal atoms. The second 
relies on rotating the wafers in planetary wafer hold-
ers so that the angle β varies during deposition (see 
Figure  7.4).2 Shadowing prevents the formation of 
a  conformal coat over a step. Mounting the sub-
strates on rotating planetaries aids in making the 
coat more conformal. A conformal coat is uniform 
in thickness independent of the underlying topo-
graphy (see Figure 7.5).
Evaporation is fast (e.g., 0.5 µm/min for Al) and 
comparatively simple; it registers a low-energy 
impact  on the substrate (~0.1 eV); that is, no sur-
face damage results except when using e-beam evap-
oration. Under proper experimental conditions, 
evaporation can provide films of extreme purity 
and known structure. In cases where the purity of 
the deposited film is of prime importance, evapo-
ration is the preferred technique. For example, for 
electrochemical sensors, where the electrocatalytic 
activity of the top monolayers of the sensing elec-
trode determines proper operation, material purity 
Source-substrate conﬁguration
Substrates
Substrate
heaters
Source
Rotating
planetaries
Rotating
planetaries
Resulting step
coverage
Resulting step
coverage
Resulting step
coverage
Incident atoms
Incident atoms
Step
Deposited Film
FIGURE 7.4 Shadowing effect may be overcome by using 
rotating planetaries and heating of the substrate.

[Page 398]
398   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
is a priority consideration. In chemical sensors, the 
surface purity of films is more important than the 
bulk resistivity (a criterion often used to evaluate IC 
films). As we just learned, evaporators emit material 
from a point source (e.g., a small tungsten filament), 
resulting in shadowing and sometimes causing 
problems with deposition, especially on high-
 aspect structures. Difficulties also arise for large 
areas where highly homogeneous films are required, 
unless special setups are chosen. A different problem 
to overcome arises from the source materials decom-
posing at high evaporation temperatures. Although 
this risk does not exist when evaporating pure ele-
ments, it becomes a problem in the evaporation of 
compounds and substance mixtures. The e-beam 
heating systems have an advantage here because 
only a small part of the metal source evaporates. The 
initial evaporant stream is richer in the higher- vapor-
pressure component; however, the melt depletes that 
constituent locally, and eventually an equilibrium 
rate is established. The best way to deposit complex 
metal alloys is then to e-beam evaporate the metal-
lic elements from different sources because mod-
ern quartz-crystal deposition rate monitors enable 
excellent control in alloy composition. To form 
oxides of the deposited metals, evaporation is per-
formed in a low-pressure oxygen atmosphere. This 
process is known as reactive evaporation. The oxygen 
supply comes from a jet  directed at the substrate 
during deposition. To obtain the correct stoichio-
metry, the deposition needs to take place on a heated 
substrate.
Evaporated thin films are usually under tensile 
stress, and the higher the material’s melting point, 
the higher the stress. Tungsten and nickel, for exam-
ple, can have stress in excess of 500 MPa, which 
may lead to curling or peeling.3 Increasing the tem-
perature of the substrate tends to lower the internal 
stresses in the thin film.
Theoretical film thickness profiles for deposi-
tion into an arbitrary-shaped cavity or trench can 
be calculated using a computer program named 
SAMPLE, which gives the thin film profile for par-
ticular input parameters (http://www.eecs.berkeley.
edu/~neureuth).4,5 In Figure 7.6a we show a SAMPLE 
result for the line-of-sight deposition in the case of re-
entrant side-wall angles. The program correctly pre-
dicts a discontinuity in the thin film lines in Figure 
7.6b. In Figure 7.6c it is shown how, for the case of 
wafers rotating on a planetary system, step coverage 
is significantly improved. However, the solution is 
not perfect because a keyhole effect might result if 
too much material is deposited (Figure 7.6d).
Sputtering
During sputtering, the target (a disc of the mate-
rial to be deposited), at a high negative potential, 
is bombarded with positive argon ions (other inert 
gases such as Xe can be used as well) created in a 
plasma (also glow discharge). The target material is 
sputtered away mainly as neutral atoms by momen-
tum transfer, and ejected surface atoms are deposited 
(condensed) onto the substrate placed on the anode. 
The substrate must be placed close to the cathode and 
is usually heated to improve bonding of the coating 
atoms. A typical arrangement is shown in Figure 7.7.
Sputtering is preferred over evaporation in many 
applications because of a wider choice of materials 
to work with, better step coverage, and better adhe-
sion to the substrate. Whereas vacuum evaporation 
is generally limited to metals, sputtering can be 
applied to nearly any material, both metallic and 
nonmetallic elements, alloys, ceramics, and poly-
mers. Films of chemical compounds can also be 
deposited by using reactive gases that form oxides, 
carbides, or nitrides with the sputtered metal. Films 
of alloys and compounds can be sputtered without 
changing their chemical compositions. Sputtering 
FIGURE 7.5 Illustration of conformal and nonconformal step coverage.

[Page 399]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   399
is used in laboratories and production settings, 
whereas evaporation mainly remains a laboratory 
technique. Other reasons to choose sputtering over 
evaporation can be concluded from a comparison of 
the two techniques in Table 7.4.
Because most aspects pertaining to the physics 
and  chemistries of DC and RF plasmas were dis-
cussed in Chapter 3, we will only amplify these top-
ics here as they apply to material deposition. During 
ion bombardment, the source is not purposely 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1.00 µm
1.00 µm
1.10 µm
-1.855
-1.669
-1.484
-1.298
-1.113
-0.927
-0.742
-0.556
-0.371
-0.185
0.0
X-AXIS
Y
-
A
X
I
S
0.0
-0.151
-1.502
-2.254
-3.005
--3.757
-4.508
-5.260
-6.011
-6.763
-7.514
0.0
0.303 0.807 0.911 1.215 1.519 1.823 2.127 2.431 2.735 3.039
X-AXIS
Y
-
A
X
I
S
0.0
-0.185
-0.371
-0.556
-0.742
-0.927
-1.113
-1.298
-1.484
-1.669
-1.855
X-AXIS
Y
-
A
X
I
S
0.0
0.303 0.807 0.911 1.215 1.519 1.823 2.127 2.431 2.735 3.039
0.0
0.303 0.807 0.911 1.215 1.519 1.823 2.127 2.431 2.735 3.039
FIGURE 7.6 The SAMPLE computer program gives the thin film profile for particular input parameters (http://www.eecs.
berkeley.edu/~neureuth). (a) dimensions of feature to be coated. (b) predicted line-of-sight deposition profile in the 
case of re-entrant side-wall angles. Notice the discontinuity in the thin film lines. (c) for wafers rotating on a planetary 
system, step coverage is improved. (d) the solution is not perfect, however, because a keyhole effect might result.
FIGURE 7.7 (a) One possible setup for sputtering, a form of physical vapor deposition. (b) Gas ions are accelerated by 
a high voltage, producing a glow discharge or plasma. A source (the cathode, also called the target) is bombarded in 
high vacuum by gas ions. Atoms from the target (Al in this case) are ejected by momentum transfer and move across the 
vacuum chamber. Atoms are deposited on the substrate to be coated and form a thin film.

[Page 400]
400   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
heated to high temperature, and the vapor pres-
sure of the source is not a consideration as it is in 
vacuum-evaporation. The amount of material, W, 
sputtered from the cathode is inversely proportional 
to the total gas pressure, PT, and the anode-cathode 
distance, d1:
 
W
kVi
P d
T
=
 
(7.10)
where V = working voltage
 
i = discharge current
 
 k = proportionality constant
Other energetic particles, such as secondary 
electrons, secondary ions and photons, and x-rays 
are created at the target and can be incorporated 
in the growing film and/or influence its properties 
through heating, radiation, or chemical reactions. 
Deposition rate is roughly proportional to  sputter 
yield, S, for a given plasma energy. The sputter 
yield S, we saw in Chapter 3, stands for the aver-
age number of atoms removed per incident ion (S = 
number ejected/number incident) and is a func-
tion of the bombarding species (for example, with 
a heavier sputtering gas, S increases), the ion energy 
of the bombarding species, the target material, 
the incident angle of the bombarding species, and 
its electronic charge. Target atoms come off with a 
nonuniform distribution as shown in Figure 3.16, 
where we plot the sputter yield S as a function of θ, 
the angle at which ions are directed at the surface 
(0° is perpendicular and 90° is glancing). Sputtering 
is seen here to be most efficient at about 20–30º 
off glancing. In sputtering at energies <50 keV, the 
incoming ions are modeled as hard spheres collid ing 
with the substrate, with 95% of the incident energy 
going into the substrate (that is why in sputter depo-
sition cooling of the target is required!) and only 
5% of the incident energy carried off by substrate/
target atoms. Some yield figures for commonly used 
metals are tabulated in Table 7.5.6 Sputtering yield is 
TABLE 7.4 Comparison of Evaporation and Sputtering Technology
Evaporation 
Sputtering
Rate
Thousand atomic layers per second 
(e.g., 0.5 µm/min for Al)
One atomic layer per second
Choice of materials
Limited
Almost unlimited
Purity
Better (no gas inclusions, very high 
vacuum)
Possibility of incorporating impurities (low-
medium vacuum range)
Substrate heating
Very low
Unless magnetron is used substrate heating can 
be substantial
Surface damage
Very low, with e-beam x-ray damage is 
possible
Ionic bombardment damage
In situ cleaning
Not an option
Easily done with a sputter etch
Alloy compositions, 
stoichiometry
Little or no control
Alloy composition can be tightly controlled
X-ray damage
Only with e-beam evaporation
Radiation and particle damage is possible
Changes in source material
Easy
Expensive
Decomposition of material
High
Low
Scaling up
Difficult
Good
Uniformity
Difficult
Easy over large areas
Capital equipment
Low cost
More expensive
Vacuum path
High: few collisions, line-of-sight 
deposition, little gas in film
Low: many collisions, less line-of-sight, gas 
inclusions
Number of depositions
Only one deposition per charge
Many depositions can be carried out per target
Thickness control
Not easy to control
Several controls possible
Adhesion
Often poor
Excellent
Shadowing effect
Large
Small
Film properties (e.g., grain 
size and step coverage)
Difficult to control, larger grain size, 
fewer grain orientations
Control by bias, pressure, substrate heat, 
smaller grain size, many grain orientations

[Page 401]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   401
low, usually from less than 1% up to 4% depending 
on the materials and ion energy level. Because of the 
low sputtering yield, sputter deposition rates are low 
(slow process). Another drawback is that because the 
ions bombarding the surface are embedded in a gas, 
traces of that gas can usually be found in the coated 
films; the entrapped gases sometimes adversely 
affect mechanical properties.
A typical sputter yield as a function of ion energy 
was shown in Figure 3.15.1 In the low-energy region, 
the yield increases rapidly from a threshold energy. 
The sputter threshold, usually in the range of 
10–130 eV, is essentially independent of the bom-
barding ion species used and equals about four 
times the activation energy for evaporation. This 
threshold voltage decreases with increasing atomic 
number within each group of the periodic table. 
Above a few hundred volts, a changeover region 
takes hold. Its value depends on the ion species and 
the target used, but after its occurrence the sputter 
yield increases more slowly. Ion energies in the range 
of 0.5–3 kV are typically used for sputter deposition 
because nuclear collisions are predominant in this 
range. In this region, the sputter yields typically 
range from 0.1–20 atoms per ion, and the yield of 
most metals is about 1 (see Table 7.5). An ion can 
only penetrate up to a certain depth into the target 
and still effect a recoil collision that can reach the 
surface with sufficient energy to eject atoms (e.g., 
1 nm/kV penetration for argon ions in copper). 
Consequently, at ion bombardment energies in the 
range of 10 keV to 1 MeV, the sputter yield reaches a 
maximum and then gradually decreases in value as 
a result of deep ion implantation. Average ejection 
energies of ions from the target range between 10 
and 100 eV. At those energies, the incident ion can 
penetrate a substrate one to two atomic layers into 
the surface on which it lands. As a result, the adhe-
sion of sputtered films is superior to films deposited 
by other methods.7 Although sputtering is basically 
a low-temperature process, considerable amounts of 
energy are dissipated at the target surface. To liber-
ate one atom requires 100–1000 times the activa-
tion energy needed for evaporation, limiting useful 
sputtering rates to about one atomic layer per sec-
ond (1000 times less than evaporation from a source 
operating at 10–1 Torr). The target needs water cool-
ing because most of the energy, estimated at about 
95%, dissipates into it, and excessive heating might 
result. Only 1% of the remaining energy goes into 
sputtering, and the rest is dissipated by secondary 
electrons that bombard and heat the substrate.
Figure 7.7 exemplifies a typical sputtering setup. 
Sputtering systems often have a load-lock connected 
to the sputtering chamber used for loading and 
unloading the substrates. With the use of a load-lock 
system, the sputtering station can be kept under con-
tinuous high vacuum; the target and chamber can 
be kept free of contamination from gaseous atmo-
spheric components. Instead of pumping the large 
sputtering chamber, only the small load-lock cham-
ber is pumped, resulting in a significant shorter 
cycle time.
To prevent sputtering of the structural elements 
of the cathode assembly, a shield of metal at anode 
potential is placed around all the surfaces to be pro-
tected at a distance less than that of the dark space 
at the cathode in Figure 7.8.7 No discharge will 
TABLE 7.5 Sputter Yields of Several Commonly Used 
Metals with 500 eV of Argon
Element
Symbol
Sputter Yield S
Aluminum
Al
1.05
Chrome
Cr
1.18
Gold
Au
2.4
Nickel
Ni
1.33
Platinum
Pt
1.4
Titanium
Ti
0.51
Source: Vossen, J. L., and W. Kern, eds. 1978. Thin film processes. 
Orlando, FL: Academic Press. With permission.6
Shield
Target
Target
Plasma
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 7.8 Sputtering: use of cathode shield. (a) Reducing 
rim effect by extending cathode shield. (b) Reducing rim 
effect by wrapping shield around the cathode. (From 
Maissel, L. I., and R. Glang, eds. 1970. Handbook of thin 
film technology. New York: McGraw-Hill.7)

[Page 402]
402   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
take place between two surfaces that have a separa-
tion less than the Crookes cathode dark space (see 
Chapter 3).
Crucial to the formation of sustained DC plasma, 
as discussed in Chapter 3, is the production of 
ionizing collisions between secondary electrons 
released from the cathode and the gas in the sput-
tering chamber. In effect, this requires a relatively 
high working pressure of greater than 1 × 10–2 
Torr. However, if the pressure is too high, signifi-
cant  numbers of the sputtered atoms cannot pass 
through the sputtering gas and are reflected back to 
the cathode by collisions. At 10–1 Torr, the mean free 
path of the sputtered metal atoms is about 1 mm, 
which is near the practical limit. Because of the 
multiple collisions of the metal atoms in the path 
between the cathode and anode, the metal atoms 
arrive at the anode at random incident angles. 
This leads to a better step coverage compared with 
evaporation (Figure 7.9). Furthermore, because the 
sputtering target is very broad compared with an 
evaporation point source, evidence of shadowing 
decreases drastically. Sputtering at low gas pressure 
leads to improved film adhesion because the sput-
tered atoms have a higher energy. Reduced pressure 
also reduces contamination of the film by trapped 
gas molecules, resulting in films of higher density 
and purity. The higher material density causes a 
slower chemical etch of the deposited film.
For conductors, a DC sputtering setup can be 
used. Insulating materials require an RF power 
supply. The two types of setups are schematically 
shown in Figure 7.10. Before sputter deposition, 
the substrate may be sputter etched by connecting 
it to the negative pole of the power supply. Sputter 
cleaning further promotes adhesion of subsequent 
metallizations. In situ cleaning can also be done 
efficiently with an ion gun.
As in dry etching, the plasma can be confined 
and densified by using electron cyclotron reso-
nance (ECR) in a planar or cylindrical magnetron 
or an S-gun using a conical magnetron, which pro-
duces higher deposition rates than evaporation pro-
duced by electron beam (e-beam) or RF induction. 
Higher ion densities permit higher sputter rates at 
lower gas pressures (down to 0.5 mTorr). In a pla-
nar magnetron sputtering apparatus, the crossed 
electric and magnetic fields (magnets of 200 Gauss 
are put behind the target) contain the electrons and 
force them into long, helical paths, thus increas-
ing the probability of an ionizing collision with an 
argon atom (see Figure 7.11). Furthermore, second-
ary electrons emitted by the cathode as a result of 
ion bombardment are bent by the crossed fields and 
are collected by ground shields. This eliminates the 
secondary electron bombardment of the substrates, 
which is one of the main sources of unplanned sub-
strate heating. The deposition rate reaches hundreds 
of angstrom per minute. For some materials such 
as aluminum, the deposition rate can be as high as 
1 µm/min. Magnetron sputter enhancement can be 
Evaporation
Evaporation vs. sputtering
Planar sputtering
S-gun sputtering
FIGURE 7.9 Sputtering leads to better step coverage than 
evaporation. (By Dr. Han Xu.)
Heating/cooling
(a)
(b)
Cooling
Cooling
Heating/cooling
Substrate bias
Anode (Substrate)
Shutter
Shutter
a few
cm
A few
cm
-2 ->-5kV
13.56 MHz
Substrate
Target
Cathode (target)
FIGURE 7.10 The DC (a) and RF (b) sputter deposition setups.

[Page 403]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   403
used in high-frequency sputtering systems, as well 
as in DC sputtering systems.
The substrate is also often heated to promote 
film adhesion and reduce film stress. Stress levels 
vary from compressive at low pressures (0.1–1 Pa) 
to tensile at high pressures (1–10 Pa). The transition 
regime between compressive and tensile is often 
sharp (more than a few tenths of Pa), making the 
crossover, an ideal point for zero-stress deposition, 
difficult to control.3 In general, it is preferable to 
have ions strike the substrate while growing a film. 
The plasma ions add energy to the film and keep 
the  surface atoms mobile enough to fill virtually 
every void. The influence of plasma on a deposit-
ing film is considered in more detail in the section 
on plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition 
(PECVD) further below.
Sputtering often is carried out in the presence 
of a reactive gas, ensuring control or modification 
of the properties of the deposited film in so-called 
reactive sputtering. A sensor material produced this 
way is IrOX, a low-impedance pH-sensing material 
arrived at by sputtering from a pure Ir target with 
argon ions  in the presence of oxygen.8 The exact 
mechanism for compound formation in reactive 
sputtering still eludes researchers. It is conjectured 
that at low pressures the reaction takes place at the 
substrate as the film is being deposited. At high pres-
sure, the reaction is believed to occur at the cathode 
with the compound transported to the substrate.
Composite films can also be made by cosputter-
ing or by sputtering from a single composite target. 
Because the various elements in a target have dif-
ferent  sputtering rates and sticking probabilities, 
the  composition of the target might differ some-
what from that on the substrate. However, the 
decomposition is less significant than in evapora-
tion because no thermal equilibrium is established 
at the target, and atoms are ejected by momentum 
transfer. High substrate temperatures are needed 
to obtain the right composition and to promote 
adhesion.
In Table 7.6 we list some of the salient characteris-
tics of sputter deposition.
Nowadays, sputtering equipment applies films 
to compact discs, computer disks, large area active-
matrix liquid crystal displays, and magneto-optic 
disks.9 Bearing gears, saw blades, and so on also 
can be coated with a number of hard, wear-resistant 
coatings such as TiN, TiC, TiAlN, NbN, CrN, TiNbN, 
or CrAlN.10 Commercial in-line sputtering equip-
ment is available, enabling, in a series of evacuated 
chambers and load locks, depositions of insulators 
such as SiO2, Si3N4, and Ta2O5, metals, and semi-
conductors such as indium tin oxide (ITO) on sub-
strate with sizes of 830 × 1500 mm. Some example 
materials deposited by sputter deposition are listed 
in Table 7.7.
In one particular setup, one can perform con-
tinuous sputter deposition (Figure 7.12) on rolls 
N
S
S
S
S
S
S
Electric
ﬁeld
points
into
page
Magnetic ﬁeld
lines
FIGURE 7.11 Magnets behind the target in a magnetron 
trap electrons near the cathode, causing more ionization 
near the cathode (10×) with fewer electrons reaching the 
substrate (less heating).
TABLE 7.6 Unique Characteristics of Sputter Deposition
Characteristics
Uniform thickness over large area 
Simple thickness control (because it is so slow!) 
The alloy composition maintains stoichiometry with the 
original target composition 
Deposition rates do not differ a great deal from one 
material to another 
Sputtering cleaning before initiating film deposition is 
possible; the surface is not again exposed to ambient 
after such cleaning 
The lifetime of a sputtering target may be as long as 
hundreds of runs and is seldom less than 20 
TABLE 7.7 Example Materials Deposited by Sputtering
Type of Material: Examples
Metals: Al, Cu, Zn, Au, Ni, Cr, W, Mo, Ti
Alloys: Ag-Cu, Pb-Sn, Al-Zn, Ni-Cr
Nonmetals: graphite, MoS2, WS2, PTFE
Refractory oxides: Al2O3, Cr2O3, Al2O3-Cr2O3, SiO2, ZrO2-Y2O3
Refractory carbides: TiC, ZrC, HfC, NbC
Refractory nitrides: TiN, Ti2N, ZrN, HfN, TiN-ZrN, TiN-AlN-ZrN
Refractory borides: TiB2, ZrB2, HfB2, CrB2, MoB2
Refractory silicides: MoSi2, WSi2, Cr3Si2 

[Page 404]
404   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
of substrate, including foils and fabrics. In a high- 
vacuum chamber, the rolled substrate is unwound 
and passes over the cathode cylinder where thin 
layers of target material are deposited. The substrate 
is continuously rewound on the other side of the 
deposition site. The sputter target is a long cylinder, 
and reactive and nonreactive processes are avail-
able.11 Roll-to-roll (R2R) manufacturing is currently 
used to print, for example, newspapers and labels. 
One envisions that many other products could be 
manufactured the same way. For example, organic 
light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) could be manu-
factured by patterning all layers with continuous 
deposition processes (web vs. batch). This would be 
potentially low cost and be scalable to large areas (see 
also Volume III, Chapter 1). Innovations like these 
might help revive the potential of micromachined 
chemical sensors for which Si batch processes are 
often too expensive. When manufacturing micro-
fabricated chemical sensors, one often competes with 
continuous fabrication processes (e.g., continuous 
printing of glucose sensor paper strips), and classical 
Si micromachining cannot beat the cost advantages 
these offer. A process as described here, comple-
mented by continuous lithography, might enable 
chemical microsensor fabrication at an acceptable 
cost (see Volume III, Chapter 1). A good reference on 
continuous, roll-to-roll thin film coating is Vacuum 
deposition onto webs, films, and foils by Charles A. 
Bishop (William Andrew Publishing, 2007).
The most negative aspects of sputtering are its 
complexity compared with an evaporation pro-
cess, the excessive substrate heating resulting from 
secondary electron bombardment, and, finally, the 
slow  deposition rate. In a regular sputtering pro-
cess, the rate is one atomic layer per second versus 
thousand atomic layers per second available from 
a typical evaporation source at a vapor pressure of 
10–1  Torr.  Controls in a sputtering setup include 
argon pressure, flow rate, substrate temperature, 
sputter power, bias voltage, and electrode distance.
Example 7.1: Sputtered Polysilicon
The quest for low-temperature polysilicon depo-
sition processes is driven in part by the need for 
compatibility with prefabricated aluminum-met-
allized complementary metal oxide semiconduc-
tor (CMOS) circuitry. This makes the 350°C sputter 
deposition of polysilicon especially interesting.
Honer et al.12 introduced sputtered polysili-
con to the MEMS community. Sputtered silicon 
can be used to fabricate polysilicon microstruc-
tures (the key mechanical structural element in 
surface micromachining; see section on Doped 
Polysilicon) atop standard, aluminum-metallized 
CMOS at temperatures less than 350°C. A draw-
back for sputtered boron doped Si films is that 
to increase their conductivity (to 25 Ω/□) they 
need to be clad in symmetric, 50-nm-thick lay-
ers of titanium-tungsten. Films with stress values 
less than 100 MPa are routinely obtained.
An important benefit of this low-temperature 
polysilicon process is that it is not only compati-
ble with conventional oxide sacrificial layers (sac-
rificial layers, we shall see below, are another key 
ingredient in surface micromachining) but also 
with certain organic sacrificial layers (e.g., poly-
imide). Organic layers can be removed in a dry 
FIGURE 7.12 Continuous deposition. (a) Mill Lane offers 
systems for continuous vacuum web coating (http://www.
mill-lane.com). (b) Innovative Sputtering Technology 
(I.S.T.), Belgium. Southwall Technologies (http://www.
southwall.com) uses two-story high sputtering machines 
to manufacture transparent sputtered films on 2 m wide × 
5,000 m long rolls of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 
substrate that is 25 µm or 50 µm thick. One roll allows 
fabrication of up to 10,000 square meters of film.

[Page 405]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   405
oxygen plasma etch, thus avoiding the stiction 
and selectivity problems associated with wet 
etch releases and at the same time alleviating 
the concerns over chemical attack on structural 
elements by HF.
Ion Plating
In ion plating, evaporation of a material is com-
bined with ionization of the atom flux by an elec-
tron filament or plasma. The principle of ion-plating 
in argon plasma is illustrated in Figure 7.13.13 The 
substrate is set up to be the cathode in the upper 
part of the chamber, and the source material is 
placed below it. A vacuum is then established in 
the chamber. Argon gas is admitted, and an elec-
tric field is applied to ionize the gas (forming Ar+) 
and establish plasma. This results in ion bombard-
ment (sputtering) of the substrate so that its sur-
face is atomic clean (interpret this as “very clean”). 
Next, the source material (Ti in the example case) is 
heated sufficiently to generate coating vapors. The 
heating methods used here are the same as those 
used in vacuum evaporation: resistance heating, 
e-beam bombardment, and so on. The Ti vapor 
passes through the plasma and coats the substrate. 
Sputtering is continued during deposition; thus, 
the ion bombardment of the substrate consists not 
only of the original argon ions but also of source 
material ions (Ti) that have been energized while 
being subjected to the same energy field as the 
argon. The effect of these processing conditions is 
to produce films of uniform thickness and excellent 
adherence to the substrate. Ion plating is applicable 
to parts with irregular geometries because of the 
high degree of scattering of the depositing material 
in the plasma. An example of interest here is TiN 
coating of high-speed cutting tools (for example, 
drill bits). As shown in Figure 7.13, the addition of a 
gas (nitrogen in this case) to the reactor enables one 
to make new compounds (such as TiN) on the sub-
strate surface, with the gas reacting with the ionized 
atoms from the evaporation source (Ti). Because of 
the high kinetic energy of the impacting ions, a very 
well-adhering, dense TiN film with extraordinarily 
low friction coefficient and high hardness coeffi-
cient (Vickers hardness of 50,000) forms. Because of 
the thermal nature of the process, very high deposi-
tion rates can be achieved. In addition to coating 
uniformity and good adherence, other advantages 
of the process include high deposition rates, high 
film densities, and the capability to coat the inside 
walls of holes and other hollow shapes.
The NTH-1000 from Nanotec Corp. (http:// 
nanotec-jp.com/www_nanotec/english/nth1000.
html) uses a tandem hollow cathode discharge tech-
nique to deposit high-quality TiN, CrN, TiCN, and 
TiCrN thin films on cutting tools, machine parts, 
and molds.
Ion Cluster Beam Deposition—
Nanoparticle Deposition
Clusters are aggregations of atoms or molecules, 
intermediate in size between individual atoms and 
aggregates that are large enough to be called bulk 
matter. Atom clusters are also called nanoparticles 
because their size is on the order of nanometers or 
tens of nanometers. The ultrasmall size of building 
blocks leads to dramatically different properties, 
and it is anticipated that such atomically engineered 
materials can be tailored to perform as no previous 
material could. T. Takagi, from Kyoto University, first 
proposed the idea of ionized cluster beam (ICB) thin 
film deposition in 1972. Conditions for formation 
of ion cluster beams, suitable for thin film deposi-
tion, were only established following an additional 
20 years of effort. When applying cluster beam 
technology, ionized atom clusters (e.g., 100–1000 
atoms) are deposited on a substrate in a high vac-
uum (10–5–10–7 mbar). Those atom clusters typically 
FIGURE 7.13 Principle of ion plating. (From Menz, W., 
and P. Bley. 1993. Mikrosystemtechnik fur Ingenieure. 
Weinheim, Germany: VCH Publishers.13)

[Page 406]
406   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
carry one elementary charge per cluster and there-
fore achieve the same energy in an electrical field as 
would a single ion.
A special evaporation cell must be used to gener-
ate these atom clusters. As shown in Figure 7.14,13 
the heating of the evaporant in an evaporation cell 
with a small opening causes an adiabatic expansion 
of more than 100–10–5 or 10–7 mbar on exiting that 
cell. The expansion causes a sudden cooling, induc-
ing the formation of atom clusters. These clusters are 
then partially ionized by an electron bombardment 
from a heated filament. Low-energy neutral clus-
ters (0.1 eV) and somewhat higher energy ionized 
clusters (a few eV) arrive at the surface where they 
flatten and form a film (Figure 7.15)13 of excellent 
adhesion and purity, with a relatively low number of 
defects. Cluster beam epitaxy is possible at tempera-
tures as low as 250°C, and no charge buildup occurs 
when depositing on an insulator. Ion cluster beam 
technology qualifies as a gas-phase nanoparticle 
synthesis method. In gas-phase synthesis of nano-
particles supersaturation is achieved by vaporizing 
material into a background gas. Condensation to 
form particles is induced by cooling, e.g., by mixing 
with a cool gas or expansion through a nozzle. In ion 
cluster beam technology the cooling occurs when 
the vapor exits the evaporation cell. Other types of 
gas-phase nanoparticle fabrication techniques are 
discussed in Chapter 9 on thermal energy-based 
forming techniques.
The cluster beam technology is also applied to 
shallow ion implantation, high-yield sputtering, 
smoothing, surface cleaning, and low-temperature 
thin film formation. Cluster ion beam processing is 
now expanding into new industrial fields presently 
limited by the available atomic and molecular ion 
beam processes. With the wide variety of selective 
layers needed in chemical sensors and the frequent 
need for low-temperature deposition of thick, well-
adhering layers, ion plating, laser sputter depo-
sition (see below), and cluster beam technology 
seem destined to play a more crucial role in chemi-
cal sensor development in the future. Also, build-
ing devices from atomic constituents (bottom-up 
approach), with proximal probes for example, is too 
time consuming when performed one atom at the 
time. To speed up the process, massive parallelism 
is required; for example, by using an army of coor-
dinated proximal probes. Cluster beam technology 
better enables nanomachining because the size of 
the building blocks lends itself to being built faster.
Epion (http://www.epion.com) is an example of 
a company selling ion cluster beam equipment, and 
their units feature surface smoothing to less than 
3 Å, surface cleaning, and high-yield sputtering.
FIGURE 7.14 Setup for ion-cluster beam deposition. 
(From Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. Mikrosystemtechnik fur 
Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: VCH Publishers.13)
Diﬀusion
(a)
(b)
Hot nano particle
Lateral ﬂow
FIGURE 7.15 Film forming with atom clusters. (a) Old model based on atom diffusion. (b) New model based on particle 
flow. (From Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. Mikrosystemtechnik fur Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: VCH Publishers.13)

[Page 407]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   407
Pulsed Laser Deposition, Laser Sputtering, 
or Laser Ablation Deposition
Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) uses intense laser 
radiation to erode a target and deposit the eroded 
material onto a substrate. A high-energy focused 
laser beam avoids the x-ray damage to the substrate 
encountered with e-beam evaporation. A high-
 energy UV excimer laser pulse (10 ns) coming from, 
for example, a KrF laser at 248 nm with a pulse 
energy in the focus of 2 J/cm2, is directed onto the 
material to be deposited, as sketched in Figure 7.16. 
As shown here, the laser ablates material from the 
target, forming a high-temperature vapor plume 
incident on the sample. The target may be just about 
anything, and one can operate at atmospheric pres-
sures or in a very high vacuum.
The PLD process can be split into the following 
basic steps:
 
1. The energy of the very short wavelength radi-
ation is absorbed in the upper surface of the 
target, i.e., absorption of the laser pulse in the 
material (for a metal, the absorption depth is 
~10 nm, depending on λ).
 
2. Energy relaxation to the lattice through elec-
tron-phonon interaction (~1 ps).
 
3. Heat diffusion (microseconds), melting (tens 
of nanoseconds), and evaporation of a small 
amount of material.
 
4. Plasma creation.
 
5. Absorption of light by plasma and ionization.
 
6. Interaction of target and ablated species with 
plasma.
 
7. Cooling and resolidification between pulses.
Laser ablation is a very nonequilibrium process. 
At the peak of the laser pulse, temperatures on the 
target can reach >105 K (>40 eV!) with electric fields 
>105 V/cm (accompanied by high magnetic fields) 
and plasma temperatures of 3000–5000 K. The 
ablated species come with energies in the 1–100-eV 
range.
Laser ablation deposition was first mentioned 
in Chapter 5, under thermal removing techniques, 
where we learned that laser subtractive machin-
ing leaves an undesirable heat-affected zone (HAZ) 
on a  surface that is being machined. The size of 
the HAZ  is a function of the laser pulse duration 
and the  thermal conductivity and specific heat of 
the work piece. The HAZ constitutes a problem in 
the case of laser subtractive machining because 
it degrades the quality of the cut. Moreover, dur-
ing the ablation process, the expulsion of material 
in the plasma jet redeposits material onto the sur-
rounding region, further compromising the fidelity 
of the process. In the case of PLD, we take advantage 
of this deposition of materials from the plume onto 
an adjacent substrate surface.
Splashing is the bane of PLD. The laser super-
heats the subsurface layer before the surface reaches 
its evaporation point, and, as a consequence, the 
surface breaks apart into large (micrometer-sized) 
globular particles when the subsurface expands. 
This  leads to globular deposits. Another problem 
with PLD is the expansion of the plume, which 
causes a sudden decrease in the pressure just above 
the surface. This shock wave pulls droplets of liquid 
of the surface. The thermal shock also causes irreg-
ularities in the surface to break off (exfoliation). 
Advant ages and disadvantages of PLD are summa-
rized in Table 7.8.
As we saw in Chapter 5 with ultrashort laser 
pul ses (<1 ps), so much energy is deposited in the 
material at such a fast rate that the material is forced 
directly into a plasma state; the material goes from 
a solid to a gas phase without first going through 
a melt phase. The reason behind this is that pulse 
width is now shorter than the electron lattice-
 relaxation time; thus, the heat diffusion and melting 
are significantly reduced. This plasma then expands 
away from the material as a highly energetic gas, 
taking almost all the heat away with it. This leads 
Heater
Sample
Target
Laser
Plume
FIGURE 7.16 Schematic of pulsed laser deposition (PLD).

[Page 408]
408   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
not only to cleaner cutting but also smoother film 
deposition (fewer particulates, less splashing) and 
the potential for ultrahigh quality films, circuit writ-
ing, isotope enrichment, new materials, and nano-
particle production.
The ablated material, partially ionized in the 
laser-induced plasma, is deposited onto a substrate 
almost without decomposition. This technique 
is particularly useful when dealing with complex 
compounds, as in the case of the deposition of 
high- temperature superconductor films (HTSCs), 
for example, YBa2Cu3O7–x. PLD faithfully repli-
cates the atomic ratios present in the hot isostati-
cally pressed target disc onto the thin film coating. 
Achieving complex stoichiometries presents more 
difficulties with any other deposition technology. 
Approximately 10,000 pulses (pulse length of 20 ns 
and a repetition rate of 15 pulses/s) are needed to 
achieve a film thickness of 0.1 µm on the substrate. 
Normally, the laser-deposited films are amorphous. 
The energy necessary to crystallize the film comes 
from heating the substrate 700–900°C and from the 
energy transferred from the intense laser beam to 
the substrate via atomic clusters.
Figure 7.17a shows a schematic setup of a laser 
deposition system.14 Here, a pulsed excimer laser 
is used to deposit superconductor materials such 
as those based on YbaCuO.14 Figure 7.17b shows 
an improved laser deposition setup where substrate 
heating can be replaced in part or completely by 
TABLE 7.8 Advantages and Disadvantages of Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD)
Advantages
Disadvantages
Flexible, easy to implement 
Uneven coverage
Growth in any environment
High defect or particulate concentration
Exact transfer of complicated materials (YBCO)
Not well suited for large-scale film growth
Variable growth rate 
Mechanisms and dependence on parameters 
not well understood 
Epitaxy at low temperature
Uneven coverage
Resonant interactions possible (i.e., plasmons in metals, 
absorption peaks in dielectrics and semiconductors) 
Splashing as a result of subsurface boiling, 
shock wave recoil, exfoliation
Atoms arrive in bunches, allowing for much more 
controlled deposition
Greater control of growth (e.g., by varying laser 
parameters)
Source: Based on Pulsed laser deposition of thin films. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1994.230
The table does not take into account pulsed laser deposition with ultrafast pulses improving the technique a lot, for exam-
ple, smoother films result.
Quartz window
Laser beam (248 nm, 30 ns)
YBaCuO pellet
Substrate
holder/
heater
3 cm
Vacuum chamber
(b)
(a)
Target plate
Excimer laser
2-5 J/cm2
Substrate
0.1–1.0 mbar O2
cw-CO2 laser
Surface temp.
>650°C
FIGURE 7.17 Laser deposition system. (a) Traditional laser 
ablation system. (From Dutta, B., X. D. Wu, A. Inam, and 
T. Venkatesan. 1989. Pulsed laser deposition: a viable 
process for superconducting thin films? Solid State Technol 
February:106–10. With permission.14) (b) Laser ablation 
with additional laser for surface heating.

[Page 409]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   409
additional laser radiation, in this case, a continu-
ous wave-CO2 (cw-CO2) infrared laser. With this 
setup, using two crossed laser beams, it is possible to 
deposit and induce the correct crystalline structure in 
the growing HTSC film while it is being deposited.15 
Superconductive Components Inc. manu factures 
superconducting and nonsuperconducting ceramic 
targets for use in sputtering and laser ab lation sys-
tems 
(http://www.superconductivecomp.com/tar-
gets2.html).
A sensor-related application of PLD is the pro-
tection of components in contact with body fluids 
using the biocompatible calcium-phosphate-based 
ceramic calcium hydroxylapatite, or Ca10(PO4)6 
(OH)2. This material exemplifies the most stable 
calcium phosphate in contact with body fluids. 
Deposition methods of this material include sput-
tering, plasma spraying, electrophoretic deposition, 
and combinations of these techniques. In all cases, 
a postdeposition treatment is needed to crystallize 
the partially or wholly amorphous and/or dehy-
drated films. With the laser pulse technique, in 
water-vapor- enriched inert gas environments, depo-
sition of the right hydroxyl apatite was observed at 
temperatures between 400 and 700°C. Adhesion of 
this material to Si and Ti-6Al-4V was found to be 
excellent.16 Laser sputtering also could help prepare 
complex and stoichiometry-sensitive coatings such 
as electrochromic devices.
Pulsed laser ablation, like ion cluster beam depo-
sition, can also be used as a nanoparticle gas-phase 
synthesis method. In this approach the solid precur-
sor is heated by absorption of laser energy. Typically 
an infrared laser (CO2) is used, and laser energy may 
be directly absorbed by precursors or by  an inert 
photosensitizer (SF6). The use of a pulsed laser short-
ens the reaction time and allows for the preparation 
of the smallest particles. In 1995, at Rice University 
it was reported that synthesis of carbon nano tubes 
could be accomplished by laser ablation.17 A pulsed 
or continuous laser is used to vaporize a graphite tar-
get placed in an oven at 1200ºC (Figure 7.18). The 
oven is filled with argon gas to keep the pressure at 
500 Torr. A very hot vapor plume forms, which then 
expands and cools rapidly. Contact with a cooled 
copper substrate causes the carbon atoms to be 
deposited in the form of nanotubes.
Laser vaporization produces a higher yield of 
single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) with better prop-
erties and with a narrower size distribution than 
nanotubes produced by arc discharge. Laser abla-
tion also produces nanotubes that are more pure 
(up to 90% purity) than those produced by arc 
discharge.
Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) with ultra-
fast pulses (<1 ps) is opening up all types of new 
research and application opportunities as evidenced 
by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s 
(DARPA’s) mesoscopic integrated conformal elec-
tronics (MICE) program. The goal of that program 
is to create electronic circuits and materials on 
any surface, e.g., to print electrical circuits on the 
frames of eyeglasses or interwoven with clothing 
(see Figure 7.19). MICE efforts have demonstrated 
the ability to print metal lines on curved surfaces, 
feature sizes as small as 5 µm, and print speeds close 
to 1 m/s. Other exciting developments include the 
demonstration of 1) printed zinc-air batteries that 
have four times more volumetric power density than 
commercial batteries, 2) direct-write antennas, and 
3) direct-write solar cells. A single laser does surface 
pretreatment, spatially selective material deposition, 
surface annealing, component trimming, ablative 
micro machining, dicing, and via drilling.
To sum up, laser ablation is a good technique for 
preparing thin films of any desired stoichiometry, 
FIGURE 7.18 Laser ablation system for carbon nanotube 
production.

[Page 410]
410   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
but, because of the small source size, it is not use-
ful for large-scale coatings. A small source size might 
make it essential, especially when working with 
high-aspect-ratio micromachined structures, to 
rotate the sample at an angle with respect to the 
material flux so as to obtain coverage of the verti-
cal features in the device. The possibility of using 
PLD for nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes and 
the use of PLD with ultrashort laser pulses (<1 ps) 
has given the technique an added impetus. For fur-
ther reading on laser sputtering, refer to references 
14–16,18,19.
Other good references are found in “Pulsed laser 
vaporization and deposition,” Wilmott and Huber, 
Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 72, 315 (2000), Pulsed 
laser deposition of thin films, Chrisey and Hubler (Wiley, 
New York, 1994), and Laser ablation and desorption, 
Miller and Haglund (Academic Press, San Diego, 
1998). Epion, for example, sells large-area PLD sys-
tems (http://www.pvdproducts.com/ products/pld_ 
systems.aspx).
Molecular Beam Epitaxy
Epitaxial techniques arrange atoms in single-crys-
tal fashion on a crystalline substrate acting as a 
seed crystal so that the lattice of the newly grown 
film duplicates that of the substrate. If the film is 
of the same material as the substrate, the process is 
called homoepitaxy, epitaxy, or simply epi. Epi depo-
sition represents one of the cornerstone techniques 
for building micromachines. Of special importance 
is that Si membranes of a predetermined thickness 
and doping level can be fashioned. The growth rate 
of an epilayer depends on the substrate crystal ori-
entation. Si (111) planes have the highest density of 
atoms on the surface, and the film grows most easily 
on these planes. Important epi applications are Si 
on Si substrates and GaAs on GaAs substrates. If the 
deposit is made on a chemically different substrate, 
usually of closely matched lattice spacing and ther-
mal expansion, the process is termed heteroepitaxy. 
One important heteroepitaxy application is the 
deposition of silicon on insulator (SOI), for exam-
ple, Si on SiO2 or Si on sapphire (Al2O3). Various 
sapphire orientations such as <0112
_
>, <101
_
 2>, and 
<1 1
_
02> have been used to grow <100>- oriented sil-
icon layers. The lattice mismatch between sapphire 
and silicon crystals limits the thickness of the Si to 
about 1 µm. Another example of heteroepitaxy is 
that of gallium phosphide on gallium arsenide.
Various types of epitaxy techniques exist. Chemi-
cal vapor phase and liquid epitaxy are described 
further below. Here, we briefly discuss PVD epitaxy, 
that is, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), invented in 
late 1960s at Bell Laboratories by J. R. Arthur and 
A. Y. Cho. In MBE, the heated single-crystal sam-
ple (e.g., between 400 and 800°C) is placed in an 
ultrahigh vacuum (10–11 Torr) in the path of streams 
of atoms from heated cells that contain the mate-
rials of interest. These atomic streams impinge, 
in a line-of-sight fashion, on the surface-creating 
layers with a structure controlled by the crystal 
FIGURE 7.19 Direct writing in air with pulsed laser deposition (PLD).

[Page 411]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   411
structure of the surface, the thermodynamics of 
the constituents, and the sample temperature. This 
technique is the most sophisticated form of PVD. 
The deposition rate of MBE is very low (i.e., about 
1 µm/h or 1 monolayer/s), and considerable atten-
tion is devoted to in situ material characterization 
to obtain high-purity epitaxial layers. Once on the 
substrate, the atoms or molecules move around 
until they find an atomic site to chemically bond to. 
Fast-acting shutters control the deposition. One or 
two atomic layers of material lie between the shutter 
action. This becomes important when an ultrasharp 
profile is called for. The low deposition rate gives 
the operator better control over the film thickness. 
Ultra sharp profiles are needed, for example, when 
making quantum well devices. A quantum well 
might be 40 Å thick. To uniquely define its energy 
levels it must be 40 ± 2 Å. Figure 7.20 represents a 
schematic of a molecular beam deposition setup.1 
The technique has several potential advantages over 
CVD epitaxy (see next section): for example, the 
relatively low growth temperatures reduce diffu-
sion and autodoping effects. Precise control of layer 
thickness and doping profile on an atomic layer 
level is possible. Novel structures such as quantum 
devices,  silicon/insulator/metal sandwiches, and 
superlattices can be made. Today, half of the lasers 
that are used in CD players, as well as those in pen-
sized laser pointers, are grown by MBE. Figure 7.20 
shows the deposition of n- and p-type GaAlAs on 
a GaAs single-crystal surface.20 With MBE, virtually 
any device structure can be made. The limitations 
to consider lie in volume manufacturing and cost. 
The ultrahigh vacuum requirements make operation 
very expensive. From the available epi techniques, 
MBE exemplifies one that is perhaps the most com-
plicated.21 In Table 7.9 we review the key points con-
cerning MBE, and in Figure 7.21 we show a typical 
commercial MBE station.
FIGURE 7.20 (a) Schematic of molecular beam epitaxy 
growth chamber. (b) Example is the growth of GaAlAs epi 
on GaAs single crystal. (From Brodie, I., and J. J. Muray. 
1982. The physics of microfabrication. New York: Plenum 
Press. With permission.1)
TABLE 7.9 Key Points in MBE
Characteristics
Ultrahigh vacuum
High purity layers with good crystal structure
No chemical byproducts created at growth surface
High uniformity (<1% deviation)
Often uses multiples sources to grow alloy films
High control of composition
Growth rates are very low (0.1–10 μm/h)
In situ monitoring and feedback
Expensive
Mature production technology
FIGURE 7.21 Typical MBE system photo.

[Page 412]
412   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Aerosol Deposition—Impact Deposition
Aerosol deposition (AD) is a mechanical film fabri-
cation method invented in 1997 by Dr. Jun Akedo of 
the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST) in Japan.22 In Figure 7.22 we 
illustrate the overall configuration for film fabrica-
tion using AD, together with electron micrographs 
of raw powder and a resulting AD film.
Raw powders with an average powder diameter 
of 600 nm are mixed and vibrated with a carrier 
gas to form an aerosol. By using the pressure differ-
ence between the aerosol and a vacuum chamber, 
the aerosol is sprayed from a nozzle and impacted 
onto a substrate. Using this simple process, AD films 
with ultrafine crystalline particles of several tens of 
nanometers can be formed as shown in the cross-
sectional image of the AD film in Figure 7.22. The 
impact of solid-state particles creates a strongly 
adherent, high-density nanocrystalline film by gas 
blasting the nanosized particles onto the surface. 
The deposition rate is 30 times faster (10 µm/min) 
than traditional deposition rates and can be carried 
out even at room temperature. The formation mech-
anism is assumed to be room-temperature shock-
compaction. The impacting 600-nm particles are 
deformed and fractured into nanocrystalline struc-
tures of 10–30-nm size. Uniform deposition rates 
over a 200-mm square area have been achieved. The 
raw powders may be manufactured by conventional 
processing methods for most materials.
The two most important distinguishing character-
istics of the AD process are that 1) the deposited films 
maintain the crystalline properties of the raw pow-
der even at low deposition temperatures, and 2) rela-
tively thick films can be produced fast. This stands in 
stark contrast to the thin film-forming methods such 
as sputtering, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), and 
chemical vapor deposition (CVD). When these latter 
methods are used to deposit a material at low tem-
peratures, for example, a piezoelectric material (typi-
cally an oxide with a perovskite crystalline structure) 
onto a substrate such as glass, an amorphous layer 
results, and all piezoelectric properties are lost. To 
maintain the piezoelectric function of this material, 
it is essential to retain the perovskite crystalline struc-
ture. To achieve this, one relies on the surface energy 
of the substrate and a temperature high enough for 
the atoms to be rearranged to form the desired per-
ovskite oxide film. In this type of deposition process, 
restructuring the particles in the crystallization pro-
cess occurs at the atomic level and far from equilib-
rium, inducing many lattice defects that result again 
in the degradation of the piezoelectric effect.
For many piezoelectric actuator applications, a 
film, several micrometers thick, is essential to out-
put sufficient mechanical energy for a given electri-
cal input. When a thick film of more than several 
micrometers is formed onto a substrate with the 
conventional thin film-forming technologies, vari-
ous problems often occur: the speed of film forming 
is not fast enough, composition tends to vary, too 
much heat is required to crystallize the film limit-
ing the choice of substrates, and so on. Because of 
these concerns, the conventional thin film-forming 
technologies have been used only for limited appli-
cations, such as for thin film sensors. In case thicker 
films are required, bulk-type piezoelectric ceramics 
AD film fabrication method
Sample
holder
Sample
substrate
He-
bottle
Aerosol
cham-
ber
–
Powder diameter
: 600 nm
Powder diameter
< 20 nm
Nozzle
Vacuum system
x-y-z
stage
AD film
Deposition chamber
Aerosol
jet stream
Raw powder
Vibrating
FIGURE 7.22 Schematic illustration of aerosol  deposition 
(AD), powder, and a resulting AD film [solid solution of 
PNN (lead nickel niobate) and PZT (lead zirconate titan-
ate)]. (http://www.nec.co.jp/techrep/en/journal/g07/
n01/070115.html)

[Page 413]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   413
made of sintered powders have usually been adopted 
(see Figure 7.23).
Screen-printing of piezoelectrics is a thick-film 
technique that, in principle, could cover the meso-
range between bulk ceramics and thin films. In 
screen-printing one uses a mixture of ceramic pow-
der and binder to make an ink. After screen-printing, 
the ink is fired at 1000ºC or more (screen-printing 
of ceramics is a thermal additive technique covered 
in Chapter 9). This limits this technology to ceramic 
substrate materials.
As suggested in Figure 7.23, thick film-formed 
piezoelectric devices integrated onto a substrate will 
be essential for many piezoelectric actuators of the 
future, such as in sound equipment and for products 
that require a high-precision positioning motion. 
The AD method is a film fabrication method that 
can fulfill that need. Piezoelectric AD results in 
nanocrystalline films that preserve a large dielec-
tric and piezoelectric effect and that are little influ-
enced by the underlying layers and/or substrates. 
For example, by using ceramic particles that fea-
ture chemically unstable surface characteristics, AD 
technology has been used to form ceramic films at 
room temperature on resin circuit boards to which 
ceramic is usually difficult to adhere. The maximum 
dielectric constant of the newly created ceramic 
film was 400, i.e. 10 times the dielectric constant of 
ceramic combined with resin, and is approximately 
at the same level as that of ceramic film made with 
the sputtering method that uses heat treating at a 
high temperature of 600°C. A condenser composed 
of three layers was also successfully created on an 
FR4 printed circuit board. The  capacitance of the 
newly created condenser was 300 nF/cm2, a high 
level that is ideal for practical use (http://www.nec.
co.jp/techrep/en/journal/g07/n01/070115.html).
From the above, the AD method is an excellent 
candidate for the fabrication of piezoelectric thick 
film actuators for the manufacture of micropumps, 
ultrasonic mixers in  microelectromechanical sys-
tems  (MEMS) and micrototal analysis systems 
(µ-TAS), micromanipulators for medical applica-
tions, ink-jet printer heads, flapper actuators for 
high-density hard disk drives, and other applica-
tions where large strains and high-speed response 
are necessary (see Figure 7.23).
An AD of a solid solution of PNN (lead, nickel, 
and niobate) and PZT (lead zirconate titanate) was 
attempted on zirconate ceramics and stainless steel 
substrates. Zirconate ceramics have good high-
 temperature resistance and stainless steel features, 
superior corrosion resistance, and processability 
that lead to low-cost manufacturing of practical 
piezoelectric devices. The AD film-forming process 
was carried out at room temperature with a depo-
sition rate of 10 µm/min or higher over an area of 
10 × 10 mm2. These process conditions confirm that 
this process is amenable to mass production. Figure 
7.24 shows a comparison of the film properties 
between the piezoelectric film formed by the AD and 
the conventional film deposition method. The piezo-
electric film fabricated by AD showed a piezoelectric 
constant (−d31) of 158 mp/V on a stainless substrate, 
which is almost the same value as that of film fab-
ricated by conventional film-forming technology. 
On a zirconate substrate, 360 pm/V was achieved, 
which is similar to that for bulk ceramics. As shown 
in Figure 7.24, where we plot the piezoelectric con-
stant as a function of film thickness of the actuator, 
AD covers a broad range of  thicknesses—between 
bulk ceramic material and thin film—with a better 
piezoelectric constant than screen printing (http://
www.nec.co.jp/techrep/en/journal/g07/n01/070115.
html).
Acoustic
products
Panel speaker
HDD
head unit
Thin film-type
devices
Bone-
conductive
speaker
Inkjet line printer
Linear motor
devices
Inkjet printer
Buzzer
Bulk ceramics
Optical
scanner
Zoom drive
incorporated in
a mobile phone
Auto focus drive
incorporated in
a mobile phone
Auto focus
incorporated in
a camera
LCD inverter
1
1/10
1/100
1/1000
Size (bulk ratio)
FIGURE 7.23 Use of piezoelectrics in consumer products. 
(http://www.nec.co.jp/techrep/en/journal/g07/n01/070115.
html.)

[Page 414]
414   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Chemical Vapor Deposition
Introduction
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is one of the 
 principal thin film manufacturing options. In Figure 
7.25 we show how thin film processes fit in the over-
all IC fabrication scheme. In the case of thin film of 
silicon dioxide, if the surface of the wafer is silicon 
(e.g., at the start of IC fabrication), then thermal oxi-
dation is the appropriate process by which to form a 
layer of SiO2. If the oxide layer must be grown over 
materials other than silicon, such as aluminum or 
silicon nitride, then an alternative technique must 
be used, such as CVD. During CVD, the constituents 
of a vapor phase, often diluted with an inert car-
rier gas, react at a hot surface (typically higher than 
300°C) to deposit a solid thin film. In CVD, the dif-
fusive-convective transport to the hot substrate sur-
face involves many intermolecular collisions, and 
mass and heat transfer modeling of deposition rates 
is consequently much more complex than in PVD. 
Chemical vapor deposition of SiO2 is accomplished 
by reacting a silicon compound such as silane (SiH4) 
with oxygen onto a heated substrate. The reaction 
is carried out at around 425°C and can be summa-
rized by:
 
SiH4 + O2 → SiO2 + 2H2 
Reaction 7.1
The density of a CVD silicon dioxide film and its 
bonding to the substrate are generally poorer than 
that achieved by thermal oxidation. Consequently, 
CVD is used only when the preferred process is not 
feasible: when the substrate surface is not silicon or 
when the high temperature used in thermal oxida-
tion cannot be tolerated.
500
400
300
200
100
1000
100
10
1
0.1
Bulk
ceramics
AD
Screen
printing
method
Tin ﬁlm
forming
method
Bulk actuator
Film-type actuator
Sensor
Film
thickness
(µm)
Piezoelectric constant - d31 (cm/V)
FIGURE 7.24 Plot of the piezoelectric constant (–d31) as a function of film thickness of the actuator [solid solution of 
PNN (lead nickel niobate) and PZT (lead zirconate titanate)] and manufacturing means. AD covers the thickness range 
between bulk and thin film. (Based on http://www.nec.co.jp/techrep/en/journal/g07/n01/070115.html by Dr. Han Xu.)
Wafer
preparation
Design
Tin ﬁlms
Front-end
processes
Photolithography
Ion
implantation
Etch
Cleaning
Planarization
Test and
assembly
FIGURE 7.25 Thin films. CVD is a broad class of processes 
using controlled chemical reactions to create thin films 
on substrates. A variant of CVD, called plasma-enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), uses gas plasma to 
lower the temperature required to obtain a chemical reac-
tion and achieve film deposition.

[Page 415]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   415
In the CVD reaction chamber, the reactants are 
adsorbed on the heated substrate surface, and the 
adatoms undergo a series of processes resulting in 
film formation. When a molecule has reached the 
surface, the required reaction analysis is the same, 
regardless of deposition method. The molecular 
phenomena at the surface to be considered include 
sticking coefficient, surface adsorption, surface dif-
fusion, surface reaction, desorption, and film or crys-
tal growth. Gaseous byproducts are desorbed and 
removed from the reaction chamber. The reactions 
forming a solid material do not always occur on or 
close to the heated substrate (heterogeneous reac-
tions) but can also occur in the gas phase (homo-
geneous reactions). As homogeneous reactions lead 
to gas-phase cluster deposition and result in poor 
adhesion, low density, and high defect films, hetero-
geneous reactions are preferred. The slowest of any 
of the CVD steps mentioned, the gas phase or sur-
face process determines the rate of deposition. The 
sample surface chemistry, its temperature, and ther-
modynamics determine the compounds deposited. 
The most favorable end product of the physical and 
chemical interactions on the substrate surface is a 
stoichiometric-correct film. Several activation barri-
ers need to be surmounted to arrive at this end prod-
uct. Some energy source, such as thermal, photon, 
or ion bombardment, is required to achieve this.
The CVD method is very versatile and works 
over a wide range of temperatures and pressures. 
Amorphous, polycrystalline, epitaxial, and uniaxi-
ally oriented polycrystalline layers can be deposited 
with a high degree of purity, control, and economy. 
CVD is used extensively in the semiconductor 
industry and has played an important role in tran-
sistor miniaturization, for example, by introducing 
very thin film deposition of silicon. More recently, 
CVD copper and low dielectric insulators (ε < 3) 
also have become important CVD applications. 
CVD embodies the principal building technique 
in surface micromachining (see section on Doped 
Polysilicon). Modern interest in CVD is also focused 
on coating applications, such as coated carbide tools, 
solar cells, depositing refractory metals on jet engine 
turbine blades, and other applications where resis-
tance to wear,  corrosion, erosion, and thermal shock 
TABLE 7.10 Example CVD Reactions
Process Description Reaction
 1. The Mond process includes a CVD process for decomposition of nickel from nickel carbonyl [Ni(CO)4], 
which is an intermediate compound formed in reducing nickel ore:
  
Ni(CO)
Ni
4CO
4
400 °F (200 °C)
⎯
→
⎯⎯⎯⎯
+
 2. Coating of titanium carbide (TiC) onto a substrate of cemented tungsten carbide (WC-Co) to produce a 
high-performance cutting tool:
  
TiCl
TiC
4H
4
1800 °F (1000 °C), excess H2
⎯
→
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
+
Cl
 3. Coating of titanium carbide (TiC) onto a substrate of cemented tungsten carbide (WC-Co) to produce a 
high-performance cutting tool:
  
TiCl
0.5N
2H
TiN
4HCl
4
2
2
1650 °F(900 °C)
+
+
+
⎯
→
⎯⎯⎯⎯
 4. Coating of aluminum oxide (Al2O3) onto a substrate of cemented tungsten carbide (WC-Co) to produce 
a high-performance cutting tool:
  
2AlCl
3CO
3H
Al O
3CO
3
2
2
900 °F(500 °C)
2
3
+
+
+
+
⎯
→
⎯⎯⎯⎯
6HCl
 5. Coating of silicon nitride (Si3N4) onto silicon (Si), a process in semiconductor manufacturing:
  
3SiF
4NH
Si N
12HF
4
3
1800 °F(1000 °C)
3
4
+
+
⎯
→
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
 6. Coating of silicon dioxide (SiO2) onto silicon (Si), a process in semiconductor manufacturing:
  
2SiCl
3H O
0.5O
2SiO
6
3
2
2
1600 °F(900 °C)
2
+
+
+
⎯
→
⎯⎯⎯⎯
HCl
 7. Coating of the refractory metal tungsten (W) onto a substrate, such as a jet engine turbine blade:
  
WF
3H
W
6HF
6
2
1100 °F(600 °C)
+
+
⎯
→
⎯⎯⎯⎯

[Page 416]
416   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
are important. Table 7.10 presents some examples of 
CVD reactions that result in deposition of a metal or 
ceramic coating onto a suitable substrate.
A few words about the difference between physical 
vapor deposition (PVD) and chemical vapor deposi-
tion processes follow. PVD constitutes a group  of 
direct  line-of-sight impingement deposition tech-
niques, and CVD repre sents a class of diffusive-
convective mass trans fer deposition techniques. 
Whereas CVD includes a wide range of pressures 
and temperatures and can be applied to a great 
variety of coating and substrate materials, PVD is 
mostly limited to metal film depo sition. With PVD 
techniques we saw that sputtering leads to a better 
conformal coating than evaporation, but CVD is better 
than sputtering in this respect. Unlike CVD, which 
operates at elevated temperature, PVD operates at 
room temperature; consequently, CVD often produces 
better crystalline films than PVD. Advantages 
typically cited for CVD include that 1) it is possible 
to deposit refractory materials at temperatures below 
their melting or sintering temperatures, 2) control of 
grain size is possible, 3) the process can be carried out 
at atmospheric pressure (it does not require vacuum 
equipment); and 4) there is good bonding of coating 
to substrate surface.
Disadvantages include that 1) the corrosive and/
or toxic nature of chemicals generally necessitates a 
closed chamber and special pumping and disposal 
equipment, 2) certain reaction ingredients are rela-
tively expensive, and 3) material utilization is low. 
Many gases used in CVD systems are toxic 
(hazardous to humans), corrosive (causes corrosion 
to stainless steel and other metals), flammable 
(burns when exposed to an ignition source and an 
oxygen source), and explosive and/or pyrophoric 
(spontaneously burn or explode in air, moisture, or 
when exposed to oxygen). In Table 7.11 we compare 
a specific PVD technique (sputtering) with a specific 
CVD technique, i.e., plasma-enhanced chemical 
vapor deposition (PECVD). With CVD, layer thick-
nesses range from 1 monolayer to 100 µm.
Reaction Mechanisms and CVD Reactor
Figure 7.26 illustrates the various transport and 
reaction processes underlying CVD schematically23:
 
◾Mass transport of reactant and diluent gases 
(if  present) in the bulk gas flow region from 
the reactor inlet to the deposition zone (1)
 
◾Gas-phase reactions (homogeneous) leading to 
film precursors and byproducts (often unselec-
tive and undesirable) (2)
 
◾Mass transport of film precursors and reactants 
to the growth surface (3)
 
◾Adsorption of film precursors and reactants on 
the growth surface (4)
 
◾Surface migration of film formers to the growth 
sites (5)
 ◾Surface reactions (heterogeneous) of adatoms 
occurring selectively on the heated surface, and 
incorporation of film constituents into the grow-
ing film, that is, nucleation (island formation) (6)
 
◾Desorption of byproducts of the surface reac-
tions (7)
 
◾Mass transport of byproducts in the bulk gas 
flow region away from the deposition zone 
toward the reactor exit (8)
TABLE 7.11 Comparison of a Typical PVD Method (Sputtering) with a CVD Method
PVD
CVD
Example processes
Sputtering
PECVD
Advantages
Clean process
Easy to control composition
Easy mechanism
Good adhesion
Safe process
High deposition rate
Good step coverage
Disadvantages
Poor step coverage
Expensive
High impurity using toxic 
gas hardware complexity
Example of deposited films
Ti, TiN, Co, W
W, TiN (MOCVD), Ti, TiN, … 
SiO2, Dielectrics

[Page 417]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   417
CVD processes are carried out in a reactor as 
shown in Figure 7.27, which consists of 1) reactant 
supply system, 2) deposition chamber, and 3) recy-
cle/disposal system. The purpose of the reactant sup-
ply system is to deliver reactants to the deposition 
chamber in the proper proportions. The deposition 
chamber contains the substrates and the chemi-
cal reactions that lead to the deposition of reaction 
products onto the substrate surfaces. Deposition 
occurs at elevated temperatures, and the substrate 
may be heated by induction heating, radiant heat, 
or  other means. Deposition temperatures for dif-
ferent CVD reactions can range from around 250–
1950°C; therefore, the chamber must be designed 
to  meet these temperature demands. The recycle/
disposal system is to render harmless the byprod-
ucts of the CVD reaction.
In the case of a thermally driven CVD reaction, a 
temperature gradient is imposed on the reactor; the 
gas-phase species (e.g., SiH4) forms in a hot region; 
and the equilibrium shifts toward the desired solid 
(e.g., Si) in a slightly colder region. Either the gas 
phase or the surface processes can determine rate. 
Thermal energy is the sole driving force in high-
 temperature CVD reactors; for lower-temperature 
deposition, an additional energy source is needed. 
A  radiofrequency (RF) plasma, photoradiation, or 
laser radiation can be used to enhance the process, 
1) Mass transport
    of reactants
2) Film precursor
     reactions
3) Diﬀusion of
     gas molecules
4) Adsorption of
     precursors
5) Precursor diﬀusion
     into substrate
6) Surface reactions
8) Byproduct
     removal
Byproducts
Exhaust
Gas delivery
7) Desorption of
     byproducts
Continuous film
Substrate
CVD reactor
FIGURE 7.26 Schematic of transport and reaction processes underlying CVD. (Based on Jensen, K. F. 1989. 
Microelectronics processing: chemical engineering aspects. Eds. D. W. Hess, and K. F. Jensen. Washington, DC: American 
Chemical Society.23)
Deposition chamber
Furnace
Substrate (work)
Recycled reactant
products
Exhaust
Recycle/disposal system
Valves
Reactant
supplies
FIGURE 7.27 Schematic of a CVD reactor.

[Page 418]
418   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
known as plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition 
(PECVD), photon-assisted CVD,24 and laser-assisted 
CVD (LCVD),25 respectively.
With photon- and laser-assisted CVD systems, 
part of the energy needed for deposition is pro-
vided by photons. This method fills the need for 
lower- temperature deposition processes. With a 
laser source,  it is possible to write a pattern on a 
surface directly by scanning the micrometer-size light 
beam over the substrate in the presence of the suitable 
 reactive gases. By adjusting the focal point of the laser 
continuously, it is even possible to grow 3D micro-
structures such as fibers and springs in a wide variety 
of materials such as boron, carbon, tungsten, silicon, 
SiC, Si3N4, and so on. Laser CVD is treated as a ther-
mal additive technique in Chapter 9.25
In PECVD, which also encompasses high-density 
plasma CVD (HDPCVD), plasma activation provides 
the radicals that result in the deposited films, and ion 
bombardment of the substrate provides the energy 
required to arrive at the stable desired end products. 
Operational temperatures are lower because part 
of the activation energy needed for deposition now 
comes from the plasma.
Because CVD processes involve carrier gas flow 
over the substrate’s surface, the issue of the “fluid/
solid interface” must be dealt with in assessing the 
effectiveness of the CVD process. Whenever a fluid is 
flowing over a solid surface, a “boundary layer” is cre-
ated, as shown in Figure 7.28. The boundary layer acts 
as a barrier to transfer of heat or transport of medium. 
Transport in the gas phase takes place through diffu-
sion proportional to the diffusivity of the gas, D, and 
the concentration gradient across the boundary layer 
that separates the bulk flow (source) and substrate 
surface (sink). The flux of depositing material is given 
by Volume I, Equation 4.20 (Fick’s first law):
J
D N(x,t)
x
= −
δ
δ
The boundary layer thickness, δ(x), as a function 
of distance along the substrate, x (see Figure 7.28), 
can be calculated from (x = 0 is the leading edge):
 
δ
η
ρ
(x)
x
V
1
2
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(7.11)
where η = gas viscosity
 
ρ = gas density
 
 V = gas stream velocity parallel to the substrate
The average boundary layer thickness, in the 
boundary layer model from Prandtl,26 can then be 
calculated over the whole plate as follows:
 
δ =
δ
η
ρ
1
L
(x)dx
2
3L
VL
0
L
1
2
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
∫
 
(7.12)
where L stands for the length of the plate receiving 
the deposit.
The dimensionless Reynolds number, Re, is a 
most important figure in fluid dynamics character-
izing the nature of a fluid flow (gas or liquid) (see 
Volume I, Chapter 6). It is given by:
 
Re
VL
= ρ
η
 
(Volume I, Equation 6.71)
It equals the ratio of the magnitude of inertial 
effects to viscous effects in fluid motion. For low 
values (<2000–3000), the flow regime is called lami-
nar, whereas for larger values the regime is turbulent. 
Substituting the expression for the Reynolds num-
ber in Equation 7.12, we obtain:
 
δ =
2L
3 Re
 
(7.13)
Control of δ and its uniformity over the substrate 
is an important design factor. In a horizontal CVD 
reactor (see Figure 7.29a) the substrate is often tilted 
Laminar
ﬂow
Boundary layer
Slices
Gas
ﬂow
x = o
v
y
dx
Boundary
layer
x
δ(x)
L
FIGURE 7.28 Development of a boundary layer in gas 
flowing over a flat plate. The figure shows an expanded 
view of the boundary layer. (Granger, R. A. 1995. Fluid 
mechanics. New York: Dover Publications.26)

[Page 419]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   419
1–3° for Si and 5–15° for GaAs. The susceptor is 
tilted so that the cross-sectional area of the chamber 
is decreased, increasing the gas velocity along the 
susceptor. This compensates for both the boundary 
layer and depletion effects.
In a vertical reactor (see Figure 7.29b and c) one 
may use a baffle to deflect the gas from the center of 
the susceptor in addition to substrate rotation, again 
leading to a more uniform δ. The stability of the flow 
in a CVD reactor is crucial in achieving uniform 
deposition. The criterion for flow stability depends 
on whether the flow is fully developed (i.e., laminar) 
before it reaches the susceptor. Gas flows in contain-
ment structures (internal flows), e.g., a cylindrical 
tube CVD reactor, differ from external flows in that 
there is a boundary layer and a uniform free stream 
in the entry region of an internal flow that accelerates 
according to the rate of growth of the boundary layer 
as shown in Figure 7.30. The velocity is uniform at the 
entrance, and the boundary layer grows with distance 
from the entrance until the flow becomes fully devel-
oped at XL. From the continuity equation (see Volume 
I, Chapter 6) it follows that the frictionless core must 
accelerate, whereas from applying the Bernoulli equa-
tion (see Volume I, Chapter 6) to a streamline in the 
free stream region, we learn that the pressure must 
decrease. At XL the velocity varies over the entire chan-
nel, and there is no free stream anymore. The laminar 
development length XL for the flow to become fully 
developed can be empirically determined as:
 
X
D
L = 0 056
.
Re
 
(7.14)
where D is the diameter of the tube. The thermal 
entrance length XT is the length beyond which the 
dimensionless temperature profile is constant with 
x  and before which it varies with x (i.e., is devel-
oping). For laminar flows in a tube, the thermal 
entrance length is a function of the Reynolds num-
ber and the Prandtl number, and for uniform sur-
face temperature it is given as:
 
X
0.033Pr ReD
T =
 
(7.15)
where the Prandtl number is defined as Pr = ν/λd (see 
Volume I, Equation 6.61), i.e., the ratio of kinematic 
viscosity and thermal diffusivity. The interpretation 
of this number is the ratio of the thickness of the 
fluid velocity boundary layer to the fluid tempera-
ture boundary layer (for water Pr is 10, and for air it 
is 0.71). Both velocity and thermal entrance length 
are considerably longer when the flow is turbulent.
By substituting the value for the average bound-
ary layer thickness from Equation 7.12 in Volume I, 
Equation 4.20 (i.e. Fick’s first law with dx = δ), the 
following  expression for the material flux to the sub-
strate results:
 
J
D
N
2L 3 Re
= −
 
(7.16)
According to Equation 7.16, the film growth rate 
in the mass flow-controlled regime should depend 
on the square root of the gas velocity, V (because the 
Reynolds number is proportional to gas velocity V). 
Wafers
To vent
Susceptor
(a)
(b)
Vertical
Horizontal
||Si
(c)
FIGURE 7.29 CVD reactor configurations: horizontal (a), 
vertical reactor (b), and barrel CVD reactor (c).
δ
XL
Potential care
Boundary layer
Fully developed ﬂow
FIGURE 7.30 Flow in the entry region of a pipe for laminar flow.

[Page 420]
420   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Because gas-phase mass transport (see Table 7.12) is 
not an activated process, it is not strongly tempera-
ture-dependent. In Figure 7.31A we show a plot of 
silicon growth rate (in micrometers per minute) as a 
function of the gas flow rate (in liters per minute and 
proportional to the gas velocity in a fixed volume 
reaction chamber) with a substrate temperature of 
1270°C, and the predicted square root dependence 
is clearly observed over a wide range of flow rates.27
At high flow rates, the growth rate reaches a maxi-
mum and then becomes independent of flow. In this 
regime, the reaction rate controls the deposition, 
evidenced by the exponential dependence of the 
growth rate on temperature observed at those flow 
rates (see Figure 7.31Ba).27
Surface reactions can be modeled by a thermally 
activated phenomenon proceeding at a rate, k, given 
by:
 
k
k e
0
E
kT
a
=
 
(7.17)
where k0 = frequency factor 
  
Ea = activation energy in electronvolts
In Figure 7.31Bb, the growth rate (in micrometers 
per minute) of Si as a function of substrate temp-
erature and a variety of precursor gases is illustrated 
in an APCVD reactor. From the slope of an Arrhenius 
plot, as demonstrated here, the activation energy of 
the rate-determining surface process can be deduced 
(for most surface reactions, Ea ranges from 1–4 eV). 
TABLE 7.12 Mass Transport: Fundamental and 
Experimental Parameters
Fundamental Parameters
Experimental Parameters
Reactant concentration
Pressure
Diffusivity
Gas velocity
Boundary layer thickness
Temperature distribution
Reactor geometry
Gas properties (viscosity…)
Activated process
1270ºC
0          0.2         0.4         0.6         0.8         1.0         1.2         1.4         1.6
1/2
Film growth rate µm/min
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
Log (dep rate)
Mass-transport
limited regime
Reaction rate
limited regime
20%
10°C
Slope ~ Ea
1/T (*K–1)
0.7             0.8           0.9              1.0            1.1
1
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.02
0.01
1300 1200 1100  1000   900          800            700                600
Surface
reaction
controlled
SiH4
SiCl4
Si HCl3
SiH Cl
2
2
Substrate temperature,
Substrate temperature, °C
10
T(K)
3
Silicon growth rate , µm/min
(A)
(B)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 7.31 Growth rate dependence in a Si CVD process as a function of gas flow rate (A) and temperature (B). At high 
flow rates, the growth rate reaches a maximum and then becomes independent of flow. In this regime, the reaction rate 
controls the deposition, evidenced by the exponential dependence of the growth rate on temperature observed at those 
flow rates (see a). The growth rate (in micrometers per minute) of Si as a function of substrate temperature and a variety 
of precursor gases is illustrated in an APCVD reactor (see b). (Bb) Various precursor gases are used. (Wolf, S., and R. N. 
Tauber. 1987. Silicon processing for the VLSI era. Sunset Beach, CA: Lattice Press.27)

[Page 421]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   421
We want the deposition reaction to occur at the gas/
wafer boundary (heterogenous reaction). However, 
the higher temperatures (650–800°C for silane) 
used to enhance surface migration also result in gas-
phase decomposition of silane, resulting in particles 
(homogeneous reaction). This is undesirable because 
particles tend to fall onto the wafers. Higher-quality 
(fewer defects) material is obtained at temperatures 
higher than 800°C. To be able to operate at higher 
temperatures, instead of silane, chlorosilanes that 
are stable up to higher temperatures are commonly 
used. Dichlorosilane (SiH2Cl2) is the most common 
and allows growth at ~800–1050°C. For a certain 
rate-limiting reaction, the temperature may increase 
high enough for the reaction rate to exceed the rate 
at which reactant species arrive at the surface. In 
such a case, the reaction rate cannot proceed any 
faster than the rate at which the reactant gases are 
supplied to the substrate by mass transport, no 
matter how high the temperature is increased (see 
plateau in Figure 7.31Ba and b). This situation is 
referred to as a mass transport-limited deposition 
process. Temperature is less important in this regime 
than it is in the reaction rate-limited (Arrhenius) 
one. In the latter case, the arrival rate of reactants is 
less important because their concentration does not 
limit the growth rate.
A direct practical application of these two pos-
sible rate-limiting processes is the way substrates 
are stacked in low-pressure CVD (LPCVD) (<10 Pa) 
versus atmospheric pressure to slightly reduced pres-
sure CVD (APCVD) (±100−10 kPa) reactors. In an 
LPCVD reactor (e.g., at ~1 Torr), the diffusivity of 
the gas species is increased by a factor of 1000 over 
that at atmospheric pressure, resulting in a one order 
of magnitude increase in the transport of reactants 
to the substrate. The rate-limiting step becomes the 
surface reaction. LPCVD reactors enable wafers to 
be stacked vertically at very close spacings as the 
rate of arrivals of reactants is less important (Figure 
7.32). On the other hand, APCVD, operating in the 
mass transport-limited regime, must be designed 
such that all locations on the wafer and all wafers 
are supplied with an equal flux of reactant species. 
In this case, the wafers often are placed horizontally 
or at a slight incline (Figure 7.29a). In APCVD, reac-
tor walls typically are cooled in a so-called cold wall 
reactor type (where only the susceptor holding the 
substrates is heated) to minimize particulate and 
impurity problems caused by deposition on them. 
Horizontal tube, hot wall reactors are the most 
widely used LPCVD reactors. In this case, not only 
the wafers but also the reaction chamber walls get 
coated. Such systems require frequent cleaning to 
avoid serious particulate contamination. They find 
wide application because of their economy, through-
put, and uniformity.
The Reynolds number in a typical LPCVD reactor 
is smaller than that for APCVD. Consequently, the 
thermal entrance length for APCVD is longer than 
that for LPCVD reactors (see Equation 7.15).
Step Coverage
Thin deposited films grow more readily on horizon-
tal, exposed surfaces than within trenches or holes, 
resulting in poor coverage of the surface with the 
film. The gaps that are formed can lead to shorts, 
reliability problems, etching failures, and other 
generally undesirable phenomena. Poor step cov-
erage results from different deposition rates in dif-
ferent parts of a microstructure. The profile of the 
thin films deposited by any CVD or PVD techniques 
depends on:
 
1. Equipment configuration
 
2. Deposition method (e.g., LPCVD, PECVD, PVD)
 
3. Reaction chemistry
 
4. Reactant transport mechanism
FIGURE 7.32 Vertical stacking of substrates in LPCVD 
reactors.

[Page 422]
422   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Here we emphasize step coverage in CVD pro-
cesses. The mean free path of a molecule, λ, based 
on a slightly modified Equation 7.6, is given by:
 
λ =
π
kT
2 P
a
1
2
T
2
 
(7.18)
where a is the molecular diameter.28 If we assume 
a = 3 Å and T = 300 K, then PT(torr)λ(m) = 7.810−5. 
Therefore, if λ = 30 cm, then a pressure of 2.6 × 10−4 
Torr is required (see also Table 7.13).
Equation 7.18 is of crucial importance in under-
standing CVD coating of micromachined features. 
CVD films may electrically isolate underlying 
 features from subsequent layers or protect them 
against the atmosphere, determined by the degree 
at which edges and pits of the underlying features 
can be covered uniformly. As demonstrated in Figure 
7.33A, three cases can be distinguished. Ideally, 
a uniform, dense, and conformal coating should 
form (Figure  7.33Aa). This can occur in instances 
where the reactants, after first hitting the solid, have 
enough energy left for surface migration before a 
bond is established with the underlying substrate. 
Coatings in which equal film thickness exists over 
all substrate topography, regardless of its slope, are 
called conformal (see also Figure 7.5). In a second 
case, as shown in Figure 7.33Ab, the mean free path 
of the molecules is large enough to reach the bot-
tom of the trench, but little energy remains for sur-
face migration. Finally, in the third case, shown in 
Figure 7.33Ac, the mean free path length is too short 
to reach the bottom, and there is little surface migra-
tion (temperature too low). Whereas sputtering is 
better than evaporation, for the best conformal 
coating CVD is preferred. Evaporated and sputtered 
metal films often have trench profiles as shown in 
the Figure 7.33Ab, whereas CVD (especially LPCVD) 
deposited films are often more uniform and confor-
mal, as demonstrated in Figure 7.33Aa.
The value of the integral of the material flux 
in Equation 7.16 (∫Jdθ), and thus the CVD film 
thickness, is directly proportional to the range of 
feasible angles of arrival, θ, of the depositing species 
(in the absence of surface migration). Different 
TABLE 7.13 Mean Free Path in Various Gases at 20°C
Gas
PT (Torr) λ (m) (cm·Torr) at 20ºC
O2
4.9 × 10−3
Atmospheric pressure (760 Torr)
~40 nm (smaller than most chip features)
N2
4.6 × 10−3
H2
9 × 10−3
Low vacuum (0.76 Torr)
~40 μm (larger than most chip features)
He
13.6 × 10−3
Ar
4.8 × 10−3
Medium vacuum (7.6 Torr)
~4.0 mm (larger than working gap)
Ne
9.3 × 10−3
Xe
2.7 × 10−3
High vacuum (7.6 μTorr)
~4.0 m (larger than chamber)
CO2
3.0 × 10−3
H2O
3.0 × 10−3
Evaporated material travels straight 
to wafer (line of sight; thus, is very 
directional)
Cl
2.3 × 10−3
NH3
3.5 × 10−3
W
Z
(a)
(A)
(B)
(b)
(c)
θ = 180°
θ = 90°
θ = 270°
θ
α
FIGURE 7.33 Step coverage cases of deposited film. (Aa) 
Uniform coverage resulting from rapid surface migration. (Ab) 
Nonconformal step coverage for long mean free path and no 
surface migration. Distance a is the longest path a molecule 
travels to reach the corner of the trench. (Ac) Nonconformal 
step coverage for short mean free path  and no surface 
migration. (B) Different arrival angles in two dimensions.

[Page 423]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   423
arrival angles in two dimensions are illustrated in 
Figure 7.33B. The arrival angle at a planar surface 
is 180°. At the top of a vertical step, the arrival rate 
is nonzero over a range of 270°; the resultant film 
thickness is 270/180, or 1.5 times greater than that 
for the planar case. At the bottom corner of a trench, 
the arrival angle is only 90°, and the film thickness is 
90/180 or one-half that of the planar case. The CVD 
profile in Figure 7.33Ac, where the mean free path 
is short compared with the trench dimensions and 
there is no surface migration, reflects the 180°, 90°, 
and 270° arrival angles. The thick cusp at the top of 
the step and the thin crevice at the bottom combine 
to give a re-entrant shape that is particularly difficult 
to cover with evaporated or sputtered metal. Gas 
depletion effects also are observed along the trench 
walls. Along the vertical walls, the arrival angle, θ, 
is determined by the width of the opening, and the 
distance from the top and can be calculated from:
 
θ = arc tan w
z
 
(7.19)
where w is the width of the opening and z the dis-
tance from the bottom of the trench to the top  surface 
(Figure 7.33Aa). This type of step coverage, as shown 
in Figure 7.33Ab, thins along the vertical walls and 
may have a crack at the bottom of the step. For uni-
formity of deposition, in the case of Figure 7.33Ab, 
where the mean free path is longer than the distance 
α (the longest path a molecule must travel to reach 
the corner of the trench), the rate of surface migration 
of adspecies should exceed the rate of adsorption of 
adspecies. The condition of λ > α can be met by work-
ing at low pressures, based on Equation 7.18:
 
kT
2 P
a
T
2
1
2
π
> α 
(7.20)
For a given gas, Equation 7.20 gives us the pres-
sures and temperatures at which λ > α. The most 
important variable influencing the requirement for 
large surface diffusion is the reactor temperature. 
The mobility of surface species is largest on metallic 
and semiconducting surfaces, where bonding is not 
very directional, and rather limited on dielectrics, 
where highly directional covalent bonds tend to 
hold a molecule in one place once it is chemisorbed. 
There is another factor influencing conformality, 
namely, the reactive stiction coefficient, Sc, which 
might be even more important than surface diffu-
sion. To appreciate the importance of this param-
eter we need to reintroduce some simple facts about 
the mean free path in various deposition systems. 
Remember that the mean free path for APCVD is 
40 nm at 760 Torr (see Table 7.13), smaller than most 
features on an IC or a micromachine. However, the 
mean free path is 10 µm in typical working condi-
tions for LPCVD and PECVD, and for sputtering it 
is a few centimeters; therefore, in this case one can 
ignore collisions between the gas particles when 
they are inside a via or a trench-like structure. The 
only collisions are those with the surface of the 
wafer. The particular flow characteristics around an 
IC, MEMS, or NEMS feature on a substrate are given 
by the value of the Knudsen number (Kn), defined 
in this case as the ratio of the mean free path of the 
molecules (λ) to the characteristic dimension of the 
structure to be coated (e.g., the width D of the struc-
ture) (see also Equation 7.5). If the Knudsen num-
ber is greater than 1, the flow is free molecular. If, 
on the other hand, the Knudsen number is <0.01, 
the flow is viscous, that is, the atom or molecule 
bounces several times into the feature’s sidewalls. A 
transition region exists between the two. The flow 
around micromachined features is typically in this 
transition regime (0.1 < Kn = λ/w < 10) or in the free 
molecular regime (Kn > 10).
The transport of reactants to the surface at low 
 pressures is sketched in Figure 7.34. The three pro-
cesses shown here are 1) direct deposition, 2) re-emis-
sion, and 3) surface diffusion. In most applications, 
it has been found that the surface diffusion (3) is less 
important than re-emission (2), which is controlled 
Deposition precursors
Direct (Sc = 1)
1
1
Re-emission (Sc < 1)
Surface diﬀusion
2
2
3
3
FIGURE 7.34 The transport of reactants to the surface at 
low pressures.

[Page 424]
424   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
by the reactive stiction coefficient, Sc. The stiction 
coefficient is the ratio of incident precursor spe-
cies minus re-emitted ones, i.e., all the species that 
remain on the surface react, over the total of inci-
dent precursor species:
 
Sc
incident
re-emission
incident
reactio
= Γ
−Γ
Γ
= Γ
n
incident
Γ
 
(7.21)
The reactive sticking coefficient (RSC) Sc depends 
on the nature of the incoming species (molecule, 
ion, neutral, radical, size of molecule) and on the 
surface conditions. A radical or other unstable pre-
cursor molecule is likely to react readily with a sur-
face site and stick wherever it strikes (Sc = 1). A more 
stable precursor may not react readily, particularly at 
higher temperatures or when the surface is already 
saturated with adsorbents (Sc < 1). Particularly in 
dielectric deposition, it has been shown that an 
important mechanism for transport of the material 
into gaps and holes is through multiple adsorption 
and re-emission from the surface: that is, from pre-
cursors having a low RSC. When such “reflections” 
occur many times, the flux of precursor to the sur-
face inside a hole may differ very little from the flux 
onto the horizontal surfaces. In other words, the 
likelihood of reaction is important because succes-
sive adsorption and re-emission is one of the key 
mechanisms determining the effect of topography 
of a surface on the thickness of a film deposited 
on that surface, and is one of the key advantages of 
CVD over evaporation or sputtering of thin films. 
Therefore, for a direct deposition (1) Sc = 1 and with 
any degree of re-emission (2) Sc < 1. Shadowing of 
the direct flux by the walls reduces the flux at the 
bottom corners of a via or a trench, resulting in thin-
ner deposition. Lower reaction stiction coefficients 
increase the number of bounces in the trench or via 
and hence increase the probability of deposition 
precursors reaching the bottom. Thus, step coverage 
is better for lower Sc (see Figure 7.35).
To illustrate the effect of a lower Sc, imagine that 
we have a couple of metal lines (e.g., aluminum) on 
a substrate that are being used as wires, and that we 
need to cover them up with an insulating dielectric 
so that a subsequent layer of metal can be depos-
ited without being shunted out. When leaving voids 
in a fill they trap chemicals that may lead to cracks 
(dielectric) or large contact resistance and sheet 
resistance (metallization). In Figure 7.36 we show 
how a decreasing Sc fills the gap between the two 
metal lines better with the dielectric material and 
that at a value of Sc = 0.007 the gap is filled com-
pletely. The simulation model used here is SPEEDIE, 
High (Sc=1)
Low (Sc< 1)
Nonconformal
Conformal
FIGURE 7.35 A low Sc can produce more conformal cover-
age because of redeposition (usually more important than 
surface diffusion)
FIGURE 7.36 Effect of varying Sc on filling a gap between 
two metal lines. The simulation model used here is SPEEDIE, 
the Stanford etching and deposition profile simulator.

[Page 425]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   425
the Stanford  etching and deposition profile simu-
lator. Scaling of interconnects in future ICs will 
require more metal layers with reduced intercon-
nect pitch. The height of the metals also has to be 
increased. The larger aspect ratio between the metal 
lines will increase dramatically the problem of step 
coverage. For a small gap or opening in a film, the 
aspect ratio is the ratio of its depth to width. Filling 
high-aspect-ratio gaps (>3:1) is critical for advanced 
wafer fabrication. It is anticipated that the thickness 
of deposited films in the IC industry will reach the 
order of 10 nm rather than a few micrometers, and 
thickness uniformity will be harder to maintain.
Although LPCVD reactors have lower deposition 
rates than APCVD reactors, it is found that this is 
more than compensated for by the high wafer capac-
ity and coating uniformity. The future trend is toward 
single-wafer processing systems instead of the batch 
processes. This is because of the increasing wafer 
sizes (8 in. or more), and the development in tech-
nology to achieve better film uniformity in modern 
single-wafer reactors. The tendency is toward large 
single wafers that are transferred from station to sta-
tion in so-called cluster tools.
Besides SPEEDIE, simulation models for nonpla-
nar CVD were presented, for example, by Coronell 
et  al.29 The latter model again provides a picture 
of the evolution of the depositing film profile. The 
parameters investigated include the sticking coeffi-
cient, the surface mobility of the adsorbed reactants, 
the Knudsen number (the ratio of the mean free 
path to the feature size), the feature aspect ratio, and 
feature geometry.
Overview of CVD Process Types
In Table 7.1423,30 we review some important CVD 
processes, listing applications and operational pres-
sures and temperatures for the different types.
Atmospheric Pressure CVD
Atmospheric pressure to slightly reduced pressure 
CVD (±100–10 kPa) is used primarily to grow 
epitaxial (i.e., single-crystalline) films of Si and to 
deposit, at high rates, SiO2, for example, from the 
reaction of SiH4 and oxygen, at low temperatures of 
300–450°C [low-temperature oxide (LTO)].23 The 
epitaxy processes [also vapor phase epitaxy (VPE)] 
involve high growth temperatures (>850°C for 
Si). As we saw above, an APCVD reactor operates 
in the mass-transport regime so that wafer access, 
in contrast to the LPCVD process, becomes more 
important and temperature control less so. APCVD 
is susceptible to gas-phase reactions, and step 
coverage is often poor. High gas dilutions help 
avoid gas-phase nucleation. APCVD, reactor walls 
typically are cooled in a so-called cold wall reactor 
type (where only the susceptor holding the substrates 
is heated) to minimize particulate and impurity 
problems caused by deposition on them. In the early 
days of semiconductor processing, atmospheric 
pressure reactors were used mostly to deposit silicon 
and dielectric films. The advantage of deposition at 
atmospheric pressure is the simplicity of the reactor 
design and the high deposition rates (700 Å/min 
for SiO2). The wafers are put on a hot susceptor, 
and reactant gases flow over the susceptor. The 
susceptor is heated by using high-intensity lamps, 
radiofrequency (RF) induction, or DC electric 
current (resistive) heating. These atmospheric 
pressure reactors have low throughput, require 
excessive wafer handling during wafer loading and 
unloading, and have poor thickness uniformity 
(>10%) across the wafer. To overcome some of these 
disadvantages, continuous throughput atmospheric 
pressure reactors were developed as shown in Figure 
7.37. In these reactors, the wafers are carried through 
the reactor on a conveyor belt and are heated by 
convection. Also, there is a more uniform flow of 
the reactant gases across the wafer surface. These 
reactors have high throughput, good uniformity, 
and the ability to handle large-diameter wafers. The 
main disadvantages of this type of reactor are that they 
required frequent cleaning and that particles formed 
on the reactant dispenser head wind up on the wafers, 
which impaired process yield and device reliability.
Example 7.2: Epitaxial Si
As a first example of an APCVD application, con-
sider silicon epitaxy at 1200°C (see also Figure 
7.31B):
 
SiCl (gas)
2H
Si(solid)
4HCl(gas)
4
2
+
+
→
Reaction 7.2

[Page 426]
426   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
An intermediate species, SiCl2, is necessary 
for silicon formation, and at less than 1000°C 
no SiCl2 forms when starting from SiCl4. Lower-
temperature epitaxy can be performed by starting 
with SiH2Cl2 or SiHCl3, which both decompose more 
readily to SiCl2. When discussing Figure 7.31Bb, 
we pointed out that using pure silane (in the 
lowest temperature range) results in gas-phase 
decomposition of silane, resulting in particles 
(homogeneous reaction), and silane also must 
be avoided. Dichlorosilane (SiH2Cl2) is the most 
common and allows growth at  ~800–1,050°C. 
TABLE 7.14 Review of CVD Processes
Process
Advantages
Disadvantages
Applications
Remark 
Pressure/
Temperature
APCVD
Simple, high 
deposition rate (700 
Å/min for SiO2), low 
temperature
Poorer step 
coverage, 
particle 
contamination
Doped and undoped, 
low temperature, 
thick oxides 
(mainly dielectrics)
Mass transport-
controlled
100–10 kPa
250–450°C
LPCVD
Excellent purity and 
uniformity, 
conformable step 
coverage, large 
wafer capacity
High 
temperature 
and lower 
deposition rate
Doped and undoped, 
high-temperature 
oxides, silicon nitride, 
polysilicon, W, WSi2
Surface reaction-
controlled
100 Pa
550–650°C
VLPCVD
Single-crystalline Si 
and compound 
semiconductor 
superlattices
Surface reaction-
controlled
1.3 Pa
MOCVD
Excellent for epi on 
large surface areas
Safety concerns 
(highly toxic), 
very expensive 
source material 
Compound 
semiconductors for 
solar cells, laser, 
photocathodes, LEDs, 
HEMTs, and quantum 
wells; also W and Cu
High volume, large 
surface area 
production
PECVD
Lower substrate 
temperatures, fast, 
good adhesion, 
good step coverage, 
low pinhole density
Chemical (e.g., 
hydrogen) and 
particulate 
contamination, 
plasma 
damage
Low-temperature 
insulators over 
metals, passivation 
(nitride)
Tends to have more 
pinholes than LPCVD
2–5 Torr (pressure 
higher than in 
sputter deposition, 
more gas-phase 
collisions, less ion 
bombardment on 
surface) more 
collision in gas 
phase, less ion 
bombardment on 
substrate
−200–400°C
Atomic 
layer 
deposition 
(ALD)
ALD is the 
deposition method 
with the greatest 
potential for 
producing very thin, 
conformal films 
with control of the 
thickness and 
composition of the 
films possible at the 
atomic level.
A major 
limitation of 
ALD is its 
slowness; 
usually only a 
fraction of a 
monolayer is 
deposited in 
one cycle.
A major driving force 
for the interest in 
ALD is for scaling 
down 
microelectronic 
devices.
Many technologically 
important materials 
such as Si and Ge, 
several multi-
component oxides 
and certain metals 
cannot currently be 
deposited by ALD in 
a cost-effective way.
RT to 400°C
Spray 
pyrolysis
Inexpensive
Difficult to 
control, not 
compatible 
with IC
Gas sensors, solar 
cells, ITO, large area
Atmospheric 
100–180°C
Source: Hess, D. W., and K. F. Jensen, eds. 1989. Microelectronics processing: chemical engineering aspects. Washington, DC: American 
Chemical Society; and Sze, S. M., ed. 1988. VLSI technology. New York: McGraw-Hill. With permission.31

[Page 427]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   427
In Figure 7.38, we show the growth rate versus 
temperature for that reaction; the plot delineates 
a CVD polysilicon deposition region and an 
epitaxial 
monocrystalline 
silicon 
deposition 
region.27 Nominal growth rates for single-crystal 
Si varies from 0.2–1.5 µm/min, depending on the 
source gas and the growth temperature. Impurity 
atoms can be introduced in the gas stream to 
grow doped epitaxial layers (Figure 7.39) (e.g., 
arsine-doped epitaxial silicon).
Example 7.3: Oxide APCVD with 
Tetraethylorthosilicate
In low-temperature oxidation (LTO), silicon diox-
ide is deposited on the wafer out of the vapor 
phase from the reaction of silane (SiH4) with oxy-
gen at relative low temperatures (400–450°C) 
and low pressure (200–400 mTorr). Silane spon-
taneously combusts in the presence of oxygen (in 
other words, silane is pyrophoric), and to avoid 
a large depletion of the gases at the entrance of 
the furnace tube, the gases are introduced in the 
furnace through injectors along the length of the 
tube. The silane/oxygen gas mixture has been 
applied in atmospheric pressure CVD (APCVD) 
and plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD) conditions. 
The main advantage of silane/oxygen is the low 
deposition temperature; the main disadvantage 
is the nonconformal step coverage.
Because silane is not safe, now tetraethy-
lorthosilicate (TEOS) with oxygen or ozone is 
commonly used. TEOS is a liquid at room tem-
perature, with a vapor pressure of about 1.5 
Torr. TEOS slowly hydrolyzes into silicon diox-
ide and ethanol when in contact with ambient 
moisture, but its flammability and toxicity are 
similar to that of an alcohol. Ozone is more reac-
tive than oxygen; hence the process can be car-
ried out at low temperature without plasma. 
In general, TEOS brings about a better starting 
chemistry than the traditional silane-based CVD 
technologies. Use of TEOS oxide, to replace SiH4-
based oxide in spin-on-glass and photoresist 
planarization schemes, now has become com-
monplace for devices with small features. TEOS 
is especially suited for filling high-aspect-ratio 
gaps. Trench fill by APCVD of TEOS is illustrated 
in Figure 7.40.
FIGURE 7.37 Simple continuous-feed atmospheric pressure 
reactor (APCVD): (a) Gas-injection type; (b) plenum type.
0.60
0.70
0.80
10 /T (K   )
3
-1
-2
10
2
10
4
10
1
Poly - region
Monocryst - region
Growth rate (µm/min)
1420
1120
1000 °C
FIGURE 7.38 Growth rate versus temperature. Epitaxy to 
CVD transition in CVD polysilicon deposition and epitaxial 
monocrystalline Si deposition. (From Wolf, S., and R. N. 
Tauber. 1987. Silicon processing for the VLSI era. Sunset 
Beach, CA: Lattice Press. With permission.27)
SiCl2
AsH3
AsH3
H2
H
H
H
H
H
Si
Si
Si
Si
As
As
As
HCl
FIGURE 7.39 Arsine-doped epitaxial silicon.

[Page 428]
428   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
In APCVD both undoped glass and boro-
phosphosilicate glass have been deposited from 
TEOS. The process involves the reaction of ozone 
with TEOS at a pressure of 600 Torr and at a tem-
perature less than 400°C:
 
Si(C H O)
8O
SiO
10H O
8CO
2
5
4
3
2
2
2
+
+
+
→
Reaction 7.3
While offering the same good step coverage 
over submicrometer gaps, the films from the 
thermal reaction of ozone and TEOS exhibit rela-
tively neutral stress and have a higher film den-
sity compared with low-pressure processes. This 
increased density gives the oxide greater mois-
ture resistance, lower wet etch rate, and smaller 
thermal shrinkage. Compared with a lower-pres-
sure process, the film density is increased from 
2.09–2.15 g/cm3; the wet etch rate decreased 
by more than 40%; and the thickness shrinkage 
changed from 12 to 4% after a 30-min anneal in 
dry N2 at 1000°C.33
Example 7.4: Carbon Nanotubes 
Grown by APCVD 
Carbon nanotubes are produced in atmospheric 
pressure CVD (APCVD) by catalytic dispropor-
tionation of CO or CH4 on catalyst particles (e.g., 
Fe in the form of iron pentacarbonyl). A typical 
CVD setup consists of a target substrate held in 
a quartz tube placed inside of a furnace. Typical 
parameters for carbon nanotube deposition 
include a pressure of 1 atm and a temperature 
of 700–900°C. Possible substrates include silicon, 
mica, quartz, or alumina, and the carbon sup-
ply is either CH4 or CO gas. Common catalysts 
are nickel, iron, or cobalt. In a typical procedure, 
catalyst is sputtered, layered, or specifically 
placed onto the substrate. A carbon-containing 
gas is then passed over the substrate inside the 
furnace, and growth is initiated on the catalyst 
particles. Adding 25% hydrogen increases the 
SWNT yield. Advantages of the APCVD method 
for making carbon nanotubes include increased 
length and purity of the carbon nanotubes, 
large-scale production capability, increased con-
trol, and lower temperatures.
In an intriguing development, fast-heating 
CVD now offers the ability to grow millimeter-
long carbon nanotubes while maintaining con-
trol over orientation of the carbon nanotubes. 
The fast heating minimizes the growing tubes’ 
interaction with the substrate; this is called the 
kite mechanism. In this process, a catalyst is 
applied by photolithography to a silicon wafer. 
Using this process, Huang et al.34 grew a square 
2D network of SWNTs guided by flow of carrier 
gas (Fe/Mo catalyst and CO2 gas) (Figure 7.41).
Low-Pressure CVD
Low-pressure CVD (LPCVD) at less than 10 Pa allows 
large numbers of wafers to be coated simultaneo-
usly without detrimental effects to film uniformity. 
This is the result of the large diffusion coefficient at 
low pressures leading to a growth limited by the rate 
of surface reactions rather than by the rate of mass 
transfer to the substrate. The surface reaction rate 
is very sensitive to temperature, but temperature is 
relatively easy to control. Typically, reactants can 
be used without dilution; therefore, growth rates 
are only an order of magnitude less than operation 
at atmospheric pressure allows. LPCVD in some 
cases can overcome the uniformity, step coverage, 
and particulate contamination limitations of early 
APCVD systems. One of the difficulties in the cold 
Nitride
Trench CVD oxide
Liner oxide
n-well
p-well
p– Epitaxial layer
p+ Silicon substrate
Trench ﬁll by chemical vapor deposition
TEOS-O3
FIGURE 7.40 Trench fill by atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition of TEOS.

[Page 429]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   429
100–1000 sccm. A large number of wafers (~100) 
are stacked vertically, perpendicular to the gas flow, 
in a quartz holder. The inlet gases may undergo 
homogeneous gas-phase reactions to produce the 
deposition precursors, which are transported to 
the wafer surface by gas-phase diffusion. Excellent 
film uniformities (better than 5%) are obtained in 
these reactors. Although these reactors have lower 
deposition rates, it is found that this is more than 
compensated for by the high wafer capacity. In a hot-
wall LPCVD reactor, not only the wafers get coated  
but also the reaction chamber walls get coated. Such 
systems require frequent cleaning to avoid serious 
particulate contamination (in situ cleaning using 
NF3 or ClF3). They find wide application because of 
their economy, throughput, and uniformity.
LPCVD polysilicon is used for structural layers in 
surface micromachines, and LPCVD SiO2 and phos-
phosilicate glass (PSG) are used as sacrificial layers 
(see below). Two disadvantages of LPCVD are the 
low deposition rate and the relatively high operating 
temperatures.
Very low-pressure processes (about 1 Pa) have 
been  used for the growth of single-crystalline Si 
at relatively low temperatures. Very low-pressure 
operation is also advantageous for the growth  of 
III–V compound superlattices by reducing  flow 
recirculations and improving interface abruptness.23
Example 7.5: Polysilicon Surface 
Micromachining Using LPCVD
Surface micromachining, we will see below, 
is based mostly on CMOS manufacturing. 
Alternating structural and sacrificial layers are 
deposited, patterned, and etched. Sacrificial 
wall systems (where only the susceptor holding 
the wafer is heated) described earlier is maintain-
ing a uniform temperature across the wafer surface. 
This can be overcome by putting the entire reaction 
chamber in a furnace maintained at a uniform tem-
perature, as in the case of standard resistance-heated 
hot wall tubular furnaces. A large number of wafers 
can be stacked closely in these furnaces, and good 
uniformity across the wafer and wafer-to-wafer film 
thickness can be achieved if they are operated at very 
low pressures and in the surface reaction- limited 
regime. Figure 7.42 gives the schematics of a hot-wall, 
low-pressure CVD reactor used to depo sit thin films 
of materials such as polycrystalline silicon, silicon 
dioxide, and silicon nitride. The reactor consists of 
a quartz tube heated by a resistance-heated furnace 
to maintain a uniform temperature along the reac-
tor. Gases are introduced in one end and pumped 
out from the other end of the reactor. The operat-
ing  pressures range from 0.25–2 Torr; temperatures 
range from 300–900°C; and gas flow rates range from 
FIGURE 7.41 Square 2D network of SWNTs guided by flow of carrier gas (Fe/Mo catalyst and CO2 gas). (Huang, S., X. Cai, 
and J. Liu. 2003. Growth of millimeter-long and horizontally aligned single-walled carbon nanotubes on flat substrates. 
J Am Chem Soc 125:5636–37.34)
Exhaust scrubber
Standup wafers
Furnace
Trap
Pump
Gas control
and
sequencer
Source gases
FIGURE 7.42 Low-pressure chemical vapor deposition hot 
wall reactor.

[Page 430]
430   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
layers are dissolved away at the end to free 
the  structural layers so that they can be free to 
move as demonstrated in Figure 7.43. Materials 
are more or less restricted to CMOS-type mate-
rials (polycrystalline silicon, silicon oxide, sili-
con nitride, boron phosphosilicate glass [BPSG], 
phosphosilicate glass [PSG]). Structures have low 
aspect ratios and are sometimes referred to as 
2.5D (quite planar). Polycrystalline silicon (called 
polysilicon to distinguish it from silicon having 
a single- crystal structure) has a number of uses 
in IC fabrication, including conducting mate-
rials for leads, gate electrodes in metal oxide 
semiconductor devices, and contact material in 
shallow junction devices. It is also the main struc-
tural material in surface micromachines. CVD to 
coat polysilicon onto a wafer involves reduc-
tion of silane at temperatures around 600°C, as 
expressed by the following reaction:
 
SiH
Si
2H
4
2
→
+
 
Reaction 7.4
The surface micromachining process sequence 
depicted in Figure 7.43 is for the creation of a 
simple freestanding polysilicon anchor. A sacri-
ficial layer, also called a spacer layer or base, is 
deposited on a silicon substrate (Figure 7.43a). 
CVD can be used to deposit layers of doped 
SiO2, such as phosphorus-doped silicon dioxide 
(called P-glass or PSG). Phosphosilicate glass 
(PSG) deposited by LPCVD stands out as the best 
material for the sacrificial layer because it etches 
even more rapidly in HF than SiO2. To obtain a 
uniform etch rate, the PSG film must be densi-
fied by heating the wafer to 950–1100°C in a 
furnace or a rapid thermal annealer (RTA). With 
a first mask, the base is patterned as shown 
in Figure 7.43b. A window is opened up in the 
sacrificial layer, and a microstructural thin film, 
consisting of polysilicon, is conformably depos-
ited over the patterned sacrificial layer (Figure 
7.43c). Furnace annealing of the polysilicon film 
at 1050°C in nitrogen for 1 h reduces stress stem-
ming from thermal expansion coefficient mis-
match and nucleation and growth of the film. 
Rapid thermal annealing has been found effec-
tive for reducing stress in polysilicon as well. 
With a second mask, the microstructure layer is 
patterned, usually by dry etching in CF4 + O2 or 
CF3Cl + Cl2 plasma (Figure 7.43d). Finally, selec-
tive wet etching of the sacrificial layer, e.g., in 
49% HF, leaves a freestanding micromechani-
cal structure (Figure 7.43e and f). The surface 
micromachining technique is applicable to com-
binations of thin films and lateral dimensions 
where the sacrificial layer can be etched without 
significant etching or attack of the microstruc-
ture, the dielectric, or the substrate. Typically, 
a surface micromachining stack may contain a 
total of four to five structural and sacrificial lay-
ers, but more are possible; the polysilicon sur-
face machining process at Sandia’s SUMMiT, for 
example, stacks up to five polysilicon and five 
oxide layers (see page 462). 
Plasma-Enhanced CVD
One of the most important limitations of LPCVD 
is  that it requires high deposition temperatures, 
which may be incompatible with other process 
steps, e.g., the deposition on an aluminum film. 
In plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD), homogenous 
gas-phase reactions are initiated by collisions of 
neu trals with nonequilibrium energetic electrons 
produced by RF plasma instead of by thermal energy. 
Thus, the deposition precursors can be produced at 
much  lower temperatures by these homogenous 
reactions. Furthermore, ion bombardment makes 
the surface more reactive by creating more dangling 
bonds (active sites) and/or supplying instantaneous 
energy at the surface for the heterogeneous reac-
tion to take place. In general, PECVD can be car-
ried out at a much lower temperature than LPCVD. 
FIGURE 7.43 Basic surface micromachining process 
sequence. (a) Spacer layer deposition (the thin dielectric 
insulator layer is not shown). (b) Base patterning with 
mask 1. (c) Microstructure layer deposition. (d) Pattern 
microstructure with mask 2. (e–f) Selective etching of 
spacer layer.

[Page 431]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   431
Moreover, the deposition rate is found to be higher 
in PECVD than in LPCVD. There are a number of 
different reactor configurations used for PECVD, 
but the physical principle is the same in all cases. 
Two basic PECVD setups are illustrated in Figure 
7.44. In these setups, RF-induced plasma trans-
fers energy into the re actant gases, allowing the 
substrate to remain at lower temperatures than in 
APCVD and LPCVD processes. We will only detail 
the cold-wall, parallel-plate plasma deposition reac-
tor, which is very similar to an etching reactor.
With a simple parallel-plate reactor (Figure 
7.44b), substrates can be placed horizontally or, if 
the pressure is low enough, vertically. The vertical 
position is used to increase throughput. No loss of 
film-thickness uniformity occurs in the latter case 
because the PECVD method is surface reaction lim-
ited. Adequate substrate temperature control ensures 
uniformity. The chamber consists of two electrodes, 
one of which is grounded, and the other is powered 
by an RF source. Wafers are placed on the grounded 
electrode and are subjected to a less-energetic bom-
bardment than wafers placed on the powered elec-
trode. The wafers are heated from below to the 
desired temperature by resistive heaters or high-in-
tensity lamps. The reactant gases are introduced at 
the outer periphery, and they flow radially toward 
the center from where they are pumped out. Plasma 
is generated between the electrodes by the RF volt-
age applied across the electrodes. The electrode spac-
ing is about 5–10 cm, and the operating temperature 
and pressure are −400°C and 0.1–5 Torr, respectively. 
Homogenous reaction between the reactant gases is 
initiated by the electrons produced in the plasma. 
The ions are accelerated toward the electrodes as a 
result of the self-bias voltage between the plasma 
and the electrode. These energetic ions bombard the 
surface, making it more reactive, leading to higher 
deposition rates.
In most PECVD systems, the reactor configura-
tion is changed so that the potential of both the 
powered and the grounded electrode, relative to the 
plasma, become equal.27 Compared with sputter 
deposition, PECVD offers several advantages. The 
lower power densities, higher pressures, and some-
what higher substrate temperatures (e.g., >200°C) 
all lead to less-severe radiation damage than in 
 sputter deposition. Moreover, for radiation-sensitive 
substrates such as compound semiconductors, after-
glow or downstream deposition systems can be used 
where the radicals are formed in the glow discharge 
and then transported out of the region to a down-
stream deposition system. Thus, selective activation 
of reactants becomes possible without damaging 
the surface of the substrate.35 PECVD films are not 
stoichiometric because the deposition reactions vary 
widely, and particle bombardment during growth of 
a multi component system changes the composition 
according to the ratios of sputtering yields of the 
component materials (nonthermal equilibrium). 
Because of the rapid deposition without the tem-
peratures required for surface migration, film tends 
to be porous (possess holes like a sponge), leading 
to lower density than thermally grown films. Film 
stoichiometry and density can be monitored by a 
combination of etch rate comparisons to thermally 
grown films and ellipsometry to determine the index 
of refraction of the films.
Despite this negative consequence of particle 
 bombardment, in general, the more ion bombard-
ment, the better the film quality. Microstructure, 
stress, density, and other film properties show 
marked response, mostly for the better, to ion bom-
bardment during deposition. Good adhesion, low 
RF excitation coil
Wafers
Graphite
susceptor
Pump
Gas ﬂow
Plasma
Gas ﬂow
Gas ﬂow
RF electrodes
Wafers
Pump
Gas inlet
Gas inlet
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 7.44 (a) Horizontal tube reactor. (b) Schematic of a cold wall, parallel-plate plasma deposition reactor, which is 
very similar to an etching reactor.

[Page 432]
432   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
pinhole density, good step coverage, adequate elec-
trical properties, and compatibility with fine line-
width pattern transfer processes have led to wide 
use of PECVD in very large-scale integration (VLSI). 
PECVD enables dielectric films such as oxides, 
nitrides, and oxynitrides to be deposited on wafers 
with small feature sizes and line widths at low tem-
peratures and on devices unable to withstand the 
high temperatures of a thermally activated reac-
tion. Planarization represents only one of the many 
applications of this versatile technology. Another 
application is deposition of amorphous silicon thin 
films, as used in flat-panel displays, eyeglasses, and 
photovoltaic panels. The most significant applica-
tion is probably the deposition of SiO2 or Si3N4 over 
metal lines.35
Summarizing, in PECVD, low RF excitation fre-
quency, low reactor pressures, and low deposition 
rate at high temperature contribute to:
 
1. Lower processing temperature (250–450°C)
 
2. Excellent gap-fill for high-aspect-ratio gaps 
(with high-density plasma)
 
3. Good film adhesion to the wafer
 
4. High deposition rates
 
5. High film density as a result of low pinholes 
and voids
 
6. Low film stress as a result of lower processing 
temperature
Example 7.6: Si3N4 by PECVD
Silicon nitride is used as a passivation layer (pro-
tecting against sodium diffusion and moisture). 
Si3N4 has a low oxidation rate compared with 
silicon; therefore, a nitride mask can be used to 
prevent oxidation in coated areas on the silicon 
surface. Plasma nitride films are almost univer-
sally used for final passivation layers in IC fab-
rication, often in conjunction with a deposited 
oxide or PSG layer. A conventional CVD process 
for coating Si3N4 onto a silicon wafer involves 
reaction of silane and ammonia (NH3) at around 
800°C as follows:
3SiH
4NH
Si N
12H
4
3
3
4
2
+
+
→
 Reaction 7.5
Plasma-enhanced CVD is also used for basi-
cally the same coating reaction, the advantage 
being that it can be performed at a much lower 
temperature, around 300°C, compatible with 
aluminum metallization. In the latter applica-
tion, stress control is important to avoid film 
cracking and degradation of metal reliability. 
Transparency in the UV must also be ensured in 
UV-erasable EPROM (erasable programmable 
read only memory) applications. PECVD silicon 
nitride is also often used for passivation of GaAs 
MESFETs [MESFET stands for metal semiconduc-
tor field effect transistor. Instead of using a p-n 
junction for a gate, a Schottky (metal-semicon-
ductor) junction is used] to avoid oxidation of 
the exposed GaAs surface.
Properties of silicon nitride made by LPCVD 
versus PECVD are compared in Table 7.15.
Example 7.7: Polysilicon by PECVD 
We remarked earlier on the quest for low-
 temperature polysilicon deposition processes, 
driven by the need for compatibility with pre-
fabricated aluminum-metallized CMOS circuitry.  
This makes the 320°C PECVD polysilicon interest-
ing (as is the ~350°C sputter deposition method).
PECVD polysilicon films, deposited in a 50-kHz 
parallel-plate diode reactor, can be doped in 
situ and crystallized by RTA (1100°C, 100 s). 
It was shown that small-grained PECVD films 
annealed by RTA have good electrical properties 
and gauge factors between 20 and 30, similar 
to those reported for other alternative types of 
polycrystalline silicon.35
A low-temperature polysilicon PECVD process 
is not only compatible with conventional oxide 
sacrificial layers (as used in surface micromachin-
ing; see below) but also with certain organic sac-
rificial layers such as polyimides.
More 
information 
on 
CVD 
thin 
films 
and how they are influenced by the above 
TABLE 7.15 Comparison of LPCVD and PECVD Silicon 
Nitride
Property
LPCVD
PECVD
Deposition 
temperature (°C)
700–800
300–400
Composition
Si3N4
SixNyHz
Step coverage
Conformal
Fair
Stress at 23°C on 
silicon (dyn/cm−2)
1.2−1.8 × 1010 
(tensile) 
1−8 × 109 (tensile 
or compressive)

[Page 433]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   433
deposition parameters, as well as other param-
eters (e.g., moisture, flow rate, and gas compo-
sition), will be given in Volume III, Chapter 5 on 
selected MEMS materials.
High-Density Plasma CVD
High-density plasma sources such as inductively 
coupled plasma (ICP) and electron cyclotron reso-
nance (ECR) stations (see Figure 3.36)—machines 
discussed in Chapter 3—can be used in high- density 
plasma CVD (HDPCVD) for both enhanced deposi-
tion and enhanced etching. Both systems work at 
low pressures (a few mTorr) and can independently 
control ion flux and ion energy. In ECRCVD, one 
uses ECR to generate a high-density plasma (HDP) 
that can deposit materials at high rates while pres-
sures and temperatures remain low (Figure 7.45). 
ECRCVD technology provides a way to ensure 
durable ultrathin films. Alternating deposition and 
etch back is used for very effective planarization of 
topography. In submicrometer device fabrication, 
interlevel di electric gap filling of high-aspect-ratio 
topography generally requires the use of multistep 
deposition/etch or spin-on dielectric processing to 
produce void-free, filled structures. With HDPCVD 
processing, high- aspect-ratio (up to 4:1) sub-half-
micrometer structures can be filled and locally pla-
narized in a single processing step. For gap filling, 
HDPCVD processing consists of a simultaneous 
deposition/etching process in which films over 
topographical features are sputtered off by reactive 
ions and radicals during deposition while deposi-
tion refills the newly created voids (see Example 
7.8). The deposition/sputtering rate ratio (D/S) is an 
important measure of the gap-filling capability of 
the processes. For further reading, see Nguyen and 
references therein.36 Alternative planarization tech-
niques are reviewed in Chapter 1.
A typical ECRCVD machine is the Tek-Vac DRIE-
1100-LL-ECR (http://www.tekvac.com/prd-ecr-1.htm) 
designed for both high-density plasma CVD and 
reactive ion etching of submicrometer integrated 
circuits (ICs), optical devices, and RF microwave elec-
tron devices. This type of equipment is used for CVD 
of diamond, diamond-like carbon, SiC, Si3N4, BN, 
and other refractory or high dielectric materials. The 
equipment provides high-density plasma with low 
damage and high etching rates and is well suited 
for etching devices sensitive to high energy electron 
damage, such as low-noise amplifiers. Various mate-
rials include aluminum, copper, gallium nitride, 
gallium arsenide, and HeCdTe, and semiconductor 
dielectrics have been etched this way. The method 
provides high uniformity of  deposition and etching 
across large area substrates.
Example 7.8: Gap Filling by ECRCVD
ECRCVD simultaneously deposits and etches 
films to prevent bread-loaf and key-hole effects 
typical for PECVD processes, as shown in Figure 
7.46. As shown in Figure 7.46b, ion-induced 
deposition is filling the gap between two metal 
lines. Argon ions then sputter-etch the excess 
film at the gap entrance, resulting in a bev-
eled appearance of the film (Figure 7.46c). The 
etched material is redeposited, and the process 
is repeated, resulting in an equal “bottom-up” 
profile (Figure 7.46d).
Metalorganic CVD
Many materials that one wishes to deposit have 
too  low a vapor pressure and thus are difficult to 
transport via gases. One solution is to chemically 
attach the material (e.g., Ga, Al, Cu) to an organic 
compound that has a high vapor pressure. Organic 
2.45 Gz
ECR magnets
Gases in
Vacuum
Wafer
temperature
probe
Field-shaping
auxiliary magets
Wafer
load position
Replaceable
chamber liners
Process
position
Temperature-
controlled
horn and target
ECR
chamber
Reaction
chamber
FIGURE 7.45 In ECRCVD, the plasma can deposit a film 
while simultaneously sputtering.

[Page 434]
434   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
compounds often have very high vapor pressure. The 
organic-metal bond is very weak and can be broken 
via thermal means on a heated wafer, depositing the 
metal with the high vapor pressure organic being 
pumped away. Care must be taken to ensure little 
of the organic byproducts are incorporated. Carbon 
contamination and unintentional hydrogen incor-
poration are sometimes a problem. Crystal growth 
by metalorganic CVD (MOCVD) began in the late 
1960s. Metalorganic CVD, sometimes called organo-
metallic vapor phase epitaxy, relies on the flow of gases 
(hydrides such as arsine and phosphine and organo-
metallics such as trimethyl gallium and trimethyl alu-
minum) past heated samples placed in the gas stream. 
Typically, the reactive metal alkyls [e.g., Ga(CH3)3] 
react with a hydride of the nonmetal component (e.g., 
AsH3) to produce the pure films (e.g., GaAs) and some 
byproducts (e.g., CH4). For example:
 
(CH ) Ga (g)
AsH (g)
GaAs(s)
3CH (g)
3 3
3
4
+
→
+
 
Reaction 7.6
The biggest advantage of MOCVD is the low 
growth temperature (cold wall reactor); the biggest 
disadvantage is the high cost of the very pure chemi-
cals. MOCVD provides thickness control within one 
atomic layer and has become the preferred epitax-
ial process, a cost-effective manufacturing process 
for a variety of compound semiconductor devices. 
Foremost, MOCVD plays a key role in the manu-
facture of many optoelectronic devices with III–V 
compounds for solar cells, lasers, photocathodes, 
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), high electron mobility 
transistors (HEMTs), and quantum wells.37 By using 
MOCVD, it is easier to scale it up to larger growth 
areas than it is to scale up liquid-phase epitaxy 
(LPE) (see below), and the uniformity and surface 
morphology of MOCVD grown lasers are superior 
to those attainable with LPE.
Atomic Layer Deposition
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a method of apply-
ing thin films to various substrates with atomic scale 
precision and constitutes one of the most promis-
ing “new” nanotechnology fabrication techniques. 
Dr. Tuomo Suntola and coworkers in Finland intro-
duced ALD in 1974 to improve the quality of ZnS 
films used in electroluminescent displays.* It turns 
* Picosun in Espoo, Finland, develops and manufactures ALD reac-
tors for microelectronics and nanotechnology. With the help of Dr. 
Tuomo Suntola, Picosun has succeeded in developing inexpensive 
yet highly efficient ALD tools for research and development.
FIGURE 7.46 ECRCVD planarization.

[Page 435]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   435
out that ALD also produces outstanding high-k* 
dielectrics, metal electrodes, barriers, and  spacers 
(see list of applications in Table 7.16). Objects of 
almost any size and shape can be coated, even 
atomic force microscope (AFM) tips. The method is 
similar in chemistry to CVD, except that the ALD 
reaction breaks up the CVD reaction into two half-
* Many materials are currently under consideration as potential can-
didates for gate dielectrics for sub-0.1-µm CMOS technology. Silicon 
dioxide with a dielectric constant of 3.9 will be replaced by so-called 
high-k materials. Candidates for gate dielectrics include the oxides of 
yttrium, lanthanum, zirconium, and hafnium, which have much 
higher dielectric constants than SiO2.
reactions, keeping the precursor reagents separate 
during their reaction at the surface. As opposed 
to conventional CVD where one has continuous 
 deposition and concurrent flow of precursors, ALD 
is based on the sequential deposition of individ-
ual monolayers at the surface in a well-controlled 
manner: the growth surface is alternately exposed 
to only one of two complementary chemical envi-
ronments, i.e., individual precursors are supplied to 
the reactor one at a time. The precursors need to 
be thermally stable and should chemisorb fast and 
react aggressively with each other. Between expo-
sure steps, an inert gas purge or a pump-down step 
is used to remove any residual chemically active 
source gas or byproducts before another precur-
sor is introduced into the reactor. The overall ALD 
process then consists of a repetition of a number 
of growth cycles. Each cycle is made up of a typi-
cal sequence: 1) flow of precursor 1, 2) purge, 3) 
flow of precursor 2 and 4) purge. During a precur-
sor exposure step, precursor molecules react with 
the surface until all available surface sites are satu-
rated. Precursor chemistries and process conditions 
are chosen such that no further reaction takes place 
once the surface is completely saturated. This sur-
face saturation guarantees the self-limiting nature 
of ALD. Precursors are preferably overdosed so that 
process results become independent of potential 
slight variations in the amount of precursor sup-
plied to the surface. Thus, surface chemistry gov-
erns film growth rather than a precise control of 
tool-specific process parameters such as precursor 
flow and partial pressure. A known and constant 
thickness is deposited per growth cycle. Typically, 
deposition rates on the order of 0.1–1.0 Å/cycle are 
obtained, with cycle times ranging from 1–10 s. 
Cycle time critically depends on saturation behav-
ior, chamber volume, and reactor design. The film 
is grown in a layer-by-layer mode, and the total 
film thickness is given by the number of cycles. 
Exceptional across-wafer thickness uniformity and 
excellent step coverage on high-aspect-ratio features 
can be achieved with ALD, making this technique 
one of the most exciting nanotechnology methods. 
In Figure 7.47 we illustrate a typical ALD setup, and 
in Figure 7.48 the ALD cycle for Al2O3 deposition is 
demonstrated.
TABLE 7.16 List of ALD Applications
• High-k dielectrics (Al2O3, HfO2, ZrO2, Ta2O5, La2O3, etc.) 
for transistor gates and DRAM capacitors in Si, 
heterostructures, compound semiconductors, 
MESFETs, III–V semiconductor materials, organic 
transistors, graphene, graphite, nanotubes, 
nanowires, and molecular electronics
• Conductive gate electrodes (Ir, Pt, Ru, TiN, etc.)
• Metal interconnects and liners (Cu, WN, TaN, WNC, 
Ru, Ir, etc.); metallic diffusion barrier layers for copper 
interconnects and semiconductor vias for transistor 
gate and memory cell applications, DRAM capacitors, 
and passivation layers
• Catalytic materials (Pt, Ir, Co, TiO2, V2O5); coatings 
inside filters, membranes, catalysts (thin economical 
Pt for automobile catalytic converters), fuel cells, ion 
exchange coatings
• Nanostructures (all materials); conformal deposition 
around and inside nanostructures and MEMS
• Biomedical coatings: (TiN, ZrN, CrN, TiAlN, AlTiN, etc.); 
biocompatible materials for in vivo medical devices 
and instruments
• Piezoelectric layers (ZnO, AlN, ZnS, etc.)
• Transparent electrical conductors (ZnO:Al, ITO) 
• UV blocking layers (ZnO, TiO2)
• OLED passivation (Al2O3)
• Solid lubricant layers (WS2)
• Photonic crystals (ZnO, ZnS:Mn, TiO2, Ta2N5); coatings 
inside porous alumina, inverted opals
• Antireflection and optical filters (Al2O3, ZnS, SnO2, 
Ta2O5); Fabry-Perot, flip-flop optical filters
• Electroluminescent devices (SrS:Cu, ZnS:Mn, ZnS:Tb, 
SrS:Ce)
• Processing layers (Al2O3, ZrO2); etch barriers, ion 
diffusion barriers, fill layers for magnetic read heads
• Optical applications (AlTiO, SnO2, ZnO); photonics, 
nanophotonics, solar cells, integrated optics, optical 
coatings, lasers, variable dielectric constant 
nanolaminates
• Sensors (SnO2, Ta2O5, etc.); gas sensors, pH sensors
• Wear and corrosion inhibiting layers (Al2O3, ZrO2)

[Page 436]
436   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 
1. Flow of precursor 1: In air, water vapor is adsorbed 
on most surfaces, forming a hydroxyl group. In the 
case of Si this forms Si-OH. After placing the sub-
strate in the reactor, trimethyl aluminum (TMA) 
is pulsed into the reaction chamber.
 
 TMA reacts with the adsorbed hydroxyl groups, 
producing methane as a reaction product.
 
Al(CH ) (g) : Si
O
H(s)
: Si
O
Al(CH ) (s)
CH (g)
3 3
3 2
4
+
−
−
→
−
−
+
 
Reaction 7.7
 
2. Purge cycle: TMA reacts with the adsorbed 
hydroxyl groups until the surface is passivated. 
TMA does not react with itself, limiting the reac-
tion to one monolayer. This leads to the perfect 
uniformity and conformality of the ADL process. 
In the purge pulse, excess TMA and the methane 
reaction product are pumped away.
FIGURE 7.48 The atomic layer deposition (ALD) process illustrated for the Al2O3 process. (From Atomic layer deposition. 
Cambridge NanoTech Inc., April 24, 2006. http://www.cambridgenanotech.com.231)
Heaters
Heaters
Wafer
Vapor pulse 1
Vacuum
pumping
out
Vapor pulse 2
High-speed valve
High-speed valve
Precursor 2
Precursor 1
Temperature-
Temperature-
controlled bath
controlled bath
FIGURE 7.47 Typical atomic layer deposition (ALD) setup. (From Atomic layer deposition. Cambridge NanoTech Inc., 
April 24, 2006. http://www.cambridgenanotech.com.231)

[Page 437]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   437
 
3. Flow of precursor 2: After all the TMA and meth-
ane have been pumped away, water is pulsed into 
the reactor chamber.
Water reacts with the dangling methyl groups 
on the new surface, forming aluminum-oxygen 
(Al-O) bridges and hydroxyl surface groups wait-
ing for a new TMA pulse.
 
2H2O(g) + :Si−O−Al(CH3)2(s) → :Si−O−Al(OH)2(s) + 2CH4(g) 
Reaction 7.8
 
4. New purge cycle: The reaction product meth ane 
is pumped away. Excess water does not react with 
the hydroxyl surface groups, again causing per-
fect passivation limited to one monolayer.
 
 One TMA pulse, one purge, and one water pulse 
form one cycle. Here three cycles are shown, with 
approximately 1 Å/cycle. Each cycle, including 
pulsing and purging, takes about 3 s.
FIGURE 7.48 (Continued)

[Page 438]
438   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The list of applications for ALD keeps expanding, 
as evident from Table 7.16. In Table 7.17 we compare 
ALD with CVD.
Epitaxy
Introduction
Epitaxial techniques arrange atoms in single-crystal 
fashion on a crystalline substrate acting as a seed 
crystal so that the lattice of the newly grown film 
duplicates that of the substrate. The lattice constant 
of the epitaxially grown layer needs to be close to 
the  lattice constant of the substrate wafer. Other-
wise, the bonds cannot stretch far enough, and dis-
locations will result.
Si epitaxy is used for high-purity layer growth and 
can form very thick doped structures (30–100 µm) 
not possible with implantation or diffusion. Such 
thick, pure layers are often used in power devices 
with thinner, 1–5-µm structures, commonly used for 
CMOS and bipolar technology. In surface microma-
chining, where polycrystalline silicon functional lay-
ers are built up on a substrate rather than etched in 
the bulk of a single-crystal substrate as in bulk micro-
machining, epi-grown SOI wafers are a very attrac-
tive alternative. Surface micromachines built from 
layers of epi silicon and isolated from the substrate 
by a SiO2 layer combine the most attractive features 
of surface micromachining (i.e., CMOS compatibil-
ity and freedom in types of structural shapes) with 
the superior single-crystal properties of the epilayer. 
For ICs, SOI is compatible with existing wafer pro-
cesses, provides 50% faster circuit speed than bulk 
silicon, allows easier scaling to finer line widths, and 
can reduce the number of required mask levels for 
a given design by ~30%. SOI may very well repre-
sent the wave of the future in the IC industry rather 
than GaAs.38 Silicon micromachining has typically 
followed in the footsteps of the IC industry; there-
fore, the prevalence of SOI in IC is a good indicator 
of coming trends in micromachining. SOI simplifies 
building micromachines by reducing the number of 
masks, reducing packaging concerns, and making 
integration of electronics easier. In the IC industry, 
many device parameters such as transistor break-
down voltage, junction capacitance, transistor gain, 
and AC performance depend on the epilayer thick-
ness, thus necessitating precise control of it. This 
precise control also enables more reproducible and 
predictable mechanical micromachines.
Liquid- and Solid-Phase Epitaxy
In the section on PVD techniques we discussed 
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) as the most ad vanced. 
In the CVD section we encountered two types of 
vapor phase epitaxy (VPE) techniques, APCVD and 
MOCVD. For silicon processing, VPE has met with 
the widest acceptance because excel lent control of 
impurity concentration and crystalline perfection 
can be achieved. In growing an epilayer with VPE, the 
processing is accomplished under closely controlled 
conditions at higher temperatures than conventional 
CVD of Si, using diluted reacting gases to slow the 
process so that an epitaxial layer can be successfully 
formed. Here, we briefly discuss liquid- and solid-
phase epitaxy. For depositing multilayer structures 
TABLE 7.17 Comparison of ALD with CVD
ALD
CVD
Highly reactive precursors
Less reactive precursors
Slower deposition
Faster deposition
Precursors react separately on the substrate
Precursors react at the same time on the substrate
Low-temperature deposition possible
Higher deposition temperature
Precursors must not decompose at process temperature
Precursors can decompose at process temperature
Uniformity ensured by the saturation mechanism
Uniformity requires uniform flux of reactant and temperature
Stoichiometric films with large area uniformity and 3D 
conformality
Gentle deposition process for sensitive substrates
Thickness control by counting the number of reaction 
cycles
Thickness control by precise process control and monitoring
Surplus precursor dosing acceptable
Precursor dosing important

[Page 439]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   439
of different materials on the same substrate, liquid 
phase epitaxy (LPE) is used. LPE films grow from a 
liquid solution very near the equilibrium state, mak-
ing the technique reproducible and resulting in films 
with low concentrations of growth-induced defects. 
A schematic for a typical LPE setup is presented in 
Figure 7.49.1 In operation, a graphite slider plate 
moves relative to a multiple-well assembly to bring 
the substrate in a recess in the slider plate in contact 
with the different solutions. LPE has found its wid-
est application in producing epitaxial layers of III–V 
compounds (e.g., InP, GaAs) for lasers and photode-
tectors. Anderson reviews the technique well.39
Solid-phase epitaxy describes the crystalline 
regrowth of amorphous layers that extend continu-
ously to the underlying single-crystal substrate. At 
temperatures between 500 and 600°C, in the case 
of silicon, a recrystallization process occurs on 
the underlying crystalline substrate, and regrowth 
proceeds toward the surface. Regrowth is faster on 
(100) than on (111) Si, and impurities such as B, P, 
and As enhance the regrowth, whereas O, C, N, and 
Ar retard it.27
Selective Epitaxy
The incorporation of selective epi in the micro-
machining arsenal is making more versatile micro-
structures possible. Under the correct growth 
conditions and/or surface treatment, it is possible 
to initiate Si growth in selected areas.27,40 Selective 
 epitaxial growth allows the formation of closely 
spaced silicon features isolated by SiO2 (see Figure 
7.50). Besides increased density over other insula -
tion techniques (important mainly for the IC 
industry), structures as shown in Figure 7.50a and 
b, might enable a host of interesting mechanical 
microstructures. For example, imagine that the SiO2 
in Figure 7.50b is selectively etched away, result-
ing in an epi anchor with suspended polybeams. In 
selective epitaxy of the type shown in Figure 7.50a, 
silicon atoms possessing high surface mobility 
migrate to sites on the single crystal where nucle-
ation is favored. In the ideal case, all the epi grows 
exclusively in the oxide openings. Silicon mobility 
improves in the presence of halides. The higher the 
number of chlorine atoms in the silicon source, the 
better the degree of selectivity (e.g., SiHCl3 is a bet-
ter source than SiH2Cl2). The selective deposition 
shown in Figure 7.50b is accomplished by simul-
taneous deposition of epitaxial silicon in the oxide 
openings and polysilicon on the oxide surfaces. The 
angle between the epi and the poly in Figure 7.50b 
depends on the crystallographic orientation of the 
Resistive furnace
Resistive furnace
Graphic
sliding
solution
holder
Push rod
Fused silica tube
Thermocouple
Substrate
Stop
H2  Out
H2  In
Solutions
1
2
3
4
Graphite
seed holder
FIGURE 7.49 Liquid-phase epitaxy setup. (From Brodie, I., 
and J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrication. New 
York: Plenum Press. With permission.1)
SiO2
SiO2
Substrate
SiO2
SiO2
Substrate
SiO2
SiO2
Substrate
Ept
(a)
SiO2
SiO2
Substrate
Ept
(b)
Poly Si
Poly Si
FIGURE 7.50 Selective deposition of epitaxial silicon. (a) Selective deposition of epi Si on Si in SiO2 windows. 
(b) Simultaneous deposition of epi Si on Si, and polysilicon on SiO2. (From Wolf, S., and R. N. Tauber. 1987. Silicon 
processing for the VLSI era. Sunset Beach, CA: Lattice Press.27)

[Page 440]
440   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
substrate. The angle is 90° for <110> orientations, 
72° toward the polysilicon for <100> orientations, 
or tapered toward the single-crystal silicon at 70° 
for the <111> orientation.27 These figures represent 
interesting angles from which  to construct micro-
mechanical structures. This selective deposition 
process also lends itself to CVD, for example, for 
selective deposition of W.
Epilayer Thickness
Epitaxial layer thickness is a critical parameter both 
in IC applications and micromachines and there fore 
must be accurately measured and controlled. Many 
devices, from discrete transistors and 16-megabyte 
dynamic random access memory (DRAM) to mem-
brane-based micromechanical structures, use silicon 
epitaxial layer wafers as their starting material. The 
thickness of an epitaxial layer forms an integral part 
in the design of many micromachined devices. For 
example, in a piezoresistive pressure sensor, epilayer 
thickness control ultimately determines the pressure 
sensitivity control.
Epilayer thickness can be measured from infra-
red reflectance, angle lap and stain, tapered groove, 
weighing, capacitance-voltage measurements, and 
profilometry. The most widely used, nondestructive 
method of measuring epi thickness is with infrared 
instruments. Fourier transform infrared offers auto-
mated epilayer thickness measurements.41
CVD Equipment
For a detailed historical timeline of vacuum coating 
and vacuum/plasma technology, visit http://www.
svc.org/H/H_HistoricalTime.html, posted on the 
Internet by the Society of Vacuum Coaters.
Typical sources for CVD equipment are CVD 
Equipment Corporation (http://www.cvdequipment 
.com) and IonBond Inc. (http://www.ionbond.com). 
Commercial epitaxial services offer layers ranging 
from 0.5–150 µm and N, P, N+, and P+ type with 
uniformity better than ±5%.
Planar (http://www.planar.com) and Cambridge 
NanoTech 
(http://www.cambridgenanotech.com) 
manufacture atomic layer deposition (ALD) systems 
for many coating applications. Vacuum equipment 
to clean, deposit, and etch is combined more and 
more in so-called cluster tools (Figure 7.51).42
Selection criteria for the additive processes 
reviewed in this chapter depend on a variety of con-
siderations, such as:
 
1. Limitations imposed by the substrate or the 
mask material: Tmax (maximum temperature), 
surface morphology, substrate structure and 
geometry, and so on
 
2. Apparatus requirement and availability
 
3. Limitations imposed by the material to be 
deposited: chemistry, purity, thickness, Tmax, 
morphology, crystal structure, and so on
 
4. Rate of deposition to obtain the desired film 
quality
 
5. Adhesion of deposit to the substrate; necessity 
of adhesion layer or buffer layer
 
6. Total running time, including setup time and 
postcoating processes
 
7. Cost
 
8. Ease of automation
 
9. Safety and ecological considerations
FIGURE 7.51 Cluster tools. (a) Schematic. (b) Example 
from Ovonyx (http://www.ovonyx.com/corporate).

[Page 441]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   441
Mechanical Properties of Thin Films
Introduction
The study of the mechanical behavior of thin films 
started in the 1950s. This early work was initiated 
to better understand the stresses and failures in 
integrated circuit (IC) structures. The MEMS field, 
especially surface micromachining, provided an 
additional impetus in the late 1980s, and the inves-
tigations were extended to more general applica -
tions of thin films. In this section, advances in 
the understanding of mechanical properties of 
thin films  are  reviewed with special focus on the 
mechanical behavior of polycrystalline thin films 
for MEMS and NEMS applications.
Thin films in surface micromachines must satisfy 
a large set of rigorous chemical, structural, mechan-
ical, and electrical requirements. Excellent adhe-
sion, low residual stress, low pinhole density, good 
mechanical strength, and chemical resistance all 
may be required simultaneously. For many micro-
electronic thin films, the material properties depend 
strongly on the details of the deposition process 
and the growth conditions, and some properties 
may depend on postdeposition thermal processing, 
referred to as annealing. Furthermore, the details of 
thin-film nucleation and/or growth may depend on 
the specific substrate or on the specific surface ori-
entation of the substrate. Although the properties 
of a bulk material might be well characterized, its 
thin-film form may have properties substantially 
different from those of the bulk. For example, thin 
films generally display smaller grain size than bulk 
materials. An overwhelming reason for the many 
differences stem from the properties of thin films, 
which exhibit a higher surface-to-volume ratio than 
large chunks of material and are strongly influenced 
by the surface properties.
Examples where thin films are directly “mechani-
cally challenged” include the myriad of structural 
and moving parts in MEMS devices, such as the 
membranes in pressure sensors, hinges in micromir-
ror arrays, wear-resistance coatings on cutting tools, 
and protective coatings for magnetic disks. In many 
other applications, thin films are selected primarily 
because of their unique electronic, magnetic, opti-
cal, or thermal properties; however, the mechani-
cal characteristics of the materials of choice in such 
applications are not unimportant because thin films 
are often subjected to large mechanical stresses dur-
ing both the manufacturing process and normal 
operation of the end-use devices.
Some terminology characterizing thin films and 
their deposition is introduced in Table 7.18.
Because thin films were originally not intended 
for load-bearing applications, their mechanical 
properties were ignored for a long time. As we indi-
cated earlier, it was the IC and MEMS world that 
TABLE 7.18 Thin-Film Terms Used in Characterizing Deposition
Term
Remark
Film
Bond energy <10 kcal/mol
Chemisorbed film
Bond energy >20 kcal/mol
Nucleation
Adatoms forming stable clusters
Condensation
Initial formation of nuclei
Island formation
Nuclei grow in three dimensions, especially along the substrate surface
Coalescence
Nuclei contact each other and larger, rounded shapes form
Secondary nucleation
Areas between islands are filled in by secondary nucleation, resulting in a continuous film
Grain size of thin film
Generally smaller than for bulk materials and function of deposition and annealing 
conditions (higher T, larger grains)
Surface roughness
Lower at high temperatures except when crystallization starts; at low temperature the 
roughness is higher for thicker films, also oblique deposition and contamination 
increases roughness 
Epitaxial and amorphous films
Very low surface roughness
Density
More porous deposits are less dense; density reveals a lot about the film structure
Crystallographic structure
Adatom mobility: amorphous, polycrystalline, single crystal or fiber texture, or 
preferred orientation

[Page 442]
442   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
precipitated a strong appreciation for the need of 
an understanding of the mechanical properties as 
essential for improving the reliability and lifetime 
of thin films, even in nonstructural applications.43 
Generally, mechanical stresses in thin films can be 
divided into intrinsic or growth stresses that develop 
during the deposition process and extrinsic stresses 
that are induced by external physical effects. The 
extrinsic stresses are induced by various physical 
effects after the film is grown.
Thin-film materials are fabricated using very dif-
ferent processing methods than those for bulk mate-
rials, such as the various CVD and PVD deposition 
techniques studied in the current chapter. These 
processing methods often result in development of 
intrinsic mechanical stresses in the films. We saw ear-
lier that metal films sputtered at room temperature 
typically consist of very fine grains, whereas evapo-
rated films are often highly textured with larger grain 
sizes than sputtered films. It was also pointed out 
that mobility of the atoms of the deposited material 
significantly affects the microstructure formation in 
both deposition and postdeposition processes. The 
microstructure evolution during the growth process 
typically involves 1) nucleation of crystallite islands 
from the condensed material atoms at many sites on 
the substrate surface, 2) growth of individual crystal-
lite islands until they coalescence with other islands, 
and 3) coarsening of grains during thickening of the 
film. For bulk materials, the crystal grain growth 
occurs at the expense of small grains through the 
motion of grain boundaries, driven by the reduction 
in the total grain boundary energy. In thin films the 
situation is a bit more complex because free surfaces 
and interfaces also play an important role in the 
microstructure development. Mismatch strains often 
develop between the film and the substrate, and 
this leads to higher strain energy in the film. Grain 
growth and crystallographic texture development in 
thin films are driven by the reduction of the total 
energy, including the grain boundary energy, the 
surface and interface energy, and the strain energy. 
This is a thermally activated kinetic process, and for 
films grown at room temperature, grain growth and 
texture development are often slow because of lack 
of thermal activation, resulting in a metastable struc-
ture with very fine grains (see section on sputtered 
films). The microstructure of thin films can be fur-
ther modified through a postdeposition process, 
such as annealing. During annealing, grains grow 
and crystallographic textures develop to minimize 
the total energy at a rate determined by the anneal-
ing temperature. When a grain grows to a size on the 
order of the film’s thickness, the grain boundaries 
start intersecting the film surface, forming grooves at 
the surface. These grooves suppress further growth 
of the grain. As a result, a columnar grain structure 
with grain boundaries traversing the film thickness 
results. Thus, the grain size in the plane of the film is 
on the order of the film thickness.
There have been many mechanisms proposed for 
the development of growth stresses, which depend 
sensitively on the material systems, deposition tech-
nique, and process parameters. Mechanics at small 
length scales in micro- and nanotechnology is a chal-
lenge for those who recognize its existence and want to 
optimize the mechanical performance of micro- and 
nanosystems and a threat for those who ignore it. We 
will see in Volume III, Chapter 6 on metrology and 
analytical techniques that surface micromachined 
devices contribute strongly to the understanding of 
mechanical properties of thin films.
Strength of Thin Films
Most thin film properties can be simply explained 
through extrapolation of bulk behavior, but other 
properties depend on mechanisms that remain 
unexplained. The strength of thin films is such an 
example. A substantial body of work has shown that 
thin metal films can support much higher stresses 
than the same material in bulk form. This strength-
ening has generally been attributed to dimensional 
and microstructural constraints on dislocation 
activity in these films. Dimensional constraints are 
imposed by the interfaces and the small dimensions 
typically encountered in thin films, whereas micro-
structural constraints arise from the very fine grains 
that often typify thin films. In bulk materials, micro-
structural constraints dominate the plastic behavior 
of the material. However, when material dimensions 
are comparable to microstructural length scales—as 
is typically the case for thin films—free surfaces and 
interfaces play an important role as well. For exam-
ple, dislocations can exit the material through free 

[Page 443]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   443
surfaces, whereas interfaces may prevent them from 
doing so. Consequently, strong interfaces lead to a 
higher cumulative dislocation density in the film 
and result in a higher flow stress and a greater strain-
hardening rate. In addition to dimensional con-
straints, the microstructure of thin films also affects 
their mechanical properties. Because thin films are 
fabricated using different techniques than those for 
bulk materials, the microstructure of thin films is 
often very different from that of bulk materials.
Let us remember what controls the strength of a 
material. Based on their bond strength most mate-
rials should be much stronger than they are in prac-
tice. For example, the strength for an ionic bond 
should be about 106 psi, but a more typical strength 
for an ionic material is 40 103 psi. The reason, as 
we saw in Volume I, Chapter 2, is that materials do 
not usually fail by breaking bonds. Real materials 
have lots of dislocations; therefore, the strength of 
the material depends on the force required to make 
the dislocation move, not the bonding energy. 
When dislocations move, slip occurs and the direc-
tion of the movement is the same as the Burgers 
vector (= the deformation direction, e.g., for an 
edge dislocation it is perpendicular to the disloca-
tion line, and for a screw dislocation it is parallel 
to the line of the dislocation). When dislocations 
run into each other a traffic jam effect results; thus, 
more dislocations increase the strength of a mate-
rial. Dislocations may be pinned by solutes, inter-
stitials, and precipitates. An example of a solute 
is Zn atoms in a Cu matrix: the bigger Zn atoms 
make the slip plane “rougher,” and thus increase 
the resistance to dislocation motion. Precipitates 
(small particles) also can promote strengthening 
by impeding dislocation motion. Applying a force 
to the material increases the number of disloca-
tions, and this is called strain hardening or cold work. 
Work hardening accounts for the higher strength of 
cold rolled steel. Grain boundaries act to impede 
dislocation motion because the slip systems in 
adjoining grains will usually not line up; increases 
in yield strength arising from this mechanism are 
called boundary strengthening. In a small grain, a dis-
location gets to the boundary and stops. In a large 
grain, the dislocation can travel farther. Therefore, 
a small grain size equates to more strength. Hall 
and Petch, working independently around 1950, 
found that the yield strength of a polycrystalline 
material follows the following dependence:
 
σ
σ
Y
K
d
=
+
0
 
(Volume I, Equation 2.70)
where σ0 is the lattice friction stress needed to 
move dislocations and K is a constant (e.g., the 
elastic limit of copper doubles when the grain size 
decreases from 100 µm to 25 µm). This relation 
is essentially empirical, but it can be rationalized 
by viewing the second term as related to the stress 
needed to activate a new mobile dislocation in an 
unfavorably oriented grain. The Hall-Petch rela-
tion is illustrated in Figure 7.52 for steel at room 
temperature. The grain size is often given in ASTM 
grain size number (n)—a measure of the size of 
the grains in a crystalline material obtained by 
counting the number of grains per square inch at a 
magnification × 100. Instead of yield strength one 
might also plot the hardness (H) of the material in 
Figure 7.52. Indentation (hardness) testing is very 
common for bulk materials where the direct rela-
tionship between bulk hardness and yield strength 
is well known. Pressing a hard, specially shaped 
point into the surface and observing the indenta-
tion can measure hardness. This type of measure-
ment is of little use for measuring thin films less 
than 5 × 104 Å. Consequently, very little is known 
35.0
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
0.00      0.200       0.400     0.600     0.800     1.000      1.200
Yield stress/10 [MPa]
 [µm– ]
d
– 1
2
1
2
FIGURE 7.52 The Hall-Petch equation—the relationship 
between yield strength and grain size—in steel at room 
temperature.

[Page 444]
444   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
about the hardness of thin films. Recently, special-
ized instruments have been constructed (e.g., the 
nanoindenter) in which load and displacement data 
are collected while the indentation is introduced in 
a thin film. This eliminates the errors associated 
with later measurement of indentation size and pro-
vides continuous monitoring of load/displacement 
data similar to a standard tensile test. Load resolu-
tion may be 0.25 µN, displacement resolution 0.2–
0.4 nm, and x-y sample position accuracy 0.5 µm. 
Empirical relations have correlated hard ness with 
Young’s modulus and with uniaxial strength of 
thin films. Hardness calculations must include 
both plastic and long-distance elastic deformation. 
If the indentation is deeper than 10% of the film, 
corrections for elastic hardness contribution of the 
substrate must also be included.43 Mechanical prop-
erties such as hardness and modulus of elasticity 
can also be determined on the micro- to picoscales 
using an atomic force microscope (AFM).44 Bushan45 
provides an excellent introduction to this field in 
the Handbook of Micro/Nanotribology.
The Hall-Petch relationship has been well estab-
lished experimentally for grain sizes in the millime-
ter through submicrometer regimes. Consequently, 
it was thought that nanosized grains would produce 
materials with even greater mechanical integrity. 
The above relation indicates that simply by decreas-
ing the grain size one can make a material arbi-
trarily strong! Of course, this is not sensible because 
a polycrystalline material with grain size of a single 
atom would just be amorphous or a single crystal. 
In other words, there must be a limit where Hall-
Petch breaks down! It is easily recognized that the 
Hall-Petch behavior is expected to break down, for 
example, if the smallest dislocation loop no longer 
fits in a grain (Figure 7.53). For very small grain 
sizes one can perform atomistic simulations of the 
deformation, and these simulations suggest that for 
very small grain sizes there is a reverse Hall-Petch 
effect, i.e., the strength decreases with increasing 
grain size; in other words, an optimal grain size 
(dc) exists as suggested by the plot in Figure 7.54. 
The classic Hall-Petch relationship is based on 
the idea that grain boundaries act as obstacles to 
dislocation movement and that dislocations re quire 
greater amounts of energy to overcome these bar-
riers. Because dislocations are carriers of plastic 
deformation, this manifests itself macroscopically 
as an increase in material strength. The deformation 
mechanism for materials with very small grains 
(<20 nm) is different, and it has been suggested that 
plastic deformation in this case is no longer domi-
nated by dislocation motion but by atomic sliding 
of grain boundaries.46 For very small grain sizes, 
this sliding effect might conceivably constitute the 
dominant effect because of the larger ratio of grain 
boundary to crystal lattice, and this mode of defor-
mation could then lead to the observed softening 
of a nanomaterial. Other explanations to rational-
ize the apparent softening of metals with nanosized 
grains include poor sample quality and the suppres-
sion of dislocation pileups.47
A reverse Hall-Petch behavior has been observed 
experimentally in nanocrystalline materials with 
sufficiently small grain sizes.48 There are also obser-
vations of “kinked” Hall-Petch graphs, i.e., cases 
where the slope is reduced (but still positive) below 
a certain grain size. However, today there is still a 
lot of uncertainty about the exact interpretation of 
a reverse Hall-Petch effect. It is possible that many 
of the early measurements of a reverse Hall-Petch 
Amorphous
Hardness or Strength
d+ Grain Size
dc
H α d-0.5
FIGURE 7.54 Hall-Petch and reverse Hall-Petch.
Microscale grains
Nanoscale grains
(too small for loops/sources)
FIGURE 7.53 Hall-Petch behavior breaks down if the 
smallest dislocation loop no longer fits in a grain.

[Page 445]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   445
effect were likely the result of unrecognized pores 
in the samples. The presence of voids in nanocrys-
talline metals would undoubtedly lead to their hav-
ing weaker mechanical properties. It is not entirely 
clear what exactly the dependency of yield stress 
should be on grain sizes less than a diameter d of 20 
nm. Nanocrystalline materials have been the sub-
ject of widespread research in recent decades; since 
the review by Gleiter49 in 1989, thousands of papers 
have been published on the topic.
The yield strength of metallic films is affected by 
several microstructural dimensions: grain size, film 
thickness, free-standing or deposited on a substrate, 
and obstacle spacing (e.g., precipitate concentra-
tion). A common approach to the quantification 
of the role of different parts of the microstructure 
to the yield stress of a deposited film is to assume 
that their contributions have a power-law form and 
can be superimposed:
 
σ
σ
+
ʹ −
Y
0
n
m
Kd
K t
=
+
−
 
(7.22)
where the first term represents the bulk yield stress 
for a large-grained polycrystal, the second repre-
sents the contribution from the grain boundaries 
(with d the grain size), and the third represents the 
contribution from the film surface or interface with 
t, the film thickness. The first two terms together 
form the well-known Hall-Petch relation, in which, 
commonly, n = 0.5.50 For thin films with very fine 
grains (d << t) or in multilayers with very thin con-
stituent layers, the deposition of individual dislo-
cation segments becomes more important than the 
formation of pileups, which makes n approach 1. 
In several studies of thin films deposited on a 
substrate, an increase of the yield strength with 
decreasing film thickness has been observed. For 
example, for thin films of copper, with thickness 
between 0.1 and 3 µm, vapor deposited on 12.7- 
or 7.6-µm-thick polyimide Kapton substrates, Yu 
et al.50 find that the yield stress depends strongly on 
the film thickness and is fit by σ Y
0.473
355t
= 116 +
−
 
where t is the thickness in meters and σY is in MPa. 
The origin of the hardening induced by the finite 
size of the film is the deposition of dislocation seg-
ments at the film surface if oxidized or otherwise 
passivated and at the film substrate interface. The 
blocking of the dislocations at the film substrate 
interface leads to an inhomogeneous strain distri-
bution, in which the plastic strain approaches zero 
near the interface.
For free-standing films, the effect of film thick-
ness is reversed, with thinner films being weaker. 
It has been found that grain-size effects are dimin-
ished when Cu test sample size decreases to less than 
about 1 mm, an observation that has important 
consequences for micromanufacturing. When the 
grain size d varied between 18 µm and 200 µm, it 
was found that strength is reduced with an increase 
in d/t, not the Hall-Petch grain size d.51 The tensile 
strength may apparently be described by a rule of 
mixtures between surface grains with  a grain-size 
independent strength and interior grains that obey 
the Hall-Petch relation. As shown in Figure 7.55, the 
tensile strength of Al films decreases with decreas-
ing part thickness in the range of 0.1–0.5 mm.51
From the above, size effects may strengthen or 
weaken the material, and interface strengthening 
or weakening will play a dominant role. Let us con-
sider Si yield strength as an example. Because of 
the high activation energy for dislocation motion 
in silicon (2.2 eV), hardly any plastic flow occurs 
in single crystalline silicon for temperatures lower 
than 673°C. Grain boundaries in polysilicon fur-
ther enhance this blocking of dislocation motion; 
hence polysilicon films can be treated as an ideal 
brittle material at room temperature.52 From the 
above, we now understand why high yield strengths 
often are obtained in thin deposited films with val-
ues up to 200 times as large as those found in the 
corresponding bulk material.53 In this light, the fact 
that fracture stress of polysilicon is between 2 and 
10 times smaller than that of bulk single crystal 
is surprising. Greek et al.54 explain this deviation 
by pointing at the high surface roughness of poly-
silicon films compared with single-crystal Si. They 
believe that a reduction in surface roughness would 
improve the tensile fracture strength considerably.
Adhesion
The importance of adhesion of various films to one 
another and to the substrate in overall IC performance 
and reliability cannot be stressed enough. Because 

[Page 446]
446   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
mechanical pulling forces might be involved, adhe-
sion is even more crucial in micromachining. If films 
lift from the substrate under a repetitive, applied 
mechanical force, the device will fail. Classical 
adhesion tests include the scotch tape test, abrasion 
method, scratching, deceleration (ultrasonic and 
ultracentrifuge techniques), bending, pulling, and 
so on (see also Volume III, Chapter 6 on metrology 
and analytical techniques).55 Micromachined struc-
tures, because of their sensitivity to thin-film prop-
erties, enable some innovative new ways of in situ 
adhesion measurement. Figure 7.56 illustrates how 
a suspended membrane may be used for adhesion 
measurements. In Figure  7.56a, the membrane is 
suspended but still adherent to the substrate. Figure 
7.56b shows the membrane after it has been peeled 
partially from its substrate by an applied load (gas 
pressure). Figure 7.56c illustrates the accompanying 
pressure-volume (P-V) cycle, in which the membrane 
is inflated, peeled, and then deflated. The shaded 
portion of Figure 7.56c illustrates the P-V work creat-
ing the new surface, which equals the average work 
of adhesion for the film-substrate interface times the 
area peeled during the test.55
Cleanliness of a substrate is a conditio sine qua 
non for good film adhesion. Roughness, provid-
ing more bonding surface area and mechanical 
interlocking, further improves it. Adhesion also 
improves with increasing adsorption energy of the 
deposit and/or increasing number of nucleation 
sites in the early growth stage of the film. Sticking 
energies between film and substrate range from less 
than 10 kcal/mol in physisorption to more than 20 
kcal/mol for chemisorption. The weakest form of 
Si
Suspended membrance
(e.g., polymide)
P
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0
0
50100150200250300
Injected volume (ul)
Inﬂating
Peeling
Deﬂating
Pressure
MPa
(c)
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 7.56 Micromachined structure to evaluate adhesion. (a) Suspended membrane. (b) Partially detached mem-
brane-outward peel. (c) Pressure-volume curve during inflate-deflate cycle. (From Senturia, S. 1987. Proceedings: IEEE 
micro robots and teleoperators workshop. Hyannis, MA: IEEE. With permission.55)
FIGURE 7.55 Thinner Al films mean weaker.51

[Page 447]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   447
adhesion in volves Van der Waals forces only (see 
also Table 7.17).
It is highly advantageous to include a layer of 
oxide-forming elements between a metal and a sub-
strate. These adhesion layers, such as Cr, Ti, and Al, 
provide good anchors for subsequent metallization. 
Intermediate film formation allows for a continuous 
transition from one lattice to the other and results 
in the best adhesion. Adhesion also improves when 
formation of intermetallic metal alloys takes place.
Stress in Thin Films
Qualitative Description
Film cracking, delamination, and void formation 
may all be linked to film stress. Nearly all films foster 
a state of residual stress as a result  of  mismatch 
in the  thermal expansion coefficient, nonuniform 
plastic deformation, lattice mismatch, substitutional 
or interstitial impurities, and growth processes. 
Figure 7.57 illustrates stress-causing factors cat-
egorized as either intrinsic or extrinsic.55 The intrin-
sic stresses (also growth stresses) develop during 
the film nucleation. Extrinsic stresses are imposed 
by unintended external factors such as temperature 
gradients or sensor package-induced stresses. Ther-
mal stresses, the most common type of extrinsic 
stresses, are well understood and often rather easy to 
calculate (see below on page 448). They arise either in 
a structure with inhomogeneous thermal expansion 
coefficients subjected to a uniform temperature 
change or in a homogeneous material exposed to 
a thermal gradient.56 Intrinsic stresses in thin films 
often are larger than thermal stresses. They usually 
are a consequence of the nonequilibrium nature 
of the thin-film deposition process. For example, 
in chemical vapor deposition (CVD), depositing 
atoms (adatoms) may at first occupy positions 
other than the lowest energy configuration. With 
too high a deposition rate and/or too low adatom 
surface mobility, these first adatoms may become 
pinned by  newly arriving adatoms, resulting in 
the development of intrinsic stress. Other types of 
intrinsic stresses illustrated in Figure 7.57 include 
transformation stresses occurring when part of a 
material undergoes a volume change during a phase 
transformation; misfit stresses arising in epitaxial 
films as a result of lattice mismatch between film 
and substrate; and impurities, either interstitial or 
substitutional, which cause intrinsic residual stress-
 es as a result of the local expansion or contraction 
associated with point defects. Intrinsic stress in 
a thin  film does usually not suffice to result in 
delamination unless the film is thick. For example, 
to overcome a low adsorption energy of 0.2 eV, a 
relatively high stress of about 5 × 109 dyn/cm2 (107 
dyn/cm2 = 1 MPa) is required.53 High stress can 
result in buckling or cracking of films.
The stress developing in a film during the initial 
phases of a deposition may be compressive (i.e., the 
film tends to expand parallel to the surface), causing 
buckling and blistering or delamination in extreme 
cases (especially with thick films). Alternatively, 
thin films may be in tensile stress (i.e., the film tends 
to contract), which may lead to cracking if forces 
high enough to exceed the fracture limit of the film 
-
+
Extrinisic
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
M
M
-
+
y
y
Intrinsic
+
+
-
-
FIGURE 7.57 Examples of intrinsic and extrinsic residual 
stresses. (a) Nonuniform plastic deformation results in 
residual stresses on unloading. M = bonding moment. 
(b) Thermal expansion mismatch between two  materials 
bonded together. α (1) and α (2) are thermal  expansion 
coefficients. (c) Growth stresses evolve during film 
 deposition. (d) Misfit stresses resulting from mismatches 
in lattice parameters in an epitaxial film and stresses from 
substitutional or interstitial impurities. (e) Volume changes 
accompanying phase transformations cause residual 
stresses. (From Krulevitch, P. A. 1994. Micromechanical 
investigations of silicon and Ni–Ti–Cu thin films. PhD 
 thesis, University of California, Berkeley.56)

[Page 448]
448   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
material are present (Figure 7.58). Subsequent rear-
rangement of the atoms, either during the remainder 
of the deposition or with additional thermal pro-
cessing, can lead to further densification or expan-
sion, decreasing remaining tensile or compressive 
stresses, respectively.
The mechanical response of thin-film structures 
is affected by the residual stress, even if the struc-
tures do not fail. For example, if the residual stress 
varies in the direction of film growth—in other 
words, if there is a stress gradient—the resulting 
built-in bending moment will warp released struc-
tures, such as cantilever beams (Figure 7.59). The 
presence of residual stress also alters the resonant 
frequency of thin-film, resonant microstructures 
(see Equation  7.29 below).57 In addition, residual 
stress can lead to degradation of electrical chara-
cteristics and yield loss through defect generation.56 
For example, it was found that the resistivity of 
stressed metallic films is higher than that of their 
annealed counterparts. Residual stress has been used 
advantageously in a few cases, such as in self-adjust-
ing microstructures,58 and for altering the shape-set 
configuration in shape memory alloy films.56
In general, the stresses in thin films, by whatever 
means produced, are in the range of 108 to 5 × 1010 
dyn/cm2 and can be either tensile or compressive. 
For normal deposition temperatures (50 to a few 
hundred °C), the stress in metal films typically 
ranges from 108–1010 dyn/cm2 and is tensile, with 
the refractory metals (Mo, Ta, Nb, W, and Ta) at the 
upper end and the soft ones (Cu, Ag, Au, and Al) 
at the lower end. At low substrate temperatures, 
metal films tend to exhibit tensile stress. This often 
decreases in a linear fashion with increasing sub-
strate temperature, finally going through zero or 
even becoming compressive. The changeover to 
compressive stress occurs at lower temperatures for 
lower melting point metals. The mobility of the ada-
toms is key to understanding the ranking for refrac-
tory and soft metals. A metal such as aluminum 
has a low melting temperature and a correspond-
ing high diffusion rate even at room temperature; 
thus, usually it is fairly stress free. By comparison, 
tungsten has a relatively high melting point and a 
low diffusion rate, and tends to accumulate more 
stress when sputter deposited. With dielectric films, 
stresses often are compressive and have slightly 
lower values than commonly noted in metals.
Tensile films result, for example, when a process 
byproduct is present during deposition and later 
driven off as a gas. If the deposited atoms are not 
sufficiently mobile to fill in the holes left by these 
departing byproducts, the film will contract and 
go in tension. Nitrides deposited by plasma CVD 
are usually compressive because of the presence of 
hydrogen atoms in the lattice. By annealing, which 
drives out the hydrogen, the films can become 
highly tensile. Annealing also has a dramatic effect 
on most oxides. Oxides often are porous enough to 
absorb or give off a large amount of water. Full of 
water, they are compressive; devoid of water, they are 
tensile. Thermal SiO2 is compressive even when dry. 
If atoms are jammed in place (such as with sputter-
ing), the film tends to act compressively. The stress 
in a thin film also varies with depth.
When reviewing dry etching in Chapter 3 we 
 discussed plasma chemistry and physics. The fol-
lowing listing further completes that information. 
The RF power of a plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD) 
deposition influences stress, e.g., a thin film may 
start out tensile, decrease as the power increases, 
and finally become compressive with further RF 
power increase. CVD equipment manufacturers con-
centrate on building stress-control capabilities into 
new equipment by controlling plasma frequency. 
FIGURE 7.58 Tensile and compressive stress in thin films.
Stress gradient (+) or (-)
Sacrificial
layer
Sacrificial
layer
Compressive
Tensile
FIGURE 7.59 Stress gradients cause a bending moment 
in a cantilever upon release, i.e., removal of the sacrificial 
material.

[Page 449]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   449
Therefore, in what follows we pay specific attention 
to PECVD parameter settings influencing thin-film 
properties, important in building surface microma-
chined microstructures, i.e., film stress and density. 
Surface micromachining uses deposited thin films, 
such as polysilicon, silicon nitride, and silicon diox-
ide. One of the challenges of any surface-microma-
chined process is to control the intrinsic stresses in 
those deposited films. Plasma settings act as criti-
cal controlling parameters of intrinsic stress in CVD 
films. Recall that the plasmas of interest are low-pres-
sure glow discharges consisting of ions, electrons, 
and neutral species. The neutral species, molecules, 
and radicals greatly outnumber the electrons and 
ions and are not influenced by external electrical 
fields. Just as etching occurs mainly through neutral 
species, deposition also almost exclusively involves 
neutrals. In etching, the ions impart anisotropy to 
the etching process, whereas in deposition they alter 
the properties of the deposited films. The different 
reactor parameter settings have the following influ-
ence on the CVD deposited films:
 
1. Total reactor pressure: Because gas density var-
ies with pressure, the mean free path is longer 
at lower pressures. Consequently, ions accel-
erated toward the cathode at lower pressure 
can gain more energy before a collision takes 
place.  Therefore, the effect of ion bombard-
ment is more pronounced at lower pressures, 
and better quality CVD films ensue, charac-
terized as films with a low wet etch rate (high 
film density) and low compressive stress. 
Experimental results show that as the reactor 
pressure is lowered, film stress goes from ten-
sile to compressive and wet etch rates decrease. 
Often, stress dynamically changes when the 
film is exposed to the atmosphere and subse-
quent heating. In the case of oxide films, for 
example, tensile films take up water, swell, and 
become more compressive (the substrate bends 
down). Compressive oxide films have a greater 
moisture resistance. A nitride film, on the other 
hand, absorbs no water and shows no tendency 
toward compressive stress with time. In the lat-
ter case, the amount of Si-H bonds, controlled 
by annealing at 490°, seems to dominate the 
stress behavior.59 Too high pressures promote 
gas-phase polymerization, increasing defect 
density in the deposited material. In the other 
extreme, too low pressures (alternatively, the 
reactant gas is too diluted) change the process 
from CVD-like to PVD-like, giving way to a 
columnar film morphology with more defects.
 
2. Frequency of the RF excitation: At low frequen-
cies, ions experience the full amplitude of the 
RF voltage, whereas above the ion-transition 
frequency (>3 MHz), where ions cannot fol-
low anymore, the ion energy is determined 
by the time average of the RF amplitude. 
Consequently, lower frequency shifts the ion 
energy upward. At the lower frequencies, wet 
etch rates decrease, and compressive film stress 
results. Again, higher-energy bombardment 
yields better films. Higher ion bombardment 
also improves the film quality on sidewalls. 
Multiple-frequency 
plasma 
equipment 
is 
emerging rapidly because it allows the user pre-
cise control over film properties (particularly 
stress) for a wide range of process conditions 
and can also improve step coverage.
 
3. RF power effects: An increase in RF power leads 
to more intense ion bombardment due to the 
increase in ion current. With a higher ion cur-
rent, the film deposition rate goes up. To sepa-
rate the effect of RF power on growth rate and 
film quality, the ratio of power density to depo-
sition rate must be evaluated. This ratio repre-
sents a rough measure of ion bombardment per 
deposited molecule. In a plot of wet etch rate 
versus power density divided by the deposition 
rate, the maximum ion bombardment, corre-
sponding to highest energy density, leads to the 
lowest wet etch rate.60
 
4. Growth temperature: The growth temperature 
has a strong influence on the structure of the 
film. At low temperatures (and high growth 
rates), the surface diffusion is slow relative to 
the arrival rate of film precursors. In this situa-
tion, the adsorbed precursor molecule is likely 
to interact with an impinging precursor mol-
ecule before it has a chance to diffuse away on 
the surface, and an amorphous film is formed. 
At high temperatures (and low growth rates), 

[Page 450]
450   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
the surface diffusion is fast relative to the 
incoming flux. The adsorbed species can dif-
fuse to step growth sites, forming single crys-
talline materials.
Summarizing, low RF excitation frequency, low 
reactor pressures, and low deposition rate at high 
temperature contribute to improved film quality 
as evidenced by stress and (wet) etch rate measure-
ments. More information on CVD thin films and 
how they are influenced by the above deposition 
parameters, as well as other parameters (e.g., mois-
ture, flow rate, and gas composition) will be given in 
Volume III, Chapter 5 on selected MEMS and NEMS 
materials.
Stress in Thin Films on Thick 
Substrates—Quantitative Analysis
The total stress in a thin film typically is given by:
 
σ
σ
σ
σ
tot
th
int
ext
=
+
+
 
(7.23)
i.e., the sum of any intentional external applied 
stress (σext), the thermal stress (σth, an unintended 
external stress), and different intrinsic components 
(σint). With constant stress through the film thick-
ness, the stress components retain the form of:
 
σ
σ
σ
σ
τ
τ
τ
τ
σ
x
x
y
y
x,y
x,y
xz
yz
(x,y)
(x,y)
(x,y)
=
=
=
=
=
z
0
=
 
(7.24)
In other words, the three nonvanishing stress 
components are functions of x and y alone. No 
stress  occurs in the direction normal to the sub -
strate (z). With x,y as principal axes, the shear stress 
τxy also vanishes,61 and Equation 7.24 reduces to the 
following strain-stress relationships:
 
ε
σ
νσ
ε
σ
νσ
σ
x
x
y
y
y
x
z
E
E
E
E
0
=
−
=
−
=
 
(7.25)
In the isotropic case, ε = εx = εy, so that σx = σy = 
σ, or:
 
σ =
−ν ε
E
1
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(7.26)
where the Young’s modulus E of the film and the 
Poisson ratio of the film act independently of ori-
entation. The quantity E/1 – ν often is called the 
biaxial modulus. Uniaxial testing of thin films is dif-
ficult, prompting the use of the biaxial modulus 
rather than Young’s uniaxial modulus (see Volume 
III, Chapter 6 on metrology and analytical tech-
niques). Plane stress, as described here, is only a 
good approximation when several thicknesses (e.g., 
three) away from the edge of the film.
Thermal Stress
The most commonly encountered example of thin 
film stress is the thermal mismatch stress due to 
the thermal expansion mismatch between a film 
and its substrate. The manufacturing process and 
normal operation of most thin film-based devices 
often involve large temperature cycles. Therefore, 
thermal mismatch stresses are inevita ble, and they 
can be very high if the thermal mismatch is large 
and the elastic modulus of the film is large, such 
as is the case for Cu films used in integrated cir-
cuits (ICs). Thermal stresses develop in thin films 
when high-temperature deposition or anneal-
ing is involved, and they usually are unavoidable 
because of mismatch of thermal expansion coef-
ficients between film and substrate. The problem 
of a thin film under residual thermal stress can 
be modeled by considering a thought experiment 
involving a stress-free film at high temperature on 
a thick substrate. Imagine detaching the film from 
the high-temperature substrate and cooling the sys-
tem to room temperature. Usually, the substrate 
dimensions undergo minor shrinkage in the plane, 
whereas the film’s dimensions may reduce signifi-
cantly. To reapply the film to the substrate with 
complete coverage, the film needs stretching with 
a biaxial tensile load to a uniform radial strain, ε, 
followed by perfect bondage to the rigid substrate 
and load removal. The film stress is assumed to be 
the same in the stretched and freestanding film as 

[Page 451]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   451
in the film bonded to the substrate, i.e., no relax-
ation occurs in the bonding process. To calculate 
the thermal residual stress from Equation 7.26, the 
elastic moduli of the film must be known, as well 
as the volume change associated with the residual 
stress, i.e., the thermal strain, εth, resulting from the 
difference in the coefficients of thermal expansion 
between the film and the substrate.
Let us now consider whether, qualitatively, the 
above assumptions apply to the measurement of 
thin films on Si wafers. Such films typically mea-
sure 1 µm thick and are deposited on 4-in. wafers, 
nominally 550 µm thick. In this case, the substrate 
measures nearly three orders of magnitude thicker 
than the film, and, because the bending stiffness is 
proportional to the thickness cubed, the substrate 
essentially is rigid relative to the film. The earlier 
assumptions clearly apply.
Figure 7.60 portrays a quantitative example 
where a polyimide film, strain-free at the deposi-
tion temperature (Td) of 400°C, is cooled to room 
temperature Tr (25°C) on a Si substrate with a differ-
ent coefficient of thermal expansion. The resulting 
strain is given by:
 
ε
=
[α
α
th
f
s
(T)
(T)]dT
∫
−
 
(7.27)
where αf and αs represent the coefficients of ther-
mal expansion for the polyimide film and the Si 
substrate, respectively. The thermal strain can be 
of either sign; based on the relative values of αf and 
αs, positive is tensile, and negative is compressive. 
Polyimide features a thermal expansion (αf = 70 × 
10–6°C–1) larger than the thermal expansion coeffi-
cient of Si (αs = 2.6 × 10–6°C–1); hence a tensile stress 
is expected. With SiO2 grown or deposited on silicon 
at elevated temperatures, a compressive component 
[αf(0.35 × 10–6°C–1) < as(2.6 × 10–6°C–1)] is expected. 
Assuming that the coefficients of thermal expansion 
are temperature independent, Equation 7.27 simpli-
fies to:
 
ε
α
α
th
f
s
d
r
T
T
=
−
−
[
](
) 
(7.28)
The calculated thermal strain for polyimide on Si 
then measures 25 × 10–3 at room temperature. The 
biaxial modulus (E/1 – ν), with E = 3 GPa and ν = 
0.4, equals 5 GPa, and the residual stress σ, from 
Equation 7.26, is 125 MPa and tensile.
Intrinsic Stress
The intrinsic stress, σi, reflects the internal structure 
of a material and is less clearly understood than the 
thermal stress, which it often dominates.62 Several 
phenomena may contribute to σi, making its analy-
sis very complex. Intrinsic stress depends on thick-
ness, deposition rate (locking in defects), deposition 
temperature, ambient pressure, method of film prep-
aration, type of substrate used (lattice mismatch), 
incorporation of impurities during growth, and so 
on. Some semiquantitative descriptions of various 
intrinsic stress-causing factors follow:
 
◾Doping (σint > 0 or σint < 0): When doping Si, 
the atomic or ionic radius of the dopant and the 
substitutional site determine the positive or neg-
ative intrinsic stress (σint > 0 or tensile and σint < 
0 or compressive). With boron-doped polysili-
con, a small atom compared with Si, the film is 
expected to be tensile (σint > 0); with phospho-
rous doping, a large atom compared with Si, the 
film is expected to be compressive (σint < 0).
 
◾Atomic peening (σint < 0): Ion bombardment 
by sputtered atoms and working gas densifies 
thin films, rendering them more compressive. 
Substrate
Substrate
T = Td
tf
tf
ts
ts
T = Tr
(Deposition temperature)
(Room temperature)
<<
εth = 0
d
r
f
s
f
s
2
εth =
FIGURE 7.60 Thermal stress. Tension and compression 
are determined by the relative size of thermal expansion 
coefficients of film and substrate. Suppose a strain-free 
film at deposition temperature, Td, is cooled to room tem-
perature, Tr, on a substrate with a different coefficient of 
thermal expansion.

[Page 452]
452   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Magnetron sputtered films at low working pres-
sure (<1 Pa) and low temperature often exhibit 
compressive stress. This topic was discussed in 
some detail higher above.
 
◾Microvoids (σint > 0): Microvoids may arise 
when byproducts during deposition escape as 
gases and the lateral diffusion of atoms evolves 
too slowly to fill all the gaps, resulting in a ten-
sile film.
 
◾Gas entrapment (σint < 0): As an example we can 
cite the hydrogen trapped in Si3N4. Annealing 
removes the hydrogen, and a nitride film, 
compressive at first, may become tensile if the 
hydrogen content is sufficiently low.
 
◾Shrinkage of polymers during cure (σint > 0): 
The shrinkage of polymers during curing may 
lead to severe tensile stress, as becomes clear 
in the case of polyimides. Special problems 
are associated with measuring the mechanical 
properties of polymers because they exhibit a 
time-dependent mechani cal response (visco-
elasticity), a potentially signi ficant factor in 
the design of mechanical struc tures where 
polymers are subjected to sus tained loads.63
 
◾Grain boundaries (σint = ?): Based on intu-
ition it is expected that the interatomic spac-
ing in grain boundaries differs depending on 
the amount of strain, thus contributing to 
the intrinsic stress. However, the origin of, 
for example, the compressive stress in polysil-
icon and how it relates to the grain structure 
and interatomic spacing are not yet com-
pletely clear (see also below on coarse and 
fine- grated Si).
For further reading on thin-film stress, refer to 
Hoffman.64,65 For a short tutorial, visit http://www.
uccs.edu/~tchriste/courses/PHYS549/549lectures/
mechchar.html.
Case Study: Polysilicon Deposition 
and Film Microstructure
Introduction Thin-film properties prove not only 
difficult to measure but also cumbersome to repro-
duce, given the many influencing parameters. 
Evaporation, sputtering, and molecular beam 
techniques can deposit dielectric and polysilicon 
films. In VLSI and surface micromachining, none 
of these techniques is as widely used as CVD. The 
major problems associated with the former meth-
ods are defects caused by excessive wafer han-
dling, low throughput, poor step coverage, and 
nonuniform depositions. From the comparison of 
CVD techniques for typical IC and MEMS materi-
als in Table 7.19, we can conclude that LPCVD, at 
medium temperatures, prevails above all others. 
VLSI devices and integrated surface micromachi-
nes require low processing temperatures to prevent 
movement of shallow junctions, uniform step cov-
erage, few process-induced defects (mainly from 
particles generated during wafer handling and 
loading), and high wafer throughput to reduce cost. 
These requirements are best met by hot-wall, low-
pressure depositions.66 While depositing a material 
with LPCVD the following process parameters can 
be varied: deposition temperature, gas pressure, 
flow rate, and deposition time.
The IC industry applies LPCVD polysilicon in 
applications ranging from simple resistors, gates 
TABLE 7.19 Comparison of Different Deposition Techniques
Atmospheric CVD 
(APCVD)
Low T LPCVD
Medium T LPCVD
Plasma-Assisted CVD 
(PECVD)
Temp (°C)
300–500
300–500
500–900
100–350
Materials
SiO2, P-glass
SiO2, P-glass, 
BP-glass
Polysilicon, SiO2, P-glass, 
BP-glass Si3N4, SiON
SiN, SiO2, SiO2, SiON
Uses
Passivation, 
insulation, spacer
Passivation, 
insulation, spacer
Passivation, gate metal, 
structural element, spacer
Passivation, insulation, 
structural elements
Throughput
High
High
High
Low
Step coverage
Poor
Poor
Conformal
Poor
Particles
Many
Few
Few
Many
Film properties
Good
Good
Excellent
Poor
Source: Adapted from Adams, A. C. 1988. VLSI technology. Ed. S. M. Sze. New York: McGraw-Hill.30

[Page 453]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   453
for MOS transistors, thin-film transistors (TFT) 
based on amorphous hydrogenated silicon (a-Si:H), 
DRAM cell plates, and trench fills, as well as in emit-
ters in bipolar transistors and conductors for inter-
connects. For the last application, highly doped 
polysilicon is especially suited: it is easy to establish 
ohmic contact; it is light insensitive and corrosion 
resistant; and its rough surface promotes adhesion 
of subsequent layers. Doping elements such as arse-
nic, phosphorous, or boron reduce the resistivity of 
the polysilicon. Commercial LPCVD equipment is 
available to deposit polysilicon on wafers up to 8 in. 
in diameter. A typical batch is 100–200 wafers. The 
mechanical properties of polycrystalline silicon are 
very good:
 
◾Stronger than stainless steel: fracture strength 
of polysilicon ~ 2–3 GPa (steel ~ 0.2 GPa–1 GPa)
 
◾Young’s modulus E ~ 140–190 GPa
 
◾Extremely flexible: maximum strain before 
fracture ~ 0.5%
 
◾Does not fatigue readily
 
◾Compatible with IC fabrication processes: pro-
cess parameters are well known
These properties explain how polysilicon also 
has  emerged as the central structural/mechanical 
material in surface micromachining, and a closer 
look at the influence of deposition  methodology on 
its material characteristics is warranted. In this case 
study we tackle polysilicon deposition by LPCVD and 
compare it with PECVD and sputtered polysilicon.
Undoped Polysilicon
The properties of low-pressure CVD (LPCVD) 
undoped polysilicon films are determined by the 
nucleation and growth of the silicon grains. In most 
cases, the Si wafers to deposit polysilicon on are 
placed vertically and closely spaced together in 
quartz boats. Stress depends on crystal structure. 
LPCVD Si films, grown slightly below the crystal-
lization temperature (about 600°C for LPCVD), ini-
tially form an amorphous solid that subsequently 
may crystallize during the deposition process.56,68 
The CVD method results in amorphous films when 
the deposition temperatures are well below the 
melting temperature of Si (1410°C). The subsequent 
transition from amorphous to crystalline depends 
on atomic surface mobility and deposition rate. 
At low temperatures, surface mobility is low, and 
nucleation and growth are limited. Newly deposited 
atoms become trapped in random positions and, 
once buried, require a substantial amount of time 
to crystallize as solid-state diffusion is significantly 
lower than surface mobility. That is why, for low 
temperature deposition, amorphous layers only start 
to crystallize after sufficient time at temperature 
in the reactor. Working at tempera tures between 
580 and 591.5°C, Guckel et al.68 produced mostly 
amorphous films. However, Krulevitch,56 working 
at only slightly higher temperatures (605°C) 
and probably leaving the films longer in the LPCVD 
setup, produced crystallized films. On crossing the 
transition temperature between amorphous and 
crystalline growth (see Figures 7.61 and 7.38), 
crystalline growth immediately initiates at the sub-
strate due to the increased surface mobil ity, which 
allows adatoms to find low-energy, crystalline 
positions from the start of the deposition process.
The deposition temperature at which the tran-
sition from amorphous to a crystalline structure 
occurs depends on many parameters, such as depo-
sition rate, partial pressure of hydrogen, total pres-
sure, presence of dopants, and presence of impurities 
(O, N, or C).67 In the crystalline regime, numerous 
nucleation sites form, resulting in a transition zone 
of a multitude of small grains at the film/substrate 
interface to columnar crystallites on top, as shown 
in the schematic of a 620–650°C columnar film 
in Figure 7.62. In this figure, a transition zone of 
small, randomly oriented grains is sketched near the 
SiO2 layer. The rate of crystallization is faster here 
than the deposition rate. Columnar grains ranging 
between 0.03 and 0.3 µm in diameter form on top of 
the small grains.67 The columnar coarse grain struc-
ture arises from a process of growth competition 
among the small grains, during which those grains 
preferentially oriented for fast vertical growth sur-
vive at the expense of misoriented, slowly growing 
grains.69,70 The lower the deposition temperature, 
the smaller the initial grain size will be. At 700°C, 
films also are columnar; however, the grains are 
cylindrical, extending through the thickness of the 
entire film, and there is no transition zone near the 

[Page 454]
454   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
SiO2 interface.56 Temperature has to be very accu-
rately controlled as grains grow with temperature, 
increasing surface roughness, causing loss of pattern 
resolution and stresses in MEMS.
Stress in polysilicon films was found to vary sig-
nificantly with deposition temperature and silane 
pressure. Guckel et al.68 found that their mainly 
amorphous films, deposited at temperatures less than 
600°C, proved highly compressive with strain levels 
as high as –0.67%. At temperatures barely more than 
600°C, Krulevitch reports tensile films, whereas for 
yet higher temperatures (≥620°C), the stress again 
turns compressive. Whereas films deposited at tem-
peratures more than 630°C all turned out compres-
sive, the magnitude of the compression decreased 
with increasing temperature. The  stress gradient 
in the polysilicon films explains why compressive 
undoped and unannealed polysilicon beams tend to 
curl upward (positive stress gradient) when released 
from the substrate.71
Using high-resolution transmission electron 
microscopy, Guckel et al.68 and Krulevitch56 found 
a strong correlation between the material’s micro-
structure and the exhibited stress. Guckel et al. 
found that in their mainly amorphous films, depos-
ited at temperatures less than 600°C, a region near 
the substrate interface crystallized during growth 
with grains between 100 and 4000 Å. Krulevitch 
found that tensile, low-temperature films (605°C) 
have Si grains dispersed throughout the film thick-
ness. These equiaxed crystals in an isotropic, high-
er-density film result in a tensile stress with a very 
small stress gradient. Krulevitch suggests that the 
compressive stress in the higher temperature com-
pressive films (≥620°C) relates to the competitive 
growth mechanism of the columnar grains. As 
crystals grow vertically and in-plane they push on 
neighbors, resulting in compressive stress and a pos-
itive stress gradient. The same author concluded that 
thermal sources of stress are insignificant.
FIGURE 7.62 Schematic of compressive polysilicon formed 
at 620–650°C. The columnar coarse-grain structure arises 
from a process of grain growth competition among the 
small grains, during which those grains preferentially 
oriented for fast vertical growth survive at the expense 
of misoriented, slowly growing grains. (From Krulevitch, 
P. A. 1994. Micromechanical investigations of silicon and 
Ni–Ti–Cu thin films. PhD thesis, University of California, 
Berkeley.56)
FIGURE 7.61 From amorphous to polycrystalline Si.

[Page 455]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   455
Importantly, Guckel et al. discovered that anneal-
ing in nitrogen or under vacuum converts the low-
temperature films with compressive built-in strain 
(–0.007) to a tensile strain with controllable strain 
levels between 0 and +0.003 (see Figure 7.63). 
Annealing can reduce stresses by a factor of 10–100.
During anneal, no grain size increase was 
noticed (100–4000 Å), but a slight increase in sur-
face roughness was measured. This type of poly-
silicon is referred to as fine-grain polysilicon (also 
Wisconsin poly-Si). Guckel et al. explain this strain 
field reversal as follows: as the amorphous region 
of the film crystallizes, it attempts to contract, but 
because of the substrate-constrained newly crystal-
lized region, a tensile stress results. Higher tem-
perature films, during an anneal, also become less 
strained, but the strain remains compressive (see 
lower curve in Figure 7.63). Moreover, in this case 
grain size increases, and the surface turns consider-
ably rougher. The latter is called coarse-grain polysili-
con. Fine-grain polysilicon, with its tensile strain, is 
preferable; however, it cannot be doped to as low a 
resistivity as coarse-grain polysilicon. Hence fine-
grain polysilicon should be considered a structural 
material rather than an electronic material.
The above picture is further complicated by the 
controlling nature of the substrate. For example, 
depositing amorphous Si at even lower temperatures 
of 480°C from disilane (Si2H6) and crystallizing it 
by subsequent annealing at 600°C demonstrated a 
large dependency of crystallite size on the underly-
ing SiO2 surface condition. Treating the surface with 
HF:H2O or NH4OH:H2O2:H2O leads to polysilicon 
films with a large grain size, two or three times as 
large as without SiO2 treatment, believed to be the 
consequence of nucleation rate suppression.72
Abe and Reed made low-strain polysilicon thin 
film by DC-magnetron sputtering and postanneal-
ing. The films showed very small regional stress and 
very smooth texture. The deposition rate was 193 
Å/min, and the substrate was neither cooled nor 
heated. The average roughness was found to be com-
parable with the surface roughness of polished, bare 
silicon substrates.73
Summarizing, stress in polysilicon depends on 
the material’s microstructure, with tension arising 
from the amorphous to crystalline transformation 
during deposition and compression from the com-
petitive grain growth mechanism.
Polysilicon deposited at 600–650°C has a {110}-
preferred orientation. At higher temperatures, the 
{100} orientation dominates. Dopants, impurities, 
and temperature influence this preferred orienta-
tion.67 Drosd and Washburn75 introduced a model 
explaining the experimental observation that 
regrowth of amorphous Si is faster for {100} sur-
faces, followed by {110} and {111}, which are 2.3 
and 20 times slower, respectively. Interestingly, the 
latter also pinpoints the order of fastest to slowest 
etching of the crystallographic planes in alkaline 
etchants. As discussed in Chapter 4, Elwenspoek 
et al.76 used this observation of symmetry between 
etching and growing of Si planes as an important 
insight to develop a new theory explaining anisot-
ropy in etching. In Table 7.20 we compare the dis-
cussed coarse- and fine-grain polysilicon forms.
Doped Polysilicon
To produce micromachines, doped polysilicon is 
used far more frequently than undoped polysilicon. 
Dopants decrease the resistivity to produce conduc-
tors and control stress. Polysilicon can be doped by 
diffusion, implantation, or the addition of dopant 
gases during deposition (in situ doping).
30
60
90
120
150
180
-0.004
-0.003
-0.002
-0.001
0.0
-0.001
-0.002
-0.003
-0.004
-0.005
-0.006
-0.007
600°C
950°C
850°C
700°C
650°C
1050°C
Strain vs. time
Anneal curves
for polysilicon
Time (min)
Compression
Tension
FIGURE 7.63 Anneal curves for polysilicon. Strain versus 
anneal time. Upper curves: low-temperature film. Lower 
curve: high-temperature film. (From Guckel, H., D. W. 
Burns, C. C. G. Visser, H. A. C. Tilmans, and D. Deroo. 1988. 
Fine-grained polysilicon films with built-in tensile strain. 
IEEE Trans Electron Devices 35:800–01. With permission.74)

[Page 456]
456   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Doping polysilicon films in situ reduces the 
number of processing steps required for producing 
doped microdevices by eliminating the need for a 
subsequent high-temperature step associated with 
a diffusion or ion-implantation anneal and also 
provides more uniform doping throughout the film 
thickness. In situ doping of polysilicon is accom-
plished by maintaining a constant PH3 to SiH4 gas 
flow ratio of about 1 vol% in a hot-wall LPCVD 
setup. At this ratio, the phosphorous content in the 
film appears above the saturation limit, and the 
excess dopant segregates at the grain boundaries.67 
Phosphorus diffuses significantly faster in polysili-
con than in single-crystalline silicon. The diffusion 
takes place primarily along the grain boundaries. 
The diffusivity in thin films of polysilicon (i.e., small 
equiaxed grains) is about 1 10–12 cm2/s. The dopant 
concentration of in situ doped films is normally very 
high (~1020 cm–3). At more than about 1 1021 cm–3, 
the film resistivity reaches a plateau of 4 × 10–4 Ω·cm 
because of the low mobility of electrons or holes. 
The maximum mobility for the highest phosphorus-
doped polysilicon is about 30 cm2/Vs.78
In situ phosphorus-doped polysilicon undergoes 
the same amorphous to crystalline growth trans-
formation observed in the undoped film, with the 
material’s microstructure depending on deposi-
tion temperature and deposition pressure. The tem-
perature of transformation is lower for the doped 
films than for the undoped polysilicon and occurs 
between 580 and 620°C.79,80 Thus, phosphorus dop-
ing enhances crystallization in amorphous silicon,81 
and because of passivation of the polysilicon surface 
by the phosphine gas, reduces the polysilicon depo-
sition rate.79 Decreases in deposition rate by as much 
as a factor of 25 have been reported.82 Slower depo-
sition rates allow more time for adatoms to find crys-
talline sites, resulting in crystalline growth at lower 
temperatures. From Table 7.20, we read that the grain 
size of phosphorus-doped polysilicon tends to be 
larger (240–400 Å) than for the undoped material 
and that {311} planes show up as a texture facet in 
the doped material. In contrast to in situ phosphine 
and arsine doping, which both decrease the deposi-
tion rate, diborane doping of polysilicon to make it 
p+ accelerates the deposition rate.67
At lower deposition temperatures and higher pres-
sures, the microstructure again consists of amor-
phous and crystalline regions, whereas at higher 
temperatures and lower pressures columnar films 
result and as deposited films exhibit compressive 
residual stress. The columnar films have a stress 
gradient that increases toward the film surface, as 
opposed to the gradient found in undoped colum-
nar polysilicon. This gradient in stress most likely 
is to the result of nonuniform distribution of phos-
phorus throughout the film. Annealing at 950°C for 
1 h results in the same stress and stress gradient for 
initially columnar and initially amorphous/crys-
talline films [i.e., σf = –45 MPa and Γ = +0.2 mm–1 
(a linear stress gradient with physical  dimensions 
1/length), respectively].56
As in the case of undoped polysilicon, phos-
phorus-doped polysilicon films with smooth sur-
faces (fine grain) are obtained by depositing in 
situ doped films in the amorphous state and then 
TABLE 7.20 Comparison of Coarse-Grain and Fine-Grain Polysilicon
Coarse-Grain Polysilicon
Fine-Grain Polysilicon
Temperature of deposition (°C)
620–650
570–591.5 
Surface roughness
Rough >50 Å
Smooth <15 Å
Grain size
Undoped: 160–320 Å as deposited
In situ P-doped: 240–400 Å
Very small grains
As deposited strain
−0.002 (compressive)
−0.007 (compressive)
Effect of high temperature 
anneal
Grains size increases 
Residual strain decreases but 
remains compressive
Reduced bending moment
Grain size increases to 100 Å;74 others have 
found 700–900 Å large variation in strain: from 
compressive to tensile
Dry and wet etch rate
Higher for doped material, depends 
on dopant concentration
Higher for doped material, depends on dopant 
concentration
Texture
<110> as deposited
<311> in situ P-doped
No texture as deposited, depends on dopant 
concentration, <111> after 900–1,000°C anneal77

[Page 457]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   457
annealing.77,83 Phosphorus-doped polysilicon oxi-
dizes faster than undoped polysilicon. The rate of 
oxidation is determined by the dopant concentra-
tion at the polysilicon surface.67 The addition of 
oxygen to polysilicon increases the film’s resistivity, 
and the resulting coating, semi-insulating polysili-
con (SIPOS) acts as a passivating coating for high-
voltage devices in the IC industry. SISPOS has not 
yet emerged in surface micromachining.
Four drawbacks of in situ phosphorus dop-
ing are the complexity of the deposition process, 
slower deposition rates,84 reduced film thickness 
uniformity,82 and the cleaning of the reactor, which 
is more demanding for the doped process.
Diffusion is often a more effective method for 
doping of polysilicon than in situ doping, especially 
for very heavy dopings (e.g., polysilicon resistivities 
down to the 10−4 Ω ⋅ cm) of thick (e.g., 2 µm) films. 
However, diffusion is a high-temperature (e.g., 900–
1,000°C) process. If the diffusion step is performed 
for long durations (a few hours) to achieve uniform 
doping throughout film thickness a few micrometers 
thick, it will destroy electronics that are fabricated 
on the wafer before polysilicon surface microma-
chining. If performed for too short a time, dopant 
distribution through the film thickness will not be 
sufficiently uniform, resulting in difficulties with 
mechanical property variations through the film 
thickness.
Ion implantation can also be used for doping 
polysilicon. The implantation energy is typically 
adjusted so that the peak of the concentration pro-
file is at the center of the film thickness. However, 
the resistivity of implanted polysilicon films is not 
as low as that possible by diffusion.
As with undoped polysilicon, the intrinsic stresses 
in as-deposited doped polysilicon films are large 
(>500 MPa) and can result in warping or curling of 
released micromechanical structures. The values for 
the fracture stress of boron-, arsenic-, and phospho-
rus-doped polysilicon are 2.77 ± 0.08 GPa, 2.70 ± 
0.09 GPa, and 2.11 ± 0.1 GPa, respectively, com-
pared with 2.84 ± 0.09 GPa for undoped polysili-
con. The lower value for phosphorus-doped material 
has been attributed to high surface roughness and 
with the large number of defects associated with 
extensive grain growth in highly phosphorus-doped 
films.85 Maluf86 reports that the operation of polysil-
icon at elevated temperatures is subject to long-term 
instabilities, drift, and hysteresis as a result of slow 
stress-annealing effects.
Several sensors using polysilicon piezoresis-
tive sense elements have been demonstrated. The 
piezoresistive coefficient is an average over all the 
orientations in polycrystalline silicon. The gauge 
factor ranges between 20 and 40, which is about a 
factor of five smaller than in single-crystal Si, and 
quickly decreases as the doping exceeds 1019 cm−3. 
At doping levels of 1020 cm−3, the temperature coef-
ficient of resistance of polysilicon is approximately 
0.04% per °C compared with 0.14% per °C for crys-
talline Si. This is an advantage for the use of poly-
silicon, even though the gauge factor is low at these 
high doping levels.
PECVD and Sputtered Polysilicon
The quest for low-temperature polysilicon depo-
sition processes is driven by the need for compat-
ibility with prefabricated aluminum-metallized 
CMOS circuitry. This makes the 320°C PECVD and 
~350°C  sputter deposition methods of polysilicon 
especially interesting, although both methods result 
in amorphous films.
PECVD films, deposited in a 50-kHz parallel-
plate diode reactor, can be doped in situ and crys-
tallized by rapid thermal annealing (RTA; 1100°C, 
100 s). It was shown that small-grained PECVD 
films annealed by RTA have good electrical proper-
ties and gauge factors between 20 and 30, similar 
to those reported for LPCVD polycrystalline silicon 
(see above).87
Honer et al.88 introduced sputtered polysilicon 
to the MEMS community. Sputtered silicon can be 
used to fabricate polysilicon microstructures atop 
standard, aluminum metallized CMOS at tempera-
tures less than 350°C. Films with stress values less 
than 100 MPa are routinely obtained.
An important benefit of both these low-tempera-
ture processes is that they are not only compatible 
with conventional oxide sacrificial layers but also 
with certain organic sacrificial layers (e.g., polyim-
ide). Organic layers can be removed in a dry oxygen 
plasma etch, thus avoiding the stiction and selectiv-
ity problems associated with wet etch releases and at 

[Page 458]
458   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
the same time alleviating the concerns over chemi-
cal attack on structural elements by HF.
A drawback for the sputtered boron-doped Si films 
is that to increase their conductivity (to 25 mho/□), 
they need to be clad in symmetric, 50-nm-thick lay-
ers of titanium-tungsten.
Kamins78 provides a detailed study of polysili-
con physical properties. Another good resource on 
polysilicon morphology and doping can be found at 
http://www.iue.tuwien.ac.at/22.0.html. Sharpe and 
Edwards89 at Johns Hopkins have perhaps provided 
the most detailed polysilicon mechanical property 
studies.
Thin Film Characterization
In Volume III, Chapter 6 on metrology, we detail 
thin film characterization. For material structure 
we rely on scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning 
probe microscopies (STM, AFM), and x-ray diffrac-
tion (XRD). For chemical composition we use auger 
electron spectroscopy (AES), energy dispersive 
analysis of x-rays (EDAX or EDS), x-ray photoelec-
tron spectroscopy (XPS), secondary ion mass spec-
trometry (SIMS), and Rutherford backscattering 
(RBS). Mechanical properties of thin films are stud-
ied using residual stress measurement and micro-/
nanoindentation. Electrical properties are derived 
from resistance (four-point probe) and capacitance 
measurements. For optical properties we rely on 
ellipsometry, and for film thickness we rely on stylus 
profilometer and ellipsometry.
We also introduce a wide variety of surface micro-
machined devices that are used in characterization 
of thin films.
Surface Micromachining
Introduction
Bulk micromachining means that 3D features are 
etched into the bulk of crystalline and noncrystalline 
materials (see Chapter 4). In contrast, surface-micro-
machined features are built up, layer by layer, on the 
surface of a substrate (e.g., a single-crystal silicon 
wafer). Dry etching defines the surface features in the 
x, y plane, and wet etching releases them from the 
plane by undercutting. In surface micromachining, 
shapes in the x, y plane are unrestricted by the crys-
tallography of the substrate (see Figure 7.1). In Figure 
7.64 a polysilicon anchor is made using typical sur-
face micromachining techniques.
The 
nature 
of 
the 
deposition 
processes 
involved determines the limited height of surface-
micromachined features (Hal Jerman, from EG&G’s 
IC Sensors, called them 2.5D features90). Specifically, 
low-pressure 
CVD 
(LPCVD) 
poly crystalline 
silicon (polysilicon) films generally are only a few 
micrometers high (low z), in contrast with wet bulk 
micromachining where only the wafer thickness 
limits the feature height. A low z may be a drawback 
for some mechanical sensors. For example, it would 
be difficult to fashion a large inertial mass for 
an accelerometer from thin polysilicon plates 
(a commercial surface-micro machined accelero-
meter, the ADLX05, has an inertial mass of only 0.3 
µg). Not only do many parameters in the LPCVD 
polysilicon process need to be controlled very 
precisely, but subsequent high-temperature anneal ing 
(e.g., at temperatures of about 580°C) also is needed 
to transform the deposited amorphous silicon into 
polysilicon—the main structural material in surface 
micromachin ing. Even with the best possible process 
control, polysilicon has some material disadvantages 
over single-crystal Si. For example, it generates a 
somewhat smaller yield strength (values between 2 
and 10 times smaller have been reported)91,92 and 
has a lower piezoresistivity.93 Moreover, because a 
single polysilicon grain diameter may constitute a 
significant fraction of the thickness of a mechanical 
member, the effective Young’s modulus may exhibit 
variability from sensor to sensor.94 An important 
FIGURE 7.64 Surface micromachining of a polysilicon anchor.

[Page 459]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   459
positive attribute of polysilicon is that its material 
properties, although somewhat inferior to single 
crystal, are far superior compared with those of metal 
films, and, most of all, because they are isotropic, 
design is rendered dramatically simpler than with 
single-crystal material. Dimensional uncertainties 
may be of greater concern than material issues. 
Although absolute dimensional tolerances obtained 
with lithography techniques can be submicrometer, 
relative tolerances are poor, perhaps 1% on the length 
of a 100-µm-long feature. The situation becomes 
critical with yet smaller feature sizes (see Figures 6.3 
and 6.4). Although the relatively coarse dimensional 
control in the microdomain is not specific to surface 
micromachining, there is no crystallography to rely 
on for improved dimensional control, as in the case 
of wet bulk micromachining. Moreover, because the 
mechanical members in surface micromachining 
tend to be smaller, more postfabrication adjust ment 
of the features is required to achieve reproducible 
characteristics. Finally, the wet process for releasing 
structural elements from a substrate tends to cause 
sticking of suspended structures to the substrate, or 
stiction, introducing another disadvantage associated 
with surface micromachining.
Some of the problems associated with surface 
micromachining mentioned above have been 
resolved by process modifications and/or alterna-
tive designs, and the technique has rapidly gained 
commercial interest, mainly because it is the most 
IC-compatible micromachining process developed 
to date. Moreover, in the past 10–15 years, processes 
such as silicon on insulator (SOI) (1),95 hinged poly-
silicon (2),96 Keller’s molded milliscale polysilicon 
(3),97 thick (10 µm and beyond) polysilicon (4),98 
LIGA and LIGA-like processes (5), and porous poly-
silicon (6) have further enriched the surface micro-
machining arsenal. Some preliminary remarks on 
each of these surface micromachining extensions 
follow.
 
1. Silicon crystalline features, anywhere between 
fractions of a micrometer to 100 µm high, can 
be readily obtained by surface micromachin-
ing of the epi silicon or fusion-bonded silicon 
layer of SOI wafers.99 Structural elements made 
from these single-crystalline Si layers result in 
more reproducible and reliable sensors. SOI 
or epi-micromachining combines the best fea-
tures of surface micromachining (i.e., IC com-
patibility and freedom in x,y shapes) with the 
best features of bulk micromachining (supe-
rior single-crystal Si properties). Moreover, SOI 
surface micromachining frequently involves 
fewer process steps and offers better control 
over the thickness of crucial building blocks. 
Given the poor reproducibility of mechanical 
properties and generally poor electronic char-
acteristics of polysilicon films, SOI machining 
may surpass the polysilicon technology for 
fabricating high performance devices.
 
2. The fabrication of polysilicon planar struc tures 
for subsequent vertical assembly by mechanical 
rotation around micromachined hinges, intro-
duced by Pister et al.96 in 1991, dramatically 
increases the plethora of designs feasible with 
polysilicon. Today, erecting  these polysilicon 
structures with the probes of an electrical probe 
station, or occasionally assembly by chance 
in an HF etch or DI water rinse,100 represents 
a too-complicated or unreliable postrelease 
assembly method for commercial acceptance, 
and alter native self-assembly means are an 
urgent need.
 
3. While at the University of California, Berkeley, 
Keller, 97 now CEO of MEMS Precision Instru-
ments (http://www.memspi.com), introduced 
a combination of surface micromachining and 
LIGA-like molding processes in the HEXSIL 
(HEXagonal honeycomb polySILicon) process, 
a technology enabling the fabrication of tall 3D 
microstructures without postrelease assembly. 
Using CVD processes, generally only thin films 
(~2–5 µm) can be deposited on flat surfaces. If, 
however, these surfaces are the opposing faces 
of deep narrow trenches, the growing films will 
merge to form solid beams. Releasing of such 
polysilicon structures and the incorporation of 
electroplating steps expand the surface micro-
machining bandwidth in terms of choice of 
materials and accessible feature heights. In this 
fashion, high-aspect-ratio structures normally 
associated with LIGA can now also be made of 
CVD polysilicon.

[Page 460]
460   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 
4. Applying classical LPCVD to obtain polysili-
con deposition is a slow process. For example, 
a layer of 10 µm typically requires a deposition 
time of 10 h. Consequently, most microma-
chined structures are based on layer thicknesses 
in the 2–5-µm range. Based on dichlorosilane 
(SiH2Cl2) chemistry, Lange et al.98 developed a 
CVD process in a vertical epitaxy batch reactor 
with deposition rates as high as 0.55 µm/min at 
1000°C. The process yields acceptable deposi-
tion times for thicknesses in the 10-µm range. 
The highly columnar polysilicon films are 
deposited on sacrificial SiO2 layers and exhibit 
low internal tensile stress, making them suit-
able for surface micromachining.
 
5. Thick layers of polyimide and other new UV 
resists have also received a lot of attention as 
important new extensions of surface micro-
machining. Because of their transparency to 
exposing UV light, they can be transformed 
into tall surface structures with LIGA-like high-
aspect ratios. They may also be electroplated 
and micromolded in any plastic of choice.
 
6. In Chapter 4 we discussed the transformation 
of single-crystal Si into a porous material with 
porosity and pore sizes determined by the cur-
rent density, type, and concentration of the 
dopant, as well as the hydrofluoric acid con-
centration. A transition from pore formation 
to electropolishing is reached by increasing the 
current density and/or by decreasing the hydro-
fluoric acid concentration.101,102 Porous silicon 
can also be formed under similar conditions 
from LPCVD polysilicon.103
In this section, we first review the main surface 
micromachining process steps and clarify the exten-
sions of the surface micromachining technique 
listed above. Next we compare surface microma-
chining with bulk micromachining. In the surface 
micromachining examples at the end of this section, 
we first look at a lateral resonator. Resonators have 
found an important industrial application in accel-
erometers and gyros introduced by Analog Devices. 
The second example involves Texas Instruments’ 
(TI’s) Digital Micromirror Device™ (DMD), a chip 
now found in many projectors.
Historical Note
The first example of a surface micromachine for 
an electromechanical application consisted of an 
underetched metal cantilever beam for a resonant 
gate transistor made by Nathanson in 1967.104 By 
1970, a first suggestion for a magnetically actuated 
metallic micromotor emerged.105 Because of fatigue 
problems, metals are not typically used as mechani-
cal components. The surface micromachining 
method as we know it today was first demonstrated 
by Howe and Muller in the early 1980s and relied 
on polysilicon as the structural material.106 These 
pioneers, and the late Guckel,107 an early contribu-
tor to the field, produced free-standing LPCVD poly-
silicon structures by removing the oxide layers on 
which the polysilicon features were formed. Howe’s 
first device consisted of a resonator designed to mea-
sure the change of mass on adsorption of chemicals 
from the surrounding air. However, this gas sensor 
does not necessarily represent a good application 
of a surface-micromachined electrostatic structure 
because humidity and dust foul the thin air gap of 
such a microstructure in a minimal amount of time. 
Later, mechanical structures, especially hermeti-
cally sealed mechanical devices, provided proof that 
the IC revolution could be extended to electrome-
chanical systems.104 In these structures, the height 
(z-direction) typically is limited to less than 10 µm, 
ergo the name surface micromachining.
Gabriel et al.108 in 1989 made the first survey of 
possible applications of polysilicon surface micro-
machining. Microscale movable mechanical pin 
joints, springs, gears, cranks, sliders, sealed cavities, 
and many other mechanical and optical components 
have been demonstrated in the laboratory.109,110 For 
awhile, in the early 1990s, it seemed that every 
MEMS group in the United States was trying to 
make surface-micromachined micromotors of the 
type shown in Figure 7.65.
Micromotors may lack practical use as of yet, but, 
just as the ion-sensitive field effect transistor (ISFET) 
galvanized the chemical sensor community in trying 
out new chemical sensing approaches, micromotors 
energized the micromachining research community 
to fervently explore miniaturization of a wide variety 
of mechanical sensors and actuators. Micromotors 

[Page 461]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   461
also brought about the christening of the microma-
chining field into MEMS. In 1991, Analog Devices 
(Norwood, MA) announced the first commercial 
product based on surface micromachining, namely, 
the ADXL-50, a 50-g accelerometer for activating 
air-bag deployment.111 The ADXL-50 chip is shown 
in Figure 7.66a. The SEM inset in this figure depicts 
the polysilicon micromachined mechanical struc-
ture. By 2001, Analog Devices was making 2 million 
surface-micromachined accelerometers a month (at 
$4 per device in volume). A second commercial suc-
cess for surface micromachining was based on Texas 
Instruments’ Digital Mirror Device™ (DMD). This 
surface-micromachined movable aluminum mir-
ror is a digital light switch that precisely controls a 
light source for projection displays and hard copy 
applications.112 A schematic of the tilting mirrors in 
a DMD chip is shown in Figure 7.66b. The commer-
cial acceptance of this second application confirmed 
the staying power of surface micromachining.
Surface micromachining is also an established 
manufacturing process at Cronos (Research Triangle 
Park, NC; now a JDS Uniphase Company) and 
Robert Bosch (Stuttgart, Germany).
Surface Micromachining Processes
Basic Process Sequence—Overview
A first simple surface micromachining process 
sequence for the creation of a freestanding poly -
silicon anchor was illustrated in Figure 7.1. We will 
now detail typical surface micromachining fabrica-
tion steps using the DARPA-sponsored multiuser 
MEMS process (MUMPs®). The baseline process of 
the MUMPs program is a three-layer polysilicon 
(Poly 0, Poly 1, and Poly 2) surface micromachin-
ing process (“polysurf”) known as PolyMUMPs. The 
process includes eight lithography levels and seven 
physical layers. A physical layer represents a layer of 
material deposited during the fabrication process 
and is usually represented in mixed-case letters. A 
lithographic level is used to pattern a physical layer 
and is always represented in CAPITAL letters. The 
physical layers illustrated in Figure 7.67 are two 
mechanical and one electrical layer of polysilicon, 
FIGURE 7.65 Surface micromachined motor. (M. Mehregany, 
1990. PhD dissertation, MIT.)
FIGURE 7.66 (a) The ADXL-50 chip from Analog Devices. 
The H-shaped structure in this photo is the polysilicon 
micromachined mechanical structure (http://www. analog.
com/library/techArticles/mems/xlbckgdr4.html). (b) 
Schematic of the tilting mirrors in a DMD chip from TI.

[Page 462]
462   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
two sacrificial oxide layers, one metal conduction, 
and one electrical isolation nitride layer (also buf-
fer or isolation layer). A sacrificial oxide layer of 
fast etching silicon dioxide is used to define the 
separation between mechanical layers and between 
mechanical layer and the substrate. The nitride layer 
is used for electrical isolation between substrate and 
electrical surface layers. The Poly 0 layer is the elec-
trical polylayer used as a ground plane or for elec-
trode formation below the first mechanical layer 
(Poly 1). The first sacrificial oxide layer will estab-
lish a gap between Poly 1 and substrate/nitride after 
release etching. The second sacrificial oxide layer 
will make for the gap between a second mechanical 
layer (Poly 2) and the first mechanical polysilicon 
(Poly 1) after release. For sacrificial oxide one often 
uses phosphosilicate glass (PSG), a phospho rous-
containing silicon dioxide layer generated by CVD 
and used for its fast etching properties. A metal layer 
provides electrical connection to the package.
The eight lithography levels are:
 
1. POLY ZERO: Defines the polysilicon zero fea-
tures (Poly 0)
 
2. ANCHOR 1: Opens points of contact between 
first polysilicon and substrate (nitride or Poly 0)
 
3. DIMPLE: Generates “bumps” in undersurface 
of Poly 1 to minimize stiction
 
4. POLY 1: Defines first polysilicon features
 
5. POLY 1-POLY 2-VIA: Opens points of contact 
between first and second polysilicon
 
6. ANCHOR 2: Opens points of contact between 
second polysilicon and substrate/nitride
 
7. POLY 2: Defines second polysilicon features
 
8. METAL: Defines location of metal features
Remarks:
 
◾Dimples are small, shallow features on the 
underside of the lower polysilicon layer to min-
imize the area of contact between the polysili-
con and the substrate.
 
◾A lithography level may or may not correspond 
with a physical layer: e.g., Poly 1 = POLY 1, but 
second oxide is patterned by both ANCHOR 2 
and POLY 1-POLY 2-VIA.
 
◾Release is the last step of the process where the 
sacrificial layers are removed by submersion 
into HF.
 
◾Stiction is the sticking effect between polysili-
con and the substrate that occurs during the 
removal of the sacrificial oxide. Many attempts 
to limit stiction, including dimples, special 
release chemicals, and processes, are tried, 
some successfully (see below).
Since its inception in December 1992, the mul-
tiuser MEMS process (MUMPs) quickly became a 
well-established, commercial program that provides 
customers with cost-effective access to surface micro-
machining for prototyping activities. It caused many 
researchers to focus on design and testing of new 
MEMS concepts rather than building yet another 
clean room. MUMPs was approaching its 40th 
run in December 2000. Another source for surface 
micromachining prototyping is at Sandia, with the 
ultraplanar multilevel MEMS techno logy (SUMMiT), 
e.g., SUMMiT-IV and SUMMiT-V (http://www.mems.
sandia.gov/tech-info/summit-v.html) introduced in 
1998 – (four and five polysilicon level processes). 
SUMMiT is reviewed further below.
Process Steps for Making a 
Polysilicon Micromotor
The following is a description of the PolyMUMPs 
process applied to the fabrication of a surface-
 micromachined electrostatic micromotor. A blan-
ket n+ diffusion of the silicon substrate (e.g., with 
POCl3), defining a ground plane, often outlines the 
very first step in surface micromachining (Step I in 
Figure 7.68), followed by a passivation step of the 
substrate, for example, with 0.15-µm-thick LPCVD 
low stress nitride (sometimes on top of a 0.5-µm 
FIGURE 7.67 The seven physical: two mechanical (Poly 1 
and Poly 2) and one electrical layer (Poly 0) of polysilicon, 
two sacrificial oxide layers, one metal conduction and one 
electrical isolation nitride layer.

[Page 463]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   463
FIGURE 7.68 The PolyMUMPs process applied to the fabrication of a surface-micromachined micromotor.

[Page 464]
464   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 7.68 (Continued)

[Page 465]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   465
FIGURE 7.68 (Continued)

[Page 466]
466   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
thermal oxide). This is followed by a blanket deposi-
tion of polysilicon (Poly 0), and the wafer is spin-
coated with a photoresist for patterning (Step II). 
The photoresist is exposed using the first mask level 
(POLY 0), and the image is developed. The unwanted 
polysilicon is removed by RIE etching, transferring 
the POLY 0 pattern onto the wafer, and the photore-
sist is stripped in a solvent (Step III).
Step IV involves the deposition of the first sacri-
ficial oxide (PSG) layer (2.0 µm thick) on the wafer 
by low temperature CVD. The wafer is coated with 
photoresist, and a second mask level (DIMPLE) is 
exposed and developed. The dimples are etched into 
the first oxide by a combination of RIE and buffered 
oxide etch (BOE) etching. In Step V, the dimple pho-
toresist is stripped, and a new layer of photoresist is 
applied for the third mask level (ANCHOR 1). The 
first oxide is patterned and then processed with RIE 
to remove the oxide from the anchor area. The photo-
resist is stripped in a solvent bath (Step VI). The wafer 
is now ready for Poly 1 processing. The ANCHOR 1 
level defines where Poly 1 will be attached to the 
substrate, and the thickness of the first oxide defines 
how far above the substrate (either nitride or Poly 0) 
Poly 1 will sit after release. After the wafer is cleaned, 
the first polysilicon layer (Poly 1) is deposited using 
LPCVD. An additional thin PSG layer is deposited 
on top of the Poly 1, and the wafer is annealed at 
high temperature to reduce the residual stress and 
dope the Poly 1 (Step VII). We will come back to this 
stress reduction matter and doping of a polysilicon 
layer sandwiched between two PSG further below. 
The wafer is now again coated with photoresist, and 
the fourth mask (POLY 1) is patterned. The wafer is 
RIE etched, stopping on the first oxide, using both 
the photoresist and thin PSG (top) layer as masks 
for the Poly 1 layer (Step VII). In Step IX, the second 
sacrificial oxide layer (0.75 µm) is deposited by low 
temperature CVD, conformally coating the topog-
raphy on the wafer and defining the separation of 
the first polylayer from the second polysilicon. The 
wafer is coated with photoresist, and the fifth mask 
(POLY 1-POLY 2-VIA) is patterned and RIE etched. 
This defines the contact regions between Poly 1 and 
Poly 2 (Step X). The photoresist is stripped, and the 
wafer is recoated. The sixth mask (ANCHOR 2) is 
patterned, and both first oxide and second oxide are 
etched in one step (Step XI). This defines the region 
where Poly 2 will contact the substrate (either nitride 
or Poly 0). The photoresist is stripped, and the wafer 
is ready for the Poly 2 deposition (Step XII). The 
second polysilicon layer is deposited followed by a 
thin PSG layer. The structure is annealed to reduce 
the Poly 2 stress and to dope the Poly 2. Because the 
CVD film is conformal, all the holes will be filled, to 
varying degrees, with Poly 2 (Step XIII). The wafer is 
coated with photoresist, and the seventh mask (POLY 
2) is patterned. Both the photoresist and thin PSG 
(hard mask) will mask the RIE etch (Step XIV). After 
the Poly 2 layer is etched and the wafer is stripped, 
the basic mechanical structure is complete (Step 
XV). A lift-off template is used to deposit the metal 
layer on the wafer. Photoresist is patterned using the 
eighth (and ninth) masks (METAL), and the metal 
is deposited, adhering to the Poly 2, where exposed, 
and breaking continuity as it goes over the photo-
resist step (lift-off profile), and the photoresist and 
remnant metal are removed by rinsing in solvent. 
The structure is now completed and ready for releas-
ing (Step XVI). A 2.5-min soak in straight 49% HF 
removes all the sacrificial oxide layers and releases 
the moveable mechanical parts. The rotor is now free 
to spin about the center pin, and the stator poles are 
fixed and electrically active (Step XVII). The chips are 
rinsed in DI water, followed by soaking in isopropyl 
alcohol and baking in a convection oven.
Process Steps Details
Pattern Transfer to Buffer/Isolation Layer Suppose 
the buffer/isolation passivation layer itself needs to 
be patterned, perhaps to make a metal contact pad 
to the underlying Si substrate. Then, the appropri-
ate fabrication step is a pattern transfer to the thin 
isolation film as shown in Figure 7.69. In this case, 
the isolation layer is a 1-µm-thick thermal SiO2 film, 
and we illustrate a wet pattern transfer with a 1-µm 
resist layer. Typically, an isotropic etch such as buff-
ered HF, also called a buffered oxide etch [e.g., BHF 
or BOE (5:1), which is five parts NH4F and one part 
concentrated HF], is used (unbuffered HF attacks 
the  photoresist). This solution etches SiO2 at a rate 
of 100 nm/min, and the creation of the opening to 
the  underlying substrate takes about 10 min. The 
etch progress may be monitored optically (color 

[Page 467]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   467
change) or by observing the hydrophobic/hydro-
philic  behavior113 of the etched layer. With a resist 
opening, Lm, the undercut typically measures the 
same thickness as the oxide thickness, tSiO2. In other 
words, the contact pad will have a size of Lm + 2tSiO2. 
The undercut worsens with loss of photoresist adhe-
sion during etching. Using an adhesion promoter 
such as HMDS (hexamethyldisilazane) proves use-
ful in such cases. A new bake after 5 min of etching 
is a good procedure to maintain the resist integ-
rity. After the isotropic etch, the resist is stripped 
in a piranha etch bath. This strong oxidizer grows 
about 3 nm of oxide back in the cleared window. To 
remove the oxide resulting from the piranha, a dip in 
diluted BHF suffices. After cleaning and drying, the 
substrate is ready for contact metal and base mate-
rial deposition. Applying a dry etch (e.g., CF4-H2 
plasma) to open up the window in the oxide would 
eliminate undercutting of the resist but requires a 
longer setup time. With an LPCVD low-stress nitride 
or a nitride on top of a thermal SiO2, an often-used 
combination for etching the buffer/isolation layer is 
a dry etch (e.g., SF6 plasma) followed by 5:1 BHF.114
Deposition of Structural Material For the best 
step coverage of a structural material over underly-
ing topography, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) 
is preferred. If a physical deposition method must 
be used, sputtering is preferred over evaporation 
(line-of-sight deposition technique), which leads 
to the poorest step coverage. In the latter case, edge 
taper could be introduced advantageously.
The most widely used structural material in sur-
face micromachining is polysilicon (poly-Si or sim-
ply “poly”). Polysilicon is deposited by low pressure 
(25–150 Pa) chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) 
in a furnace (a polychamber) at about 600°C. The 
undoped material is usually deposited from pure 
silane, which thermally decomposes according to 
Reaction 7.2. Typical process conditions may consist 
of a temperature of 605°C, a pressure of 550 mTorr 
(73 Pa), and a silane flow rate of 125 sccm. Under 
those conditions, a normal deposition rate is 100 Å/
min. To deposit a 1-µm film will take about 90 min. 
Sometimes the silane is diluted by 70–80% nitro-
gen. The silicon is deposited at temperatures rang-
ing from 570–580°C for fine-grained polysilicon to 
620–650°C for coarse-grained polysilicon. The char-
acteristics of these two types of polysilicon materi-
als were compared above (see Table 7.20). Furnace 
annealing of the polysilicon film at 1050°C in nitro-
gen for 1 h is commonly used to reduce stress stem-
ming from thermal expansion coefficient mismatch 
and nucleation and growth of the polysilicon film. 
Low-temperature deposition of silicon at 320°C in 
PECVD and at ~350°C in sputter deposition is also 
possible, although this results in amorphous films.
To make parts of the microstructure conductive, 
dopants can be introduced in the polysilicon film 
by adding dopant gases to the silane gas stream, 
by drive-in from a solid dopant source, or by ion 
implantation. When doping from the gas phase, 
the dopant can be readily controlled in the range of 
1019–1021/cm3. Polysilicon deposition rates, in the 
case of gas-phase doping (in situ doping), may be 
significantly impacted. For example, decreases in 
polysilicon deposition rate by as much as a factor of 
25 have been reported in phosphine and arsine dop-
ing. The effect is associated with the poisoning of 
reaction sites by phosphine and arsine.115 The lower 
deposition rate of in situ phosphine doping can be 
mitigated by reducing the ratio of phosphine to silane 
flow by one third.116 With the latter flow regime, 
deposition at 585°C (for a 2-µm-thick film), followed 
by 900°C rapid thermal annealing for 7 min, results 
in a polysilicon with low residual stress, negligible 
FIGURE 7.69 Wet etch pattern transfer to a thin thermal SiO2 
film for the fabrication of a contact pad to the Si substrate.

[Page 468]
468   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
stress gradient, and low resistivity.116,117 In situ boron 
doping, in contrast to arsine and phosphine doping, 
accelerates the polysilicon deposition rate through 
an enhancement of silane adsorption induced by 
the boron presence.118 Film thickness uniformity 
for doped films typically is less than 1%, and sheet 
resistance uniformity is less than 2%. Alternatively, 
polysilicon may be doped from PSG films sandwich-
ing the undoped polysilicon film as we alluded to 
when discussing Steps VII and XIII in Figure 7.68. 
By annealing such a PSG sandwich at 1050°C in 
N2 for 1 h, the polysilicon is symmetrically doped 
by diffusion of dopant from the top and the bot-
tom layers of PSG. Symmetric doping results in a 
polysilicon film with a moderate compressive stress. 
The resulting uniform grain texture  avoids gradi-
ents in the residual stress, which would cause bend-
ing moments, warping microstructures on release. 
Finally, ion implantation of undoped polysilicon, 
followed by high- temperature dopant drive-in, also 
leads to conductive polysilicon. This polysilicon has 
a moderate tensile stress, with a strain gradient that 
causes cantilevers to deflect toward the sub strate.119 
The polysilicon is now ready for patterning by RIE 
in, e.g., CF4-O2 plasma.
Although the mechanical properties are less 
understood than for single-crystal Si, microstruc-
tures based on polysilicon as a mechanical member 
have been commercialized swiftly.111,119
Surface micromachining of thin single-crystalline 
Si layers in epitaxial layers or fusion-bonded and 
etched back Si, as well as surface micromachining 
involving resists such as polyimides, is also very 
common and is discussed separately below. Other 
structural materials used in surface micromachin-
ing include aluminum, SiO2, silicon nitride, silicon 
oxynitride, diamond, SiC, sputtered silicon, GaAs, 
tungsten, α-Si:H, Ni, W, Al, etc. More information 
on the material properties of these materials in 
thin film form is provided in the section on Surface 
Micromachining Modifications and in Volume III, 
Chapter 5 (Selected Materials and Processes for 
MEMS and NEMS).
Base Layer (also Spacer or Sacrificial Layer) 
Deposition A thin LPCVD phosphosilicate glass 
(PSG) layer (e.g., 2 µm thick) is a preferred base, 
spacer, or sacrificial layer material. Adding pho-
sphorous to SiO2 to produce PSG enhances the etch 
rate in HF.120,121 Other advantages to using doped 
SiO2 include its utility as a solid-state diffusion dop-
ant source to make subsequent polysilicon layers 
electrically conductive and helping to control win-
dow taper (planarization). As deposited phospho-
silicate displays a nonuniform etch rate in HF and 
must be densified, typically carried out in a furnace 
at 950°C for 30 min to 1 h in a wet oxygen ambi-
ent. The etch rate in BHF can be used as the measure 
of the densification quality. The base window etch-
ing stops at the buffer isolation layer, often a Si3N4/
SiO2 layer that also forms the permanent passivation 
of the device. Windows in the base layer are used 
to make anchors onto the buffer/isolation layer for 
mechanical structures.
The edges of the etched windows in the base may 
need to be tapered to minimize coverage problems 
with subsequent structural layers, especially if these 
layers are deposited with a line-of-sight deposition 
technique. An edge taper is introduced through an 
optimization of the plasma etch conditions (see 
Chapter 3), through the introduction of a gradient 
of the etch rate, or by reflow of the etched spacer. 
Viscous flow at higher temperature smoothes the 
edge taper. The ability of PSG to undergo viscous 
deformation at a given temperature primarily is a 
function of the phosphorous content in the glass; 
reflow profiles get progressively smoother the higher 
the phosphorous concentration—reflecting the cor-
responding enhancement in viscous flow.122 Doped 
oxides used as diffusion sources contain 5–15 wt% 
of the dopant. Doped oxides for passivation or inter-
level insulation contain 2–8 wt% phosphorus to pre-
vent the diffusion of ionic impurities to the device. 
PSG used for the reflow process contains 6–8 wt% 
phosphorus and reflows at temperatures between 
950 and 1100°C. Oxides with lower phosphorus 
concentrations will not soften and flow, but higher 
phosphorus concentrations can give rise to deleteri-
ous effects because phosphorus can react with atmo-
spheric moisture to form phosphoric acid, which 
can consequently corrode the aluminum metalliza-
tion. Addition of boron to PSG further reduces the 
reflow temperature without exacerbating this cor-
rosion problem [undoped SiO2 is often used above 

[Page 469]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   469
and below PSG or borophosphosilicate glass (BPSG) 
to prevent corrosion of Al]. BPSG typically contains 
4–6 wt% P and 1–4 wt% B and reflows at 800°C. 
In Figure 7.70 we depict the reflow of a BPSG spacer 
after patterning in a dry etch; the SEM shows the 
BPSG oxide layer after an 800ºC reflow step, show-
ing smooth topography over the step.
Ion implantation of PSG creates a rapidly etching, 
damaged PSG layer.123–125 The steady-state taper is a 
function of the etch rate in PSG etchants (e.g., BHF).
Selective Etching of Spacer Layer
Selective Etching To create movable microma-
chines, the microstructures must be freed from 
the spacer layers. The challenge in freeing micro-
structures by undercutting is evident from Figure 
7.71. After patterning the polysilicon by RIE in, 
e.g., SF6 plasma, it is immersed in an HF solution 
to remove the underlying sacrificial layer, releasing 
the  structure from the substrate. The release 
step is the source of several technological woes. 
Commonly, a layer of sacrificial phosphosilicate 
glass, between 1 and 2000 µm long and 0.1–5 µm 
thick, is etched in concentrated, dilute, or buffered 
HF (BHF = BOE). The spacer etch rate, Rs, should be 
faster than the attack on the microstructural element, 
Rm, and that of the insulator layer, Ri. For this type 
of complete undercutting, only wet etchants can be 
used. Etching narrow gaps and undercutting wide 
areas with BHF can take hours. The removal rate is 
this slow because the sacrificial layer is only a few 
micrometers thick, and the reaction becomes quickly 
diffusion limited. As a consequence, the depth of 
sacrificial layer dissolved under the structure will 
increase slowly with the etching time as d
t
release
etch
∝
 
Simply said, releasing a structure twice as wide will 
take four times more time. However, if the etching 
lasts too long, the chemical may start attacking the 
device structural material, too. Detailed studies on 
the etching mechanism of oxide spacer layers were 
undertaken by Monk et al.126,127 They found that 
the etching reaction shifts from kinetic controlled 
to diffusion controlled as the etch channel becomes 
longer. This affects mainly large-area structures 
because diffusion limitations were observed only 
after approximately 200 µm of channel etching 
or 15 min in concentrated HF. Eaton and Smith128 
developed a release etch model that is an extension 
of the work done by Monk et al.126,127 and Liu 
et  al.129 To shorten the etch time, extra apertures 
in the microstructures are sometimes provided for 
additional access to the spacer layer (see Figure 7.72). 
FIGURE 7.70 Edge taper reflow of BPSG layer.
Rs (μm/min)
Ri (μm/min)
Rm (μm/min)
Si
SiO2
Phosphosilicate glass
Si3N4
Poly-Si
n+ Si
FIGURE 7.71 Selective etching of spacer layer.

[Page 470]
470   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
These access holes in the structural layer are typically 
spaced by roughly 30 µm, allowing for the HF to etch 
all the oxide beneath in less than 5 min.
The etch rate of PSG, the most common spacer 
material, increases monotonically with dopant con-
centration, and thicker sacrificial layers etch faster 
than thinner layers.126
The selectivity ratios for spacer layer, microstruc-
ture, and buffer layer are not infinite,131 and in some 
instances even silicon substrate attack by BHF is 
observed under polysilicon/spacer regions.132,133 It 
also has been shown that during an HF release step 
the mechanical properties of polysilicon, including 
residual stress, Young’s modulus, and fracture strain, 
are affected.134 Heavily phosphorous-doped polysili-
con is especially prone to attack by BHF. In general, 
the Young’s modulus and fracture strain of a thin 
polysilicon film decrease with increasing expo-
sure time to HF and increasing HF concentration. 
Silicon nitride deposited by LPCVD etches much 
more slowly in HF than oxide films, making it a 
more desirable isolation film. When depositing this 
film with a silicon-rich composition, the etch rate is 
even slower (15 nm/min).114 Eaton et al.135 compared 
oxide and nitride etching in a 1:1 HF/H2O and in 
a 1:1 HF/HCl solution and concluded that the HCl-
based etch yielded both faster oxide etch rates (617 
vs. 330 nm/min) and slower nitride etch rates (2 vs. 
3.6 nm/min), providing a much greater selectivity of 
the oxide to silicon nitride (310 vs. 91!). The same 
authors also studied the optimum composition of 
a sacrificial oxide for the fastest possible etching 
in their most selective 1:1 HF/HCl etch. The faster 
sacrificial layer etch limited the damage to nitride 
structural elements. Their results are summarized in 
Table 7.21. A densified CVD SiO2 was used as a con-
trol, and a 5%/5% borophosphosilicate glass (BPSG) 
was found to etch the fastest.
Using low-pressure vapor HF, Watanabe et al.136 
found high etch ratios of PSG and BPSG to thermal 
oxides of more than 2000, with the BPSG etching 
slightly faster than the PSG. We will see further that 
low-pressure vapor HF also leads to less stiction of 
structural elements to the substrate. In Table 7.22 we 
present etch rate and etch ratios for Ri and Rs in BHF 
(7:1) for a few selected materials.
Etching is followed by rinsing and drying. The prob-
lems with wet release continue during this drying and 
TABLE 7.21 Etch Rate in 1:1 HF/HCl of a Variety of 
Sacrificial Oxides
Thin Oxide
Lateral Etch 
Rate (Å/min)
CVD SiO2 (densified at 1,050 °C for 30 min)
6,170
Ion implanted and densified CVD SiO2 
(P, 8 1015/cm2, 50 keV)
8,330
Phosphosilicate (PSG)
11,330
5%/5% borophosphosilicate (BPSG)
41,670
Source: Adapted from Eaton, W. P., and J. H. Smith. 1995. Smart 
structures and materials 1995: smart electronics (Proceed-
ings of the SPIE). San Diego: SPIE.135
FIGURE 7.72 Analog optical modulator. The 1/4 silicon nitride “drumhead” suspended over a silicon substrate is 
equipped with access holes to etch the BSG faster. (Goossen, K., J. Walker, and S. Arney. 1994. Silicon modulator based on 
mechanically-active antireflection layer with 1 Mbit/sec capability. IEEE Photonics Tech Lett 6:1119.130)

[Page 471]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   471
rinsing step. The meniscus created by the receding liq-
uid/air interface tends to pull the structure against the 
substrate. This intimate contact gives rise to surface 
forces like Van der Walls force, which will irremedi-
ably pin one’s structure to the substrate when the dry-
ing is complete, effectively destroying the device. This 
phenomenon is referred to as  stiction  (see Stiction 
below). Extended rinsing causes a native oxide to form 
on the surface of the polysilicon structure. Such a pas-
sivation layer often is desirable and can be formed 
more easily by a short dip in 30% H2O2.
Etchant-Spacer-Microstructure Combinations A wide 
variety of etchant, spacer, and structural material 
combinations has been used; a limited listing is 
presented in Table 7.23. One interesting case con-
cerns polysilicon as the sacrificial layer. This was 
used, for example, in the fabrication of a vibra-
tion sensor at Nissan Motor Co.137 In this case, 
polysilicon is etched in KOH from underneath a 
nitride/ polysilicon/nitride sandwich cantilever. Also, 
a solution of HNO3 and BHF can be used to etch 
polysilicon, but it proves difficult to control. Using 
aqueous solutions of NR4OH, where R is an alkyl 
group, provides a better etching solution for poly-
silicon, with greater selectivity with respect to 
silicon dioxide and phosphosilicate glass. The relati-
vely slow etch rate enables better process control,138 
and the etchant does not contain alkali ions, mak-
ing it more CMOS compatible. With tetramethyl 
ammonium hydroxide (TMAH), the etch rate of 
CVD polysilicon, deposited at 600°C from SiH4, 
follows the rates of the (100) face of single-crystal 
silicon and is dopant dependent. The selectivity of 
Si/SiO2 and Si/PSG, at temperatures less than 45°C, 
is measured to be about 1000. Hence a layer of 500 
Å of PSG can be used as the etch mask for 10,000 Å 
of polysilicon. In addition, porous Si has been used 
as a sacrificial layer in micromachining. The high 
surface area of this material makes for rapid etch-
ing in KOH.139
In Texas Instruments’ Digital Micro Device (DMD) 
(Figure 7.66b) the structural layer is aluminum and 
the sacrificial layer is a polymer. The polymer is 
removed with oxygen plasma, and prolonged release 
time will only slightly affect the metal.
Figure 7.73 illustrates a fabrication sequence for 
a polyimide corrugated structure. The sacrificial 
Al in Step 4 may be etched away by a mixture of 
phosphoric acidic, acetic acid, and nitric acid (see 
Table 7.23).
Stiction
Stiction during Release The use of sacrificial layers 
enables the creation of very intricate movable poly-
silicon surface structures. An important limitation of 
such polysilicon shapes is that large-area structures 
tend to deflect through stress gradients or surface 
tension induced by trapped liquids and attach to 
the substrate/isolation layer during the final rinsing 
TABLE 7.22 Etching of Spacer Layer and Buffer Layer 
in BHF (7:1)
Material
Property
LPCVD Si3N4
LP CVD SiO2
LP CVD 7% PSG
Etch rate
7–12 Å/min
700 Å/min
~10,000 Å/min
Selectivity 
ratio
Ri = 1
Rs = 60–100
Rs ~800–1,200 
Å/min
TABLE 7.23 Etchants—Spacer and Microstructural Layer
Etchant
Buffer/Isolation
Spacer
Microstructure
Buffered HF (5:1,NH4F/conc. HF)
LPCVD Si3N4/thermal SiO2
PSG
Polysilicon133
RIE using CHF3 BHF (6:1)
LPCVD Si3N4
LP CVD SiO2
CVD Tungsten140
KOH
LPCVD Si3N4/thermal SiO2
Polysilicon, porous Si (at 
room temperature)
Si3N4
141,142 SOI139
Ferric chloride
Thermal SiO2
Cu
Polyimide143
HF
LPCVD Si3N4/thermal SiO2
PSG
Polyimide144
Phosphoric/acetic acid/nitric acid 
(PAN or 5:8:1:1 water/phosphoric/
acetic/nitric)
Thermal SiO2
Al
PE CVD Si3N4 Nickel145,146
Ammonium iodide/iodine alcohol
Thermal SiO2
Au
Ti147
Ethylene-diamine/pyrocathecol (EDP)
Thermal SiO2
Polysilicon
SiO2

[Page 472]
472   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
and drying step, a stiction phenomenon that may 
be related to hydrogen bonding, residual contami-
nation, and the Casimir force (see also Volume  I, 
Chapter 3). In Volume III, Chapter 7 on scaling 
laws, we will come to appreciate that surface forces 
become dominant in the microdomain, and not only 
stiction but also friction are of great concern to the 
micromachinist. One of the principal causes of mal-
functioning in MEMS is stiction, namely, the collapse 
of movable elements into nearby surfaces, resulting 
in their permanent adhesion. This can occur during 
fabrication, especially as a result of capillary forces, 
or during operation (in-use stiction, see below).
The sacrificial layer removal with a buffered 
oxide etch (BOE) followed by a long, thorough rinse 
in deionized water and drying under an infrared 
lamp typically represent the last steps in the surface 
micromachining sequence. As the wafer dries, the 
surface tension of the rinse water pulls the delicate 
microstructure to the substrate where a combination 
of forces—van der Waals forces, hydrogen bonding, 
and Casimir forces—keeps it firmly attached (see 
Figure 7.74).119 Once the structure is attached to the 
substrate by stiction, the mechanical force needed 
to dislodge it usually is large enough to damage the 
micromechanical structure.125,141 The same phenom-
ena are thought to be involved in room temperature 
wafer bonding (Volume III, Chapter 7). Van der Waals 
forces and hydrogen bonding are covered in Volume 
III, Chapter 3 on nanochemistry:  bottom-up manu-
facturing. Casimir forces are quantum mechanical 
in nature (see Volume I, Chapter 3) and inversely 
proportional to the fourth power of the distance 
between the plates. One can quickly establish that 
two mirrors of 1 cm2 separated by a distance of 
1 µm have an attractive Casimir force of 130 nN (see 
Volume III, Chapter 8). Although this force appears 
small, at distances less than 1 µm the Casimir force 
becomes the dominant force between two neutral 
objects. At separations of 10 nm, the Casimir effect 
produces the equivalent of 1 atm! Obviously this is 
a force to reckon with in MEMS and NEMS devices 
(see Volume III, Chapter 8 on actuators). We will not 
further dwell on the mechanics of the stiction pro-
cess here, but the reader should refer to the theo-
retical and experimental analysis of the mechanical 
stability and adhesion of microstructures under cap-
illary forces by Mastrangelo et al.149,150
Strategies that are used to overcome stiction have 
tackled it at the design and fabrication level. An 
important fabrication idea has been to reduce the 
contact surface by introducing dimples under the 
structure. Creating stand-off bumps on the under-
side of a polysilicon plate114,151 or adding meniscus-
shaping microstructures to the perimeter of the 
microstructure are mechanical means to help reduce 
sticking152 (see Figure 7.75).
Fedder et al.153 used another mechanical approach 
to avoid stiction by temporarily stiffening the 
microstructures with polysilicon links. The very stiff 
polysilicon structures are not affected by liquid sur-
face tension forces, and the links are severed after-
ward with a high current pulse once the potentially 
FIGURE 7.74 Stiction phenomenon in surface microma-
chining and the effect of surface tension on micromechan-
ical structures. (a) Unreleased beam. (b) Released beam 
before drying. (c) Released beam pulled to the substrate 
by capillary forces as the wafer dries.
FIGURE 7.73 Schematic view of the fabrication process 
of a polyimide corrugated diaphragm. (From van Mullem, 
C. J., K. J. Gabriel, and H. Fujita. 1991. Sixth interna-
tional conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’91). San Francisco: IEEE. With permission.148)

[Page 473]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   473
destructive processing is complete. Yet another 
mechanical approach to avoid stiction involves the 
use of sacrificial supporting polymer columns. A 
portion of the sacrificial layer is substituted by poly-
mer spacer material, spun on after partial etch of the 
oxide glass. After completion of the oxide etch, the 
polymer spacer prevents stiction during evaporative 
drying. Finally, an isotropic oxygen plasma etches 
the polymer to release the structure.154
Ideally, to ensure high yields, contact between 
structural elements and the substrate should be 
avoided during processing. In a liquid environment, 
however, this may become impossible because of 
the large surface tension effects. Consequently, most 
solutions to the stiction problem involve reducing 
the surface tension of the final rinse solution by 
physicochemical means. Lober et al.,131 for example, 
tried HF vapor, and Guckel et al.155,156 used freeze-
drying of water/methanol mixtures. Freezing and 
sublimating the rinse fluid in a low-pressure envi-
ronment gives improved results by circumventing 
the liquid phase. Takeshima et al.157 used t-butyl 
alcohol freeze-drying. Because the freezing point of 
this alcohol lies at 25.6°C, it is possible to perform 
freeze-drying without special cooling equipment. 
Supercritical drying results in increased micro-
structure yields.158 With this technique, the rinse 
fluid is displaced with a liquid that can be driven 
into a supercritical phase under high pressure. This 
supercritical phase does not exhibit surface tension, 
which allows for the drying of released microstruc-
tures without sticking. Typically, CO2 at 35°C and 
1100 psi are used (see also Chapter 1).
Kozlowski et al.159 substituted HF in successive 
exchange steps by the monomer divinylbenzene to 
fabricate very thin (500 nm) micromachined poly-
silicon bridges and cantilevers. The monomer was 
polymerized under UV light at room temperature 
and was removed in oxygen plasma. Analog Devices 
applied a proprietary technique involving only stan-
dard IC process technology in the fabrication of a 
microaccelerometer to eliminate yield losses due to 
stiction.118
Coating the structure with a nonsticking layer 
[e.g., fluorocarbon, hydrophobic self-assembled 
mono- layer (SAM)] has also proved successful, and 
this method, albeit more complex, has the added 
advantage to provide long-lasting protection (see 
below under “In-Use Stiction”).
The two most popular methods today to avoid 
stiction are etching a polymer sacrificial layer in an 
O2 plasma and using xenon difluoride (XeF2) to etch 
sacrificial silicon (see also Chapter 3). Xenon difluo-
ride has been used successfully to release very com-
pliant or nanosized oxide structures where silicon 
was used as the sacrificial material. The process does 
not use plasma, making the chamber rather simple, 
and several manufacturers like XactiX (http://www.
xactix.com) (in cooperation with STS) in the United 
States and PentaVacuum in Singapore offer tools to 
exploit the technology.
In-Use Stiction Stiction remains a fundamental 
reliability issue because of contact with adjacent 
surfaces after release. Stiction-free passivation that 
can survive the packaging temperature cycle is 
not known at present.94 Attempted solutions are 
summarized below.
Adhesive or stiction energy may be minimized in 
a variety of ways: for example, by forming bumps on 
surfaces (see above) or roughening of opposite sur-
face plates.160 Also, self-assembled monolayer (SAM) 
coatings have been shown to reduce surface adhesion 
and to be effective at friction reduction in bearings 
at the same time.161 Making the silicon surface very 
hydrophobic or coating it with diamond-like carbon 
are other potential solutions for preventing postre-
lease stiction of polysilicon microstructures. Man 
et al.162 eliminate postrelease adhesion in micro-
structures by using a thin conformal fluorocarbon 
film. The film eliminates the adhesion of polysilicon 
beams up to 230 µm long even after direct immer-
sion in water. The film withstands temperatures as 
high as 400°C, and wear tests show that the film 
FIGURE 7.75 Stand-off bump or antistiction bump.

[Page 474]
474   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
remains effective after 108 contact cycles. Along the 
same line, ammonium fluoride-treated Si surfaces 
are thought to be superior to the HF-treated surfaces 
because of a more complete hydrogen termination, 
which leads to a cleaner hydrophobic surface.163 
Gogoi et al.164 introduced electromagnetic pulses for 
postprocessing release of stuck microstructures.
Wong et al.165 at the Georgia Institute of Techno-
logy are mimicking one of nature’s best nonstick 
surfaces—lotus plant leaves—to help create more 
reliable MEMS structures unaffected by water and 
even claim improved biocompatible surfaces able 
to prevent cells from adhering to implanted medi -
cal devices. As we discuss in Volume I, Chapter 6, 
the lotus plant’s ability to repel water and dirt results 
from an unusual combination of a superhydropho-
bic (water-repelling) surface and a combination of 
micrometer-scale hills and valleys and nanometer-
scale waxy bumps that create rough surfaces that do 
not give water or dirt a chance to adhere. With its 
superhydrophobicity and surface roughness, a lotus 
surface coating can prevent stiction.
Control of Film Stress
After reviewing typical surface micromachining 
 process sequences, we are ready to investigate some of 
the mechanical properties of the fabricated mechan-
ical members. Consider a straight lateral resonator as 
shown in Figure 7.76a. Electrostatic force is applied 
by a drive comb to a suspended shuttle. Its motion 
FIGURE 7.76 (a) Layout of a lateral resonator with straight flexures. (b) Folded flexures (left) to release stress are com-
pared with straight flexures (right). M is shuttle mass. Scanning electron microscope picture represents a folded beam 
lateral resonator. (Nguyen, C. T. C., and R. T. Howe. 1993. Electron devices meeting, 1993. IEDM ’93. Technical Digest, 
International. Washington DC: IEEE.166)

[Page 475]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   475
is detected capacitively by a sense comb. For many 
applications, a tight control over the resonant fre-
quency, f0, is required. An analytical approximation 
for f0 of this type of resonator can be deduced from 
Rayleigh’s method:
 
f
EtW
mL
tW
mL
r
0
3
3
1
2
2
24
5
=
+
π
σ
 
(7.29)
where 
E = the Young’s modulus of polysilicon
L, W, and t = the length, width, and thickness of 
the flexures, respectively
m = the mass of the suspended shuttle (of  the 
order of 10–9 kg or less)
For typical values (L = 150 µm and W = t = 2 µm) and 
a small tensile residual stress, the resonant frequency 
f0 is between 10 and 100 kHz.94 For typical values 
of L/W, the stress term in Equation 7.29 dominates 
the bending term. Any residual stress, σr, obviously 
will affect the resonant frequency. Consequently, 
stress and stress gradients represent critical stages 
for microstructural design.
Ignoring the stress term the resonant frequency 
in  Equation 7.29 scales as the square root of the 
ratio of the stiffness and mass (Figure 7.77) (see also 
scaling in Volume III, Chapter 7). Thus, frequency 
scales as L−1, and hence micro- and nanoresonators 
can lead to very high frequencies.
One of the many challenges of any surface-micro-
machining process is to control the intrinsic stresses  
in the deposited films. Several techniques can be used 
to control film stress. Some we detailed before, but 
we list them again for completeness sake:
 
◾Large-grained polysilicon films, deposited 
around 625°C, have a columnar structure and 
are always compressive. Compressive stress 
can cause buckling in constrained structures. 
Annealing at high temperatures, between 
900 and 1150°C, in nitrogen significantly 
reduces the compressive stress in as-deposited 
polysilicon167,168 and can eliminate stress 
gradients. No significant structural changes 
occur when annealing a columnar polysilicon 
film. The annealing process is not without 
danger in cases where active electronics are 
integrated on the same chip. Rapid thermal 
annealing might provide a solution (see “IC 
Compatibility” below).
 
◾Undoped polysilicon films are in an amor-
phous state when deposited at 580°C or less. 
The stress and the structure of this low-tem-
perature material depend on temperature and 
partial pressure of the silane. A low-tempera-
ture anneal leads to a fine-grained polysilicon 
with low tensile stress and very smooth sur-
face texture.155 Tensile rather than compres-
sive films are a necessity if lateral dimensions 
of clamped structures are not to be restricted 
by compressive buckling.
 
◾Phosphorous,169–171 boron,170,172,173 arsenic,170 
and carbon174 doping have all been shown to 
affect the state of residual stress in polysilicon 
films. In the case of single-crystal Si, to com-
pensate for strain induced by dopants, one can 
implant with atoms with the opposite atomic 
radius versus Si. Similar approaches would 
most likely be effective for polysilicon as well.
 
◾Tang et al.114,175 developed a technique that 
 sandwiches a polysilicon structural layer be -
tween a top and bottom layer of PSG and lets 
the high-temperature anneal drive in the phos-
phorous symmetrically, producing low-stress 
polysilicon with a negligible stress gradient.
 
◾Another stress reduction method is to vary the 
materials composition, something readily done 
in CVD processes. An example of this method 
is the Si enrichment of Si3N4, which reduces the 
tensile stress.176,177
 
◾During plasma-assisted film deposition pro-
cesses, stress can be influenced dramatically. 
In a physical deposition process such as sput-
tering, stress control involves varying gas pres-
sure and substrate bias. In plasma-enhanced 
FIGURE 7.77 Scaling of the resonant frequency of simple 
cantilever beam.

[Page 476]
476   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), the RF 
power, through increased ion bombardment, 
influences stress. In this way, the stress in a thin 
film starts out tensile, decreases as the power 
increases, and finally becomes compressive 
with further RF power increase. PECVD equip-
ment manufacturers are also working to build 
stress control capabilities into new equipment 
by controlling plasma frequency (see above). In 
CVD, stress control involves all types of tem-
perature treatment programs.
 
◾A clever mechanical design might facilitate 
structural stress relief.178 By folding the flexures 
in the lateral resonator in Figure 7.76b and by 
the overall structural symmetry, the relaxation 
of residual polysilicon stress is possible 
with out structural distortion. By folding the 
flexures, the resonant frequency, f0, becomes 
independent of σr (see Equation 7.29). The 
springs in the resonator structure provide 
freedom of travel along the direction of the 
comb-finger motions (x) while restraining 
the structure from moving sideways (y), thus 
preventing the comb fingers from shorting 
out the drive electrodes. In this design, the 
spring constant along the y-direction must be 
higher than along the x-direction, i.e., ky >> kx. 
The suspension should allow for the relief of 
the built-in stress of the polysilicon film and 
the axial stress induced by large vibrational 
amplitudes. The folded-beam suspensions 
meet both criteria. They enable large deflections 
in the x-direction (perpendicular to the length 
of the beams) while providing stiffness in the 
y-direction (along the length of the beams). 
Furthermore, the only anchor points (see 
Figure 7.76b) for the whole structure reside 
near the center, thus allowing the parallel 
beams to expand or contract in the y-direction, 
relieving most of the built-in and induced 
stress.114 Tang also modeled and built spiral 
and serpentine springs supporting torsional 
resonant plates. An advantage of the torsional 
resonant structures is that they are anchored 
only at the center, enabling radial relaxation of 
the built-in stress in the polysilicon film.114 For 
some applications, the design approach with 
folded flexures is an attractive way to eliminate 
residual stress. However, a penalty for using 
flexures is increased susceptibility to out-of-
plane warpage from residual stress gradients 
through the thickness of the polysilicon 
microstructure.94
 
◾Corrugated structural members, introduced in 
the MEMS field by Jerman for bulk microma-
chined sensors,179 also reduce stress effectively. 
In the case of a single-crystal Si membrane, 
stress may be reduced by a factor of 1,000–
10,000.180 One of the applications of such 
corrugated structures is the decoupling of a 
mechanical sensor from its encapsulation by 
reducing the influence of temperature changes 
and packaging stress.180,181 Thermal stress alone 
can be reduced by a factor of 120.182 Besides 
stress release, corrugated structures enable 
much larger deflections than do similar planar 
structures. This type of structural stress release 
was studied in some detail for single-crystal 
Si,183 polyimide,148 and LPCVD silicon nitride 
membranes,184 but the quantitative influence of 
corrugated polysilicon structures still requires 
further investigation. A schematic view of the 
fabrication process of a polyimide corrugated 
diaphragm was shown in Figure 7.73.
Dimensional Uncertainties
The often-expressed concerns about run-to-run vari-
ability in material properties of polysilicon or other 
surface-micromachined materials are somewhat 
misplaced, Howe points out.114 He contrasts the rel-
atively large dimensional uncertainties inherent to 
any lithography technique with polysilicon quality 
factors of up to 100,000 and long-term (>3 years) 
resonator frequency variation of less than 0.02 Hz. 
We follow his calculations here to prove the relative 
importance of the dimensional uncertainties. The 
shuttle mass M of a resonator as shown in Figure 
7.76 is proportional to the thickness (t) of the poly-
silicon film, and neglecting the residual stress term, 
Equation 7.29 reduces to:
 
f
W
L
0
3
2
∝⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(7.30)

[Page 477]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   477
In case the residual stress term dominates in 
Equation 7.29, the resonant frequency is expressed 
as:
 
f
W
L
0
1
2
∝⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(7.31)
The width-to-length ratio is affected by systematic 
and random variations in the masking and etching 
of the microstructural polysilicon. For 2-µm-thick 
structural polysilicon, patterned by a wafer stepper 
and etched in a reactive-ion etcher, a reasonable esti-
mate for the variation in linear dimension of etched 
features, ∆ is about 0.2 µm (10% relative tolerance).
From Equation 7.30 the variation ∆ in lateral 
dimensions will result in an uncertainty δf0 in the 
lateral frequency of:
 
δ
≈
Δ
f
f
3
2
W
0
0
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(7.32)
for a case where the residual stress can be ignored. 
With a nominal flexure width of W = 2 µm, the 
resulting uncertainty in resonant frequency is 15%. 
For the stress-dominated case, Equation 7.31 indi-
cates that the uncertainty is now given as:
 
δf
f
1
2
W
0
0
∝
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
Δ
 
(7.33)
The same 2-µm-wide flexure would now lead to a 
5% uncertainty in resonant frequency. Interestingly, 
the stress-free case exhibits the most significant 
variation in the resonant frequency. In either case, 
resonant frequencies must be set by some postfabri-
cation frequency trimming or other adjustment.
In Chapter 6 we draw further attention to the 
increasing loss of relative manufacturing tolerance 
with decreasing structure size (see Figure 6.3).
Sealing Processes in Surface Micromachining
Sealing cavities to hermetically enclose sensor struc-
tures is a significant attribute of surface microma-
chining. Sealing cavities in surface micromachines 
often embodies an integral part of the overall fab-
rication process and presents a desirable chip level, 
batch-packaging technique. The resulting surface 
packages (microshells) are much smaller than typi-
cal bulk micromachined ones. A sealed cavity made 
with epi-micromachining is shown in Figure 7.82 
further below, and more details on packaging using 
surface micromachining techniques are provided in 
Volume III, Chapter 4.
IC Compatibility
Putting detection and signal conditioning circuits 
right next to the sensing element enhances the per-
formance of the sensing system, especially when 
dealing with high impedance sensors. A key benefit 
of surface micromachining, besides small device 
size  and single-sided wafer processing, is its com-
patibility with CMOS processing. IC compatibility 
implies simplicity and economy of manufacturing. 
In the examples at the end of this chapter, we will 
discuss, for example, how Analog Devices used a 
mature 4-µm BiCMOS process to integrate electron-
ics with a surface-micromachined accelerometer.
To develop an appreciation of integration issues 
involved in combining a CMOS line with surface 
micromachining, we highlight Yun’s185 comparison 
of CMOS circuitry and surface micromachining 
processes in Table 7.24A. Surface micromachining 
processes are similar to IC processes in several aspects. 
Both processes use similar materials, lithography, 
and etching techniques. CMOS processes involve at 
least 10 lithography steps where lateral small feature 
size plays an important role. Some processing steps, 
such as gate and contact patterning, are critical to 
the functionality and performance of the CMOS cir-
cuits. Furthermore, each processing step is strongly 
correlated with other steps. Change in any one of 
the processing steps will lead to modifications in a 
number of other steps in the process. In contrast, 
surface micromachining appears relatively simple. It 
usually consists of two to six masks, and the feature 
sizes are much larger. The critical processing steps, 
such as structural polysilicon, often are self-aligned, 
which eliminates lithographic alignment. The CMOS 
process is mature, generic, and fine-tuned, whereas 
surface micromachining strongly depends on the 
application and still needs maturing.
Table 7.24B presents the critical temperatures 
associated with the LPCVD deposition of a 

[Page 478]
478   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
variety of frequently used materials in surface 
micromachin ing. Polysilicon is used for structural 
layers, and thermal SiO2, LPCVD SiO2, and PSG 
are used as sacrificial layers; silicon nitride is used 
for passivation. The highest temperature process in 
Table 7.24B is 1050°C and is associated with the 
annealing step to release stress in the polysilicon 
layers. Doped polysilicon films deposited by LPCVD 
under conventional IC conditions usually are in a 
state of compression that can cause mechanically 
constrained structures such as bridges and dia-
phragms to buckle. The annealing step above at 
about 1000°C promotes crystallite growth and 
reduces the strain. If a polysilicon microstructure is 
built after the CMOS active electronics have been 
implemented (a so-called post-CMOS procedure), 
temperatures greater than 950°C must be avoided 
because junction migration will take place at 
those temperatures. This is especially true with 
devices incorporating shallow junctions where 
migration might be a problem at temperatures as 
low as 800°C. The degradation of the aluminum 
metallization presents a bigger problem. Alumi-
num typically is used as the interconnect material 
in the conventi onal CMOS process. At temperatures 
of 400–450°C, the aluminum metallization will 
start suffering. Anneal temperatures (densification 
of the PSG and stress anneal of the polysilicon) 
only account for some of the concerns; in general, 
several compatibility issues must be considered: 
1)  deposition and anneal temperatures, 2) passi-
vation during micromachining etching steps, and 
3) surface topography.
Yun185 compared three possible approaches 
to build integrated microdynamic systems: pre-, 
 mixed, and post-CMOS microstructural processes. 
He concluded that building up the microstruc -
tures after implementation of the active electronics 
offers the best results.
To avoid problems with microstructure topog-
raphy, which commonly includes step heights of 
2–3 µm, the CMOS module is fabricated before the 
microstructure module in a post-CMOS process. 
Although this solves topography problems, it intro-
duces constraints on the CMOS. In a post-CMOS pro-
cess, the electronic circuitry is passivated to protect 
it from the subsequent micromachining processes. 
The standard IC processing may be performed at a 
regular IC foundry, whereas the surface microma-
chining occurs as an add-on in a specialized sensor 
fabrication facility. LPCVD silicon nitride (deposited 
at 800°C; see Table 7.24B) is stable in HF solutions 
TABLE 7.24 Surface Micromachining and CMOS
A. Comparison of CMOS and Surface Micromachining
CMOS
Surface Micromachining
Common features
Silicon-based processes Same materials
Same etching principles
Process flow
Standard
Application specific
Vertical dimension
~1 µm
~1–5 µm
Lateral dimension
<1 µm
2–10 µm
Complexity (number of masks)
>10
2–6
B. Critical Process Temperatures for Microstructures
Temperature (°C)
Material
LP CVD deposition
450
Low-temperature oxide (LTO)/PSG
LP CVD deposition
610
Low-stress polysilicon
LP CVD deposition
650
Doped polysilicon
LP CVD deposition
800
Nitride
Annealing
950
1,050
PSG densification
Polysilicon stress annealing
Source: Yun, W. 1992. A surface micromachined accelerometer with integrated CMOS detection circuitry. PhD thesis. University 
of California, Berkeley.185

[Page 479]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   479
and is the preferred passivation layer for the IC dur-
ing the long-release etching step. PECVD nitride can 
be deposited at around 320°C, but it displays rela-
tively poor step coverage, whereas pinholes in the 
film allow HF to diffuse through and react with the 
oxide underneath. LPCVD nitride is conformably 
deposited. Although it shows fewer pinholes, cir-
cuitry needs to be able to survive the 800°C deposi-
tion temperature.
Aluminum metallization must be replaced by 
another interconnect scheme to increase the post-
CMOS temperature ceiling higher than 450°C. 
Tungsten, which is refractory, shows low resistivity, 
and has a thermal expansion coefficient matching 
that of silicon, is an obvious choice. One problem 
with tungsten metallization is that tungsten reacts 
with silicon at about 600°C to form WSi2, implying 
the need for a diffusion barrier. The process sequence 
for the tungsten metallization developed at the 
University of California, Berkeley is shown in Figure 
7.78. A diffusion barrier consisting of TiSi2 and TiN 
is used. The TiN film forms during a 30-s sintering 
step to 600°C in N2. Rapid thermal annealing with 
its reduced time at high temperatures (10 s to 2 min) 
and high ramp rates (~150°C/s) allows very precise 
process control and a dramatic reduction of thermal 
Contact opening
Selective etching of Ti
Ti sputtering
Ti compound
(a)
(b)
Ti
Self-aligned process
No peeling of W up to 0150 °C
in Ar
Tin layer of nitride forms
during RTA in N2
CMOS region
Tungsten
Nitride
passivation
CMOS PSG
Gate poly
P+
n+
n+
P+
P3
Etch hole Limit stop
P2
P1
SNT contact
TiN/TiSi2
MEMS region
Sintering in N2 at 600 °C
(30 s), RTA
PSG
Field oxide
n+
n+
n+
TiSi2
W sputtering
TiN
n+
Limit stop
PSGI
PSG2
Oxide
m-type substrate
p-well
FIGURE 7.78 (a) Tungsten metallization process in a modified CMOS process. (Adapted from Yun, W. 1992. A surface 
micromachined accelerometer with integrated CMOS detection circuitry. PhD thesis. University of California, Berkeley. 
With permission.185) (b) CMOS electronics combined with postprocessed MEMS device.

[Page 480]
480   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
budgets, reducing duress for the active on-chip elec-
tronics. Titanium silicide is formed at the interface 
of titanium and silicon, whereas titanium nitride 
forms simultaneously at the exposed surface of the 
titanium film. The TiSi2/TiN forms a good diffu-
sion barrier against the formation of WSi2 and at the 
same time provides an adhesion and contact layer 
for the W metallization.
To avoid the junction migration in a post-CMOS 
process, rapid thermal annealing is used for both 
the PSG densification and polysilicon stress anneal: 
950°C for 30 s for the PSG densification and 1000°C 
for 60 s for the stress anneal of the polysilicon. 
Alternatively, fine-grained polysilicon can be used 
because it yields a controlled tensile strain with low-
temperature annealing.186
Despite some advantages, the post-CMOS pro-
cess with tungsten metallization is not the pre-
ferred implementation. Hillock formation in the W 
lines during annealing and high contact resistance 
remains problematic.116 The heavily doped struc-
tural and sacrificial layers may also affect the finely 
tuned CMOS fabrication sequence. Most impor-
tantly, the use of tungsten for circuit interconnects 
is not consistent with mainstream IC technologies, 
where aluminum interconnects predominate. Given 
that IC manufacturers have already invested enor-
mous resources into the development of multilevel 
aluminum interconnect technologies, and further 
given the inferior resistivity of tungsten versus alu-
minum, the described tungsten-based post-CMOS 
process, although useful as a demonstration tool, 
is not likely  to be adapted in industry.187 A post-
CMOS process for high-aspect-ratio integrated sin-
gle-crystal silicon microstructures was described in 
Example 3.3.
The mixed CMOS/micromachining approach 
implements a processing sequence that puts the 
processes in a sequence to minimize performance 
degradation for both electronic and mechanical 
components. According to Yun, this requires sig-
nificant modifications to the CMOS fabrication 
sequence. Nevertheless, Analog Devices relied on 
such an interleaved process sequence to build the 
first commercially available integrated microac-
celerometer (see Example 7.1). The modifications 
required on a standard BiCMOS line are minimal: to 
facilitate integration of the IC and to surface micro-
machine the thickness of deposited microstructural 
films, the line is limited to 1–4 µm. Relatively deep 
junctions permit thermal processing for the sen-
sor polysilicon anneal, and interconnections to the 
sensor are made only via n+ underpasses. Therefore, 
no metallization is present in the sensor area. This 
industrial solution remains truer to the traditional IC 
process experience than the post-CMOS procedure. 
Howe116 recently detailed another example of such 
a mixed process In Howe’s scenario, the microma-
chining sequence is inserted after the completion of 
the electronic structures but before contact etching 
or aluminum metallization. By limiting the polysili-
con annealing to 7 min at 900°C, only minor dopant 
redistribution is expected. Contact and metalliza-
tion lithography and etching are more complex now 
because of the severe topography of the polysilicon 
microstructural elements. These processes, however, 
have their own associated limitations: mixed pro-
cesses often require longer, more expensive develop-
ment periods for new product lines.
The pre-CMOS approach is to fabricate micro-
structural elements before any CMOS process steps. 
At first glance, this seems like an attractive approach 
because no major modifications would be needed 
for process integration. However, because of the 
vertical dimensions of microstructures, step cover-
age is a problem for the interconnection between 
the sensor and the circuitry (the latest approach 
introduced by Howe faces the same dilemma). 
Passivation of the microstructure during the CMOS 
process can also become problematic. Furthermore, 
the heavily doped structural layers can affect the 
fine-tuned CMOS fabrication sequences, such as 
gate oxida tion. Consequently, this approach is only 
used for special applications.185 Precircuit processes 
may place limitations on foundry-based fabrication 
schemes because circuit foundries may be sensitive 
to contamination from MEMS foundries.
A unique pre-CMOS process (micromechanics 
first) that overcomes the planarity issues of build-
ing the MEMS before the CMOS has been devel-
oped at Sandia National Labs (http://mems.sandia.
gov/tech-info/summit-v.html).188 The SUMMiT-V™ 
fabrication process is a batch fabrication process 
using conventional IC processing tools. Using this 

[Page 481]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   481
technology, high-volume, low-cost production can 
be achieved. Topography issues are mitigated using 
chemical- mechanical polishing (CMP) to achieve 
planarization (see Chapter 1 on lithography), and 
stress is maintained at low levels using a proprie-
tary process. The process uses 14 individual masks, 
approximately the same quantity as in many CMOS 
IC processes (Figure 7.79).
In this approach, micromechanical devices are 
fabricated in a trench etched in a Si epilayer. After the 
mechanical components are complete, the trench is 
filled with oxide, planarized using CMP, and sealed 
with a nitride membrane. The flat wafer with the 
embedded micromechanical devices is then pro-
cessed by means of conventional CMOS processing. 
Additional steps are added at the end of the CMOS 
process to expose and release the embedded micro-
mechanical devices and to hook them up with the 
CMOS. A cross-section of a structure made with this 
technology is shown in Figure 7.80.
The SPIE “Smart Structures and Materials 1996” 
meeting in San Diego, CA, had two complete ses-
sions dedicated to the crucial issue of integrating 
electronics with polysilicon surface micromachin-
ing.189 Research aimed at achieving truly modular 
merged circuits + microstructures technology is still 
ongoing.
Surface Micromachining Modifications
Silicon on Insulator—SOI 
Surface Micromachining
Introduction SOI is an exciting new approach to 
both IC chip making and MEMS. In SOI, bulk sili-
con wafers are replaced with wafers that have three 
layers: a thin surface layer of silicon (from a few 
hundred angstroms to several micrometers thick), 
an underlying layer of insulating material, and a 
support or “handle” silicon wafer. The insulating 
layer, usually made of silicon dioxide, is called the 
buried oxide or BOX and is typically a few thousand 
angstroms thick. As we will see below, this thin bur-
ied oxide layer, sandwiched between two layers of 
Si, can be achieved in several different ways.
When transistors are built within the thin top 
silicon layer, they switch signals faster (up to 10 GHz), 
run at lower voltages, and are much less vulnerable 
to signal noise from background cosmic ray particles. 
Furthermore, on an SOI wafer each transistor is iso-
lated from its neighbor by a complete layer of silicon 
dioxide, which makes them immune to “latch-up” 
problems, and they can be spaced closer together 
than transistors built on bulk silicon wafers. Thus, 
building circuits on SOI allows for more compact 
FIGURE 7.79 Sandia’s Ultraplanar Multilevel MEMS 
Technology (SUMMiT-V™) (http://mems.sandia.gov/ tech-
info/summit-v.html).
FIGURE 7.80 Schematic cross-section of the embedded micromechanics approach to Sandia’s CMOS/MEMS integration.

[Page 482]
482   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
chip designs, resulting in smaller IC devices (with 
higher production yield) and more chips per wafer 
(increasing fabrication productivity).
In MEMS, silicon crystalline features, anywhere 
between fractions of a micrometer to 100 µm high, 
can be readily obtained by surface micromachining 
of the epi silicon or fusion-bonded silicon layer of 
SOI wafers.99 Structural elements made from these 
single-crystalline Si layers result in more repro-
ducible and reliable sensors than those made from 
polysilicon. SOI or epi-micromachining combines 
the best features of surface micromachining (i.e., 
IC compatibility and freedom in x,y shapes) with 
the best features of bulk micromachining (superior 
single-crystal Si properties). Moreover, SOI surface 
micromachining frequently involves fewer process 
steps and offers better control over the thickness 
of crucial building blocks. Given the poor repro-
ducibility of mechanical properties and generally 
poor electronic characteristics of polysilicon films, 
SOI machining may surpass the polysilicon tech-
nology for fabricating high-performance devices.
SOI Surface Micromachining Below, we present a 
short review of the three most popular methods for 
producing SOI wafers, introduce some uses of SOI in 
MEMS, and compare SOI versus polysilicon surface 
micromachining.
SOI Wafer Fabrication Techniques Three major tech-
niques currently are applied to produce SOI wafers 
(Figure 7.81) (see also under “Epitaxy” above): 
SIMOX (Separated by IMplanted OXygen), the Si 
fusion bonded (SFB) wafer technique, and zone-
melt recrystallized (ZMR) polysilicon. With SIMOX, 
standard Si wafers are implanted with oxygen ions 
and then annealed at high temperatures (1300°C). 
The oxygen and silicon combine to form a silicon 
oxide layer beneath the silicon surface. The oxide 
layer’s thickness and depth are controlled by varying 
the energy and dose of the implant and the anneal 
temperature. In some cases, a CVD process deposits 
additional epitaxial silicon on the top silicon layer. 
Attempts have also been made to implant nitrogen in 
Si to create abrupt etch stops [in the SIMON process 
(Separation by IMplantation Of Nitrogen]. At high-
enough energies, the implanted nitrogen is buried 
0.5–1 µm deep. At a high-enough dose, the etching 
in that region stops. It is not necessary to implant 
a stoichiometric amount of nitrogen; a dose lower 
by a factor of two to three suffices. After implanta-
tion, it is necessary to anneal the wafer because the 
implantation destroys the crystal structure at the 
surface of the wafer.
The Si fusion bonded wafer process starts with an 
oxide layer (typically about 1 µm) grown on a stan-
dard Si wafer. That wafer is then bonded to another 
wafer, with the oxide sandwiched between. For the 
bonding, no mechanical pressure or other forces are 
applied. The sandwich is annealed at 1100°C for 2 h 
in a nitrogen ambient, which creates a strong bond 
between the two wafers. One of the wafers is then 
FIGURE 7.81 How SOI wafers are made.

[Page 483]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   483
ground to a thickness of a few micrometers using 
mechanical and CMP.
A third process for making SOI structures is to 
recrystallize polysilicon (e.g., with a laser, an elec-
tron beam, or a narrow strip heater), which has been 
depo sited on an oxidized silicon wafer. This process 
is called zone melting recrystallization (ZMR) and is 
used primarily for local recrystallization but has not 
yet been explored much for use in micromachining 
applications.
The crystalline perfection of conventional silicon 
wafers in SFB and ZMR is completely maintained in 
the SOI layer because the wafers do not suffer from 
implant-induced defects. By using plasma etching, 
wafers with a top Si layer thickness of as little as 
1000–3000 Å with total thickness variations of less 
than 200 Å can be made.190 SOI top Si layers of 2 µm 
thick are more standard.191 A tremendous amount of 
effort is spent in the IC industry on controlling the 
SOI thin Si layer thickness, which benefits any nar-
row tolerance IC and micromachine.
Etched-back fusion-bonded Si wafers and SIMOX 
are used extensively to build both ICs and micro-
machines, and both are commercially available. In 
1989 TI introduced its commercial 64K static ran -
dom access memory (SRAM) based on SOI, and 
AMD’s 90 nm is also based on SOI technology 
(introduced in late 2004). One vendor is SOITEC 
(http://www.soitec.com/en/products).
SOI Use in MEMS
Overview Kanda192 reviews different types of 
SOI wafers in terms of their micromachining and 
IC applications. Working with SOI wafers, he points 
out, offers several advantages over bulk Si wafers: 
fewer process steps are needed for feature isolation; 
parasitic capacitance is reduced; and power con-
sumption is lowered. In the IC industry, SOI wafers 
are principally used for high-speed CMOS ICs (<10 
GHz), smart power ICs (voltages up to 100 V), 3D 
ICs, and radiation-hardened devices.193
An important use of silicon on insulator wafers 
is in the production of high-temperature sensors. 
Compared with p-n junction isolation, which is 
limited to about 125°C, much higher tempera-
ture (up to 300°C) devices are possible based on 
the dielectric insulation of SOI. A wide variety of 
SOI surface-micromachined structures have been 
explored, including pressure sensors, accelerom-
eters, torsional micromirrors, light sources, and 
optical choppers.95,99 Often in those micromachin-
ing applications, SOI wafers are used to produce an 
etch stop. The silicon fusion bonded (SFB) method 
offers the more versatile MEMS approach because 
of the associated potential for thicker single-crystal 
layers and the option of incorporating buried cavi-
ties, facilitating micromachine packaging. Sensors 
manufactured by means of SFB now are commer-
cially available.194 The SIMOX approach is less labor 
intensive and holds better membrane thickness con-
trol. An important expansion of the SOI technique 
is selective epitaxy. The latter enables a wide range of 
new mechanical structures and enables novel etch-
stop methods,195 as well as electrical and/or thermal 
separation and independent optimization of active 
sensor and readout electronics.196 In most cases, SOI 
machining involves dry anisotropic etching to etch 
a pattern into the Si layer on top of the insulator. 
These structures then are released by etching the sac-
rificial buried SiO2 insulator layer, which displays a 
thickness with very high reproducibility (400 ± 5 
nm) and uniformity (<±5 nm), especially in the case 
of SIMOX. Etched free cantilevers and membranes 
consist of single-crystalline silicon with thicknesses 
ranging from micrometers and submicrometers 
(SIMOX) up to hundreds of micrometers (SFB).
The increasing use of SOI technology for the fab-
rication of MEMS devices has brought with it its 
own set of unique problems that must be overcome 
for applications where CD control is important. For 
example, the etching of deep trenches in SOI wafers 
necessitates a fast etch process, followed by a slow 
etch process as soon as the buried dioxide layer is 
reached.197 The main problem in plasma processing 
of SOI is the notching at the oxide interface, which 
results from the deflection of the incident ions by 
charging up the insulating oxide surface. The notch 
width increases with time, and it is here that etch 
uniformity begins to play an important role because 
overetching times to clear the wafer can become 
significant. For example, a 400-µm-deep etch with 
+5% uniformity requires a >10% overetch to ensure 
that all features etch to the required depth. Thus, 
some areas of the wafer will be subject to a 40-µm 

[Page 484]
484   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
overetch, and precise control of the profile during 
overetching becomes essential.
Creating Buried Cavities in Silicon by Silicon Fusion 
Bonded Micromachining Silicon fusion bonding 
enables the formation of thick single-crystal layers 
with cavities built in. An example is shown in Figure 
7.82.99 The device pictured involves two 4-in. <100> 
wafers: a handle wafer and a wafer used for the SOI 
surface. The p-type (3–7 Ωcm) handle wafer is ther-
mally oxidized at 1100°C to obtain a 1-µm-thick 
oxide. Thermal oxidation enables thicker oxides 
than the ones formed in SIMOX by ion implanta-
tion and avoids the potential implantation damage 
in the working material. To make a buried cavity, 
the oxide is patterned and etched. To produce yet 
deeper cavities, the Si handle wafer may be etched 
as well (as in Figure 7.82). In the case shown, the top 
wafer consists of the same p-type substrate material 
as the handle wafer with a 2–30-µm-thick n-type 
epitaxial layer. The epitaxial layer determines the 
thickness of the final mechanical/structural ele-
ment. The epitaxial layer is fusion bonded to the 
cavity side of the handle wafer (2 h at 1100°C). The 
top wafer is then partially thinned by grinding and 
polishing (Figure 7.82a). An insulator is deposited 
and patterned on the back side of the handle wafer 
to etch access holes to the insulator. After the insu-
lator at the bottom of the etch hole is removed by a 
buffered oxide etch (BOE), aluminum is sputtered 
and sintered to make contact to the n-type epilayer 
for the electrochemical etch back of the remaining 
p-type material (Figure 7.82b). The final single-crys-
tal silicon thickness is uniform to within ±0.05 µm 
(standard deviation) and does not require a costly, 
high-accuracy polish step.
Draper Laboratory is using SOI processes in the 
development of inertial sensors, gyros, and acceler-
ometers as an alternative to devices fabricated by the 
dissolved wafer process (see Example 4.1). The main 
advantage is that the former consists of an all-Si pro-
cess rather than a Si/Pyrex sandwich; an all Si device 
will exhibit less thermal stress.198
Fabricating Pressure Sensors in SIMOX Surface 
Micromachining Both capacitive and piezoresistive 
pressure sensors were microfabricated from SIMOX 
wafers.95 Figure 7.83 illustrates the process sequence 
by Diem et al.95 for fabricating an absolute capaci-
tive pressure sensor. The 0.2-µm silicon surface layer 
of  the SIMOX wafer is thickened with doped epi-
silicon to 4 µm. An access hole is RIE etched in the 
Si layer, and vacuum cavity and electrode gap are 
obtained by etching the SiO2 buried layer. Because 
the buried thick oxide layer exhibits a very high 
reproducibility and homogeneity over the whole 
wafer (0.4 µm ± 5 nm), the resulting vacuum cavity 
and electrode gap after etching also are very well 
controlled. The small gap results in relatively high 
capacitance values between the free membrane and 
bulk substrate (20 pf/mm2). Diaphragm diameter, 
controlled by the SiO2 etching, is up to several 
hundred micrometers (±2 µm). The etching hole is 
hermetically sealed under vacuum by plasma CVD 
deposition of nonstressed dielectric layer plugs.
With the above scheme, Diem et al. realized an 
absolute pressure sensor with a size of less than 
1.5 mm2. The temperature dependence of a capacitive 
sensor is mainly a result of the temperature coeffici-
ent of the offset capacitance. Therefore, temperature 
compensation is needed for high accuracy sensors. 
A drastic reduction of the temperature dependence 
is obtained by a differential measurement, especially 
if the reference capacitor resembles the sensing 
capacitor. A reference capacitor is designed with the 
membrane blocked by several plugs for pressure 
FIGURE 7.82 (a) Wafer sandwich after grind-and-polish 
step. (b) Wafer after electrochemical etch-back in KOH, 
buried oxide removal, and aluminum deposition. [From 
Noworolski, J. M., E. Klaassen, J. Logan, K. Petersen, and 
N. Maluf. 1995. Eighth international conference on solid-
state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, 
Sweden: IEEE. With permission.99]

[Page 485]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   485
insensitivity. The localization and the number of 
plugs are modeled by finite element analysis (FEA; 
ANSYS software was used) to get a deformation 
lower  than 1% of the active sensor’s deformation. 
Even without temperature calibration, the high 
output of the differential signal results in an overall 
output error better than ±2% over the whole temper-
ature range (–40°C to +125°C) compared with 10% 
for nondifferential measurements. The temperature 
coefficient of the sensitivity is about 100 ppm/°C, 
which agrees with the theoretical variation of the 
Young’s modulus of silicon. A piezoresistive sensor 
can be achieved by implanting strain gauges in 
the membrane. Although SIMOX wafers are more 
expensive than regular wafers, they come with 
several process steps embedded, and they make 
packaging easier.
Selective Epitaxy Surface Micromachining In 
the discussion on epitaxy, we drew attention to 
the potential of selective epitaxy for creating novel 
microstructures. The example in Figure 7.50 illus-
trates the selective deposition of epi-silicon on a Si 
substrate through a SiO2 window. The same figure 
also demonstrates the simultaneous deposition of 
polysilicon on SiO2 and crystalline epi-silicon on 
silicon, creating the basis for a structure featuring an 
epi-silicon anchor with polysilicon side arms.
Neudeck et al.199,200 at Purdue and Gennissen 
et al.195,196 in Twente proved that selective epitaxy 
can also be applied for automatic etch stop on 
buried oxide islands. Figure 7.84a demonstrates 
how epitaxial lateral overgrowth (ELO) can bury 
oxide islands. After removal of the native oxides 
from the seed windows, epi is grown for 20 min 
at 950°C and at 60 Torr using a Si2H2Cl2-HCl-H2 
gas system. The epi growth front moves parallel 
to the wafer surface while growing in the lateral 
direction, leaving a smooth planar surface. During 
epi growth, the HCl prevents polynucleation on 
the nonsilicon areas. The epi quality is strongly 
dependent on the orientation of the seed holes 
FIGURE 7.83 Process sequence of a SIMOX absolute capacitive pressure sensor by Diem et al. [From Diem, B., M. T. 
Delaye, F. Michel, S. Renard, and G. Delapierre. 1993. Seventh international conference on solid-state sensors and 
actuators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan: IEEE. With permission.95]

[Page 486]
486   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
in the oxide. Seed holes oriented in the <100> 
direction lead to the best epi material and surface 
quality. Selective epi’s other big problem for fab-
rication remains sidewall defects.201 The buried 
oxide islands stop the KOH etch of the substrate, 
enabling formation of beams and membranes as 
shown in Figure 7.84b. This technique might form 
the basis of many high-performance microstruc-
tures. The Purdue and Twente groups also work on 
confined selective epitaxial growth (CSEG), a pro-
cess pioneered by Neudeck et al.200 In this process 
a micromachined cavity is formed above a silicon 
substrate with a seed contact window to the sili-
con substrate and access windows for epi-silicon 
(Figure 7.84c).196 Low-stress, silicon-rich nitride 
layers act as structural layers to confine epitaxial 
growth; PSG is used as sacrificial material. This 
confined selective epitaxial growth technique 
allows electrical and/or thermal isolation separa-
tion, as well as independent optimization of active 
sensor and readout electronic areas.
SOI versus Polysilicon Surface Micromachining 
The power of polysilicon surface micromachining 
mainly lays in its CMOS compatibility. When depos-
ited on an insulator, both polysilicon and single 
crystal layers enable higher operating temperatures 
(>200°C) than bulk micromachined sensors featur-
ing p-n junction isolation only (130°C max).202 An 
additional benefit for SOI-based micromachining 
is IC compatibility combined with single-crystal Si 
performance excellence. The maximum gauge fac-
tor (see Volume I, Equation 4.93) of a polysilicon 
piezoresistor is about 30, roughly 15 times larger 
than that of a metal strain gauge but only one third 
that of an indiffused resistor in single-crystal Si.203 
Higher piezoresistivity and fracture stress would 
seem to favor SOI for sensor manufacture. However, 
there is an important counterargument: the piezore-
sistivity and fracture stress in polysilicon are iso-
tropic, a major design simplification. Moreover, by 
laser recrystallization, the gauge factor of polysilicon 
might increase to greater than 50,204 and by appro-
priate boron doping the temperature coefficient of 
resistance (TCR) can reach 0 versus a TCR of, e.g., 
1.7 × 10–3 K–1 for single-crystal p-type silicon. Neither 
technical nor cost issues will be the deciding factor 
in determining which technology will become dom-
inant in the next few years. Micromachining is very 
much a hostage to trends in the IC industry; promis-
ing technologies such as GaAs and micromachining 
do not necessarily take off, in no small part because 
of the invested capital in some limited sets of stan-
dard silicon technologies. On this basis, SOI sur-
face micromachining is the favored candidate; SOI 
extends silicon’s technological relevance and experi-
ences, increasing investment from the IC industry 
and thus benefiting SOI micromachining.192
Based on the above, we believe that SOI micro-
machining not only introduces an improved 
method of making many simple micromachines, 
but it also will probably become the favored 
Epitaxial lateral overgrowth
Oxide islands
Hole
(a)
(b)
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
ELO
Nitride
Membrane
Beam
Oxide
(c)
CSEG Si
Access window
Seed window
PSG
Nitride
Silicon
FIGURE 7.84 Micromachining with epi-silicon. (a) Lateral overgrowth process of epi-silicon (ELO, epitaxial lateral 
overgrowth) out of <100>-oriented holes in an oxide mask. (b) KOH etch stop on buried oxide islands or front side 
nitride. (c) Principle of confined selective epitaxial growth. (From Bartek, M., P. T. J. Gennissen, P. J. French, and 
R. F. Wolffenbuttel. 1995. Eighth international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). 
Stockholm, Sweden: IEEE. With permission.196)

[Page 487]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   487
approach of the IC industry. A summary of SOI 
advantages is listed below:
 
◾IC industry use in all type of applications such 
as MOS, bipolar digital, bipolar linear, power 
devices, BiCMOS, CCDs, and heterojunction 
bipolar205
 
◾Batch packaging through embedded cavities
 
◾CMOS compatibility
 
◾Substrate industrially available at increasingly 
lower costs (about $200 today)
 
◾Excellent mechanical properties of the single-
crystalline surface layer
 
◾Freedom of shapes in the x-y dimensions and 
continually improving dry etching techniques, 
resulting in larger aspect ratios and higher 
features
 
◾Freedom to choose a very well-controlled range 
of thicknesses of epi surface layers
 
◾SiO2 buried layer as sacrificial and insulating 
layer and excellent etch stop
 
◾Dramatic reduction of process steps as the SOI 
wafer comes with several “embedded” process 
steps
 
◾High-temperature operation
A tutorial on SOI can be found at http://
www.freescale.com/webapp/sps/site/overview.
jsp?code=TM_SOI.
Hinged Polysilicon
One way to achieve high vertical structures with sur-
face micromachining is to build large, flat structures 
horizontally and then rotate them on a hinge to an 
upright position. Pister et al.194–203 developed the 
polysilicon hinges shown in Figure 7.85A; on these 
hinges, long structural polysilicon features (1  mm 
and beyond) can be rotated out of the plane of a 
substrate. To make these hinged structures, a 2-µm-
thick PSG oxide layer (PSG-1) is deposited on the Si 
substrate as the sacrificial material, followed by the 
deposition of the first polysilicon layer (2-µm-thick 
Poly 1). Photolithography and dry etching to form 
the desired structural elements, including hinge pins 
to rotate them, pattern the polysilicon structural 
layer. Following the deposition and patterning of 
Poly 1, another layer of sacrificial material (PSG-2) 
of 0.5-µm thickness is deposited (Figure 7.85Aa). 
Contacts are made through both PSG layers to the Si 
substrate, and a second layer of polysilicon is depos-
ited and patterned (Poly 2), forming a staple to hold 
Poly 2
Poly 1
Poly 1
Poly 2
Poly 2 staple holding
poly 1 plate
A
B
Contact pad
Self-alignment
structure
Collimated
beam
Emitting spot near front surface
Fresnel lens
Edge-emitting
laser
Si substrate
Contact
pad
Edge-emitting
laser
Self-alignment
plates
Silver conductive
epoxy
100 μm
20KV
00
015
S
Fresnel
lens
Oxide
FIGURE 7.85 Microfabricated hinges. (A) Cross-section, side view, and top view of a single-hinged plate before and after 
the sacrificial etch. SEM of a hinge (MCNC). (B) Schematic (top) and SEM micrograph of the self-aligned hybrid integra-
tion of an edge-emitting laser with a micro-Fresnel lens. (From Lin, L. Y., S. S. Lee, M. C. Wu, and K. S. J. Pister. 1995. 
Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’95). Amsterdam, the Netherlands: IEEE. With permission.206)

[Page 488]
488   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
the first polysilicon layer hinge to the surface (Figure 
7.85Ab). The first and second layers of poly are sepa-
rated everywhere by PSG-2 for the first polysilicon 
layer to freely rotate off the wafer surface when the 
PSG is removed in a sacrificial etch. After the sacri-
ficial etch, the structures are rotated in their respec-
tive positions (Figure 7.85Ac). This is accomplished 
in an electrical probe station by skillfully manipulat-
ing the movable parts with the probe needles. Once 
the components are in position, high friction in the 
hinges tends to keep them in the same position. To 
obtain more precise and stable control of position, 
additional hinges and supports are incorporated. To 
provide electrical contact to the vertical polysilicon 
structures, one can rely on the mechanical contact 
in the hinges, or polysilicon beams (cables) can be 
attached from the vertical structure to the substrate.
Pister’s research team made a wide variety  of 
hin ged microstructures, including hot wire ane-
mometers, a box dynamometer to measure forces 
exerted by embryonic tissue, a parallel-plate 
gripper,207 a microwindmill,208 a microoptical bench 
(MOB) for free-space integrated optics,206 and a 
standard CMOS single piezoresistive sensor to 
quantify the single heart cell contractile forces 
of a rat.209 One example from this group’s efforts 
is illustrated in Figure 7.85B, showing an SEM 
photograph of an edge-emitting laser diode shining 
light onto a collimating micro-Fresnel lens.206 The 
micro-Fresnel lens in the SEM photo is surface 
micromachined in the plane and erected on a 
polysilicon hinge. The lens has a diameter of 280 µm. 
Alignment plates at the front and the back sides 
of the laser are used for height adjustment of the 
laser spot so that the emitting spot falls exactly 
onto the optical axis of the micro-Fresnel lens. 
After assembly, the laser is electrically contacted by 
silver epoxy. Although this hardly outlines standard 
IC manufacturing practices, excellent collimating 
ability for the Fresnel lenses has been achieved. The 
eventual goal of this work is a microoptical bench 
(MOB), in which microlenses, mirrors, gratings, and 
other optical components are prealigned in the 
mask layout stage using computer-aided design. 
Additional fine adjustment would be achieved by 
on-chip microactuators and micropositioners such 
as rotational and translational stages. Erecting 
these polysilicon structures with the probes of an 
electr ical probe station and, occasionally, assembly 
by chance in the HF etch or deionized water 
rinse represent too complicated or too unreliable 
postrelease assembly methods for commercial 
acceptance. At the University of Illinois (Urbana), the 
Micro Actuator, Sensors, and Systems Group headed 
by Dr. Chang Liu uses magnetic actuation to position 
a large array of hinged microstructures in parallel. 
A magnetic material, Permalloy, is electroplated 
and integrated into the hinged microstructures. 
The result may be improved manufacturability and 
stability of these delicate structures.
Friction in polysilicon joints is high because 
friction is proportional to the surface area (s2) and 
becomes dominant over inertial forces (s3) in the 
microdomain (see Volume III, Chapter 7). Such 
joints are not suitable for microrobotic applications. 
Although attempts have been made to incorporate 
polysilicon hinges in such applications,210 plastically 
deformable hinges make more sense for microrobot 
machinery involving rotation of rigid components. 
Noting that the external skeleton of insects incor-
porates hard cuticles connected by elastic hinges, 
Suzuki et al.146 fabricated rigid polysilicon plates 
(E = 140 GPa) connected by elastic polyimide hinges 
(E = 3 GPa) as shown in Figure 7.86. Holes in the 
polysilicon plates shorten the PSG etch time com-
pared with plates without holes. The plates without 
holes remain attached to the substrate, whereas the 
ones with holes are completely freed. Using electro-
static actuators, the structure shown in Figure 7.85 
can be made to flap like the wing of a butterfly. By 
FIGURE 7.86 Flexible polyimide hinge and polysilicon 
plate (butterfly wing). (From Kim, Y. W., and M. G. Allen. 
1991. Sixth international conference on solid-state sen-
sors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco: IEEE. 
With permission.143)

[Page 489]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   489
applying an AC voltage of 10 kHz, resonant vibra-
tion of such a flapping wing was observed.144
Hoffman et al.211 demonstrated aluminum plas-
tically deformable hinges on oxide movable thin 
plates. Oxide plates and Al hinges were etched free 
from a Si substrate by using XeF2, a vapor phase 
etchant exhibiting excellent selectivity of Si over Al 
and oxide. According to the authors, this process, 
because of its excellent CMOS compatibility, might 
open the way to designing and fabricating sophis-
ticated integrated CMOS-based sensors with rapid 
turnaround time (see also Chapter 3).
Milliscale Molded Polysilicon Structures
The manual assembly of fabricated microparts 
complicates assembly of tall 3D features in the 
hinged polysilicon approach we just described, 
which is similar to building a miniature boat in a 
bottle. Keller, while at the University of California, 
Berkeley, came up with an elegant alternative for 
building tall, high-aspect-ratio microstructures in a 
process that does not require postrelease assembly 
steps.97 The technique involves deep dry etching of 
trenches in a Si substrate, deposition of sacrificial 
and structural materials in those trenches, and 
demolding of the deposited structural materials 
by etching away the sacrificial materials. CVD 
processes can typically only deposit thin films 
(~1–2 µm) on flat surfaces. If, however, these surfaces 
are the  opposing faces of deep narrow trenches, 
the growing films will merge to form solid beams. 
In this fashion, high-aspect-ratio structures that 
would normally be associated with LIGA now also 
can be made of CVD polysilicon. The procedure 
is illustrated in Figure 7.87.97,212 The first step is to 
etch deep trenches into a silicon wafer. The depth 
of the trenches equals the height of the desired 
beams and is limited to about 100 µm with aspect 
FIGURE 7.87 Schematic illustration of HEXSIL process. The mold wafer may be part of an infinite loop. (Courtesy of 
Dr. C. Keller, MEMS Precision Instruments.)

[Page 490]
490   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
ratios of about 10 (e.g., a 10-µm-diameter hole with 
a depth of 100 µm). For trench etching, Keller uses 
a Cl2 plasma etch with the following approximate 
etching conditions: flow rates of 200 sccm for He 
and 180 sccm for Cl2, a working pressure of 425 
mTorr, a power setting of 400 W, and an electrode 
gap of 0.8 cm. The etch rate for Si in this mode 
equals 1 µm/min. Thermal oxide and CVD oxide 
act as masks with 1 µm of oxide needed for each 
20 µm of etch depth. Before the Cl2 etch, a short 
7-s SF6 pre-etch removes any remaining native oxide 
in the mask openings. During the chlorine etch, a 
white sidewall passivating layer must be controlled 
to maintain perfect vertical sidewalls. After every 
30 min of plasma etching, the wafers are submerged 
in a silicon isotropic etch long enough to remove 
the residue.213 Beyond 100 µm, severe undercutting 
occurs, and the trench cross-section becomes 
sufficiently ellipsoidal to prevent molded parts from 
being pulled out. Advances in dry cryogenic etching 
are continually improving attainable etch depths, 
trench profiles, and minimum trench diameter. 
We can expect continuous improvements in the 
tolerances of this novel technique. After plasma 
etching, an additional 1 µm of silicon is removed 
by an isotropic wet etch to obtain a smoother trench 
wall surface. Alternatively, to smooth sidewalls 
and bottom of the trenches, a thermal wet oxide is 
grown and etched away. The sacrificial oxide in step 
2 is made by CVD phosphosilicate glass (PSG) (at 
450°C, 140 Å/min), CVD low-temperature oxide 
(LTO at 450°C), or CVD polysilicon (580°C, 65 Å/
min). The latter is completely converted to SiO2 by 
wet thermal oxidation at 1100°C. The PSG needs 
an additional reflowing and densifying anneal at 
1000°C in nitrogen for 1 h. This results in an etching 
rate of the sacrificial layer of ~20 mm/min in 49% 
HF. The mold shown in Figure 7.87 displays three 
different trench widths and can be used to build 
integrated micromachines incorporating doped and 
undoped polysilicon parts, as well as metal parts. 
The remaining volume of the narrowest trench 
after  oxide deposition is filled completely with 
the first deposition of undoped polysilicon (Poly 
1) in step 3. The undoped poly will constitute the 
insulating regions in the micromachine. Undoped 
CVD polysilicon was formed in this case at 580°C, 
with a 100-sccm silane flow rate, and a 300-
mTorr reactor pressure, resulting in a deposition 
rate of 0.39 µm/h. The deposited film under these 
conditions is amorphous or very fine grained. 
Generally speaking, CVD polysilicon films conform 
well to the underlying topography on the wafer and 
show good step coverage. With trenches of an aspect 
ratio in excess of 10, some thinning of the film on 
the sidewalls occurs. Because the narrowest trenches 
are completely filled in by the first deposition, they 
cannot accept material from later depositions. The 
trenches of intermediate width are lined with  the 
first material and then completely filled in by 
the  second deposition. In the case illustrated, the 
second deposition (step 4) consists of in situ doped 
polysilicon and forms the resistive region in the 
micromachine under construction. To prevent 
diffusion of P from the doped poly deposited on top 
of the narrow undoped beams, a blanket etch in step 
5 is used to remove the doped surface layer before 
the anneal of the doped poly. The third deposition, 
in step 6 of the example case, consists of electroless 
nickel plating on polysilicon surfaces but not on 
oxide surfaces and results in the conducting parts of 
the micromachine. By depositing structural layers in 
order of increasing conductivity, as done here, regions 
of different conductivity can be separated by regions 
of narrow trenches containing only nonconducting 
material. Lapping and polishing in step 7 with a 
1-µm diamond abrasive in oil planarizes the top 
surface, readying it for HF etch release and mold 
ejection in step 8. Annealing of the polysilicon is 
required to relieve the stress before removing the 
parts from the wafer so they remain straight and flat. 
In step 8, the sacrificial oxide is dissolved in 49% 
HF. A surfactant such as Triton X100 is added to the 
etch solution to facilitate part ejection by reducing 
surface adhesion between the part and the mold. 
The parts are removed from the wafer, and the wafer 
may be returned to step 2 for another mold cycle. An 
example micromachine, resulting from the described 
process, is the thermally actuated tweezers shown in 
Figure 7.88. These HEXSIL tweezers measure 4 mm 
long, 2  mm wide, and 80 µm tall. The thermal 
expansion beam to actuate the tweezers consists of 
the in situ doped polysilicon; the insulating parts are 
made from the undoped polysilicon material. Nickel-

[Page 491]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   491
filled polysilicon beams are used for the current 
supply leads. It is possible to combine the HEXSIL 
process with classical polysilicon micromachining, 
as illustrated in Figure 7.89a, where HEXSIL forms 
a stiffening rib for a membrane filter fashioned by 
surface micromachining of a surface polysilicon layer. 
The surface polysilicon is deposited after HEXSIL. 
A critical need in HEXSIL technology is controlled 
mold ejection. Keller et al.213 have experimented with 
HEXSIL-produced bimorphs, making the structure 
spring up after release. Keller at MEMS Precision 
Instruments is exploiting HEXSIL technology 
commercially (http://www.memspi.com). Keller did 
his early HEXSIL work at the University of California, 
Berkeley and later incorporated the Bosch deep RIE 
process (see Chapter 3) to create tweezers structures 
similar to the one shown in Figure 7.88, which can 
now be fabricated in single-crystal silicon (see Figure 
7.89b). MEMS Precision Instruments today makes 
microtweezers with one of three processes: HEXSIL, 
deep RIE Bosch process, or Sandia’s SUMMiT-V 
process.
Thick Polysilicon
Applying classical LPCVD to obtain polysilicon 
deposition is a slow process. For example, a layer of 
10 µm typically requires a deposition time of 10 h. 
Consequently, most micromachined structures are 
based on layer thicknesses in the 2–5-µm range. 
Basing their process on dichlorosilane (SiH2Cl2) 
chemistry, Lange et al.98 developed a CVD process 
in a vertical epitaxy batch reactor with deposition 
rates as high as 0.55 µm/min at 1000°C. The process 
yields acceptable deposition times for thicknesses 
in the 10-µm range (20 min). The highly columnar 
polysilicon films are deposited on sacrificial SiO2 
layers and exhibit low internal tensile stress, mak-
ing them suitable for surface micromachining. The 
surface roughness comprises about 3% of the thick-
ness, which might preclude some applications.
Kahn et al.214 made mechanical property test 
structures from thick undoped and in situ B-doped 
FIGURE 7.88 SEM micrograph of HEXSIL tweezers: 4 mm 
long, 2 mm wide, and 80 µm tall. Lead wires for current 
supply are made from nickel-filled polysilicon beams; in 
situ phosphorus-doped polysilicon provides the resistor 
part for actuation. The width of the beam is 8 mm: 2 mm 
polysilicon, 4 mm nickel, and 2 mm polysilicon. (Courtesy 
of Dr. C. Keller, MEMS Precision Instruments.)
FIGURE 7.89 (a) SEM micrograph of surface-microma-
chined membrane filter with a stiffening rib (50 mm high). 
Original magnification 1000×. (b) Single-crystal microt-
weezers made by the Bosch deep RIE process. (Courtesy of 
Dr. C. Keller, MEMS Precision Instruments.)

[Page 492]
492   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
polysilicon films. The elastic modulus of the B-doped 
polysilicon films was determined as 150 ± 30 GPa. 
The residual stress of as-deposited undoped thick 
polysilicon was determined as 200 ± 10 MPa.
This “thick epi-polysilicon surface microma-
chining” has been used to fabricate accelerometers 
with a seismic mass thickness well beyond what 
regular micro machining can achieve (http://www. 
sensorscan.com/sensoren/sensoren/accelerometer_ 
1.htm).
Resists as Structural Elements and 
Molds in Surface Micromachining
Introduction Deep UV photoresists were covered 
in Chapter 1. In this section, we briefly reiterate 
some of the material covered there in the context 
of surface micromachining. Deep UV photoresists 
enable the molding of high-aspect-ratio microstruc-
tures in a wide variety of moldable materials, or they 
are used directly as structural elements in the case of 
permanent photoresists.
UV Depth Lithography
Polyimide Surface Structures Because of their 
transparency to exposing UV light, polyimide sur-
face structures can be made very high and exhibit 
LIGA-like high-aspect ratios. By using multiple coats 
of spun-on polyimide, thick suspended plates are 
possible. Moreover, composite polyimide plates can 
be made, depositing and patterning a metal film 
between polyimide coats. Polyimide surface micro-
structures are typically released from the substrate 
by selectively etching an aluminum sacrificial layer, 
although Cu and PSG (e.g., in the polyimide flap-
ping wing in Figure 7.86) have been used as well (see 
also Table 7.23).
Polyimides, because they are easily deformed, 
usually do not qualify as mechanical members but 
have been used, for example, in plastically deform-
able hinges (see Figure 7.86).144,211 An early result in 
polyimide surface micromachining was obtained 
at SRI International, where polyimide pillars (spac-
ers) about 100 µm in height were used to separate 
a Si wafer, which was equipped with a field emitter 
array, from the display glass plate of a field emission 
flat panel display.215 The concept of a field emission 
display is illustrated in Figure 7.90a. The flat panel 
display and an SEM picture of the pillars are shown 
in Figure 7.90b. The field-emitter tip arrays are posi-
tioned between these supporting polyimide posts. 
The Probimide 348 FC formulation of Ciba-Geigy 
was used. This viscous precursor formulation (48% 
by weight of a polyamic ester, a surfactant for wet-
ting, and a sensitizer) with a 3500 cs viscosity was 
applied to the Si substrate and formed into a film of a 
125-µm thickness by spinning. A 30- to 40-min pre-
bake at about 100°C removed the organic solvents 
from the precursor. The mask with the pillar pattern 
was then aligned to the wafer coated with the precur-
sor and subjected to about 20 min of UV radiation. 
After driving off moisture by another baking opera-
tion, the coating, still warm, was spray developed 
(QZ 3301 from Ciba-Geigy), revealing the desired 
spacer matrix. By baking the polyimide at 100°C 
in a high vacuum (10–9 Torr), the pillars shrunk to 
about 100 µm, whereas the polyimide became more 
dense and exhibited greater structural integrity.
Frazier et al.216 obtained a height-to-width 
aspect ratio of about 7 with polyimide structures. 
Ultraviolet was used to produce structures with 
heights in the range of 30–50 µm. At greater heights, 
the verticality of the sidewalls became relatively 
poor. Spun-on thickness in excess of 60 µm in a 
single coat was obtained for both Ciba-Geigy and 
Dupont commercial UV-exposable, negative-tone 
polyimides. Using a G-line mask aligner, exposure 
energy of 350 mJ/cm2 was sufficient to develop a 
pattern with the Ciba-Geigy QZ 3301 developer. 
Allen and his team combined polyimide insert 
molds with electrodeposition to make a wide vari-
ety of metal structures.217
Other Resists Used for UV Deep Lithography Surface 
Micromachining Besides 
polyimides, 
research 
on Novolak-type resists also is leading to higher 
3D features. Lochel et al.206 use Novolak, positive 
tone resists of high viscosity (e.g., AZ 4000 series, 
Hoechst). They deposit, in multiple-coating process, 
layers up to 200 µm thick in a specially designed 
spin coater that incorporates a corotating cover. The 
subsequent deep UV lithography yields patterns 
with aspect ratios up to 10, steep edges (more than 
88°), and a minimum feature size down to 3 µm. 
By combining this resist technology with sacrificial 

[Page 493]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   493
layers and electroplating, a wide variety of 3D micro-
structures result.
Along the same line, researchers at IBM experi-
mented with Epon SU-8 (Shell Chemical), an epoxy-
based, onium-sensitized, UV transparent negative 
photoresist used to produce high-aspect-ratio (>10:1) 
features and straight sidewalled images in thick film 
(>200 µm) using standard lithography.218,219 SU-8 
imaged films were used as stencils to plate Permalloy 
for magnetic motors.218
Patterns generated with these thick resist tech-
nologies should be compared with LIGA-generated 
patterns, not only in terms of aspect ratio but also in 
terms of sidewall roughness and sidewall run-out. 
Such a comparison will determine which surface 
machining technique to use for the job.
Porous Polysilicon
In Chapter 4, we discussed the transformation of 
single-crystal Si into a porous material with poros-
ity and pore sizes determined by the current den-
sity, type, and concentration of the dopant, and the 
hydrofluoric acid concentration. A transition from 
pore formation to electropolishing is reached by 
increasing the current density and/or by decreas-
ing the hydrofluoric acid concentration.101,102 Porous 
silicon can also be formed under similar condi-
tions from LPCVD polysilicon.103 In this case, pores 
roughly follow the grain boundaries of the polysili-
con. Figure 7.91 illustrates the masking and process 
sequence to prepare a wafer to make thin layers 
of porous Si between two insulating layers of low 
FIGURE 7.90 Polyimide structural elements. (a) Principle of a field emission display. (b) Micro-machined flat panel 
display. Number 39 represents one of the spacer pillars in the matrix of polyimide pillars (100 mm high). The spacer array 
separates the emitter plate from the front display plate. (c) SEM of the spacer matrix. (Courtesy of Dr. I. Brodie.) The 
height of the pillars is similar to what can be accomplished with LIGA. Because only a simple UV exposure was used, this 
polyimide is referred to as poor man’s LIGA process, or pseudo-LIGA. (From I. Brodie et al., US Patent 4,923,421, 1990; 
and Brodie, I., H. R. Gurnick, C. E. Holland, and H. A. Moessner. 1990. Method for providing polyimide spacers in a field 
emission panel display.215)

[Page 494]
494   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
stress silicon nitride.220 The wafer, after the process 
steps outlined in Figure 7.91, is put in a Teflon test 
fixture, protecting the back from HF attack. An elec-
trical contact is established on the back of the wafer, 
and a potential is applied with respect to a plati-
num-wire counter electrode immersed in the same 
HF solution. Electrolytes consisting of 5–49 wt% HF 
and current densities from 0.1–50 A cm–2 are used. 
The advance of a pore-etching front, growing paral-
lel to the wafer surface, may be monitored using a 
line-width measurement tool. The highest observed 
rate of porous-silicon formation is 15 µm min–1 
(in 25 wt% HF). In the electropolishing regime, at 
the highest currents, the etch rate is diffusion lim-
ited, but the reaction is controlled by surface reac-
tion kinetics in the porous Si growth regime.
By changing the conditions from pore forma-
tion to electropolishing and back to porous Si, an 
enclosed chamber may be formed with porous poly-
silicon walls (plugs) and “floor and ceiling” silicon 
nitride layers. Sealing of the cavities by clogging the 
microporous polysilicon was attempted by room 
temperature oxidation in air and in an H2O2 solu-
tion. Leakage through the porous plug persisted 
after those room temperature oxidation treatments, 
but with a Ag deposition from a 400-mM AgNO3 
solution and subsequent atmospheric tarnishing 
(48 h, Ag2S) the chambers appeared to be sealed, as 
determined from the lack of penetration by metha-
nol. This technology might open up possibilities 
for filling cavities with liquids and gases under low-
temperature conditions. The chamber provided with 
a porous plug might also make a suitable on-chip 
electrochemical reference electrode with an electro-
lyte reservoir.
Hydrofluoric acid can penetrate thin layers of 
polysilicon either at foreign particle inclusion sites or 
at other critical film defects, such as grain boundar-
ies (see above). This way, the HF can etch underlying 
oxide layers, creating, for example, circular regions of 
freestanding polysilicon, so-called blisters. The poly-
silicon permeability associated with blistering of 
polysilicon films has been applied successfully by 
Judy et al.221,222 to produce thin-shelled hollow beam 
electrostatic resonators from thin polysilicon films 
deposited onto PSG. The possible advantage of 
using these hollowed structures is to obtain a higher 
resonator quality factor Q. The devices were made in 
such a way that the  0.3-µm-thick undoped polysili-
con completely encased a PSG core. After annealing, 
the structures were placed in HF, which penetrated 
the polysilicon shell and dissolved away the PSG, 
eliminating the need for etch windows. It was not 
possible to discern the pathways through the poly-
silicon using TEM.
Lebouitz et al.223 applied permeable polysilicon 
etch-access windows to increase the speed of cre-
ating microshells for packaging surface-microma-
chined components. After etching the PSG through 
the many permeable Si windows, the shell is sealed 
with 0.8 µm of low-stress LPCVD nitride.
Porous Si can be used very effectively as a sac-
rificial layer both in polysilicon surface microma-
chining and in SOI micromachining (see Table 
7.23).139 The high surface area of the porous Si 
results in rapid etching in KOH at room tempera-
ture. The porous layer can be formed directly under 
a deposited layer or under the epilayer in SOI surface 
micromachining.
Silicon is not the only material that can be con-
verted into a porous sponge-like material. Most 
semiconductor materials can be modified this way, 
and in Volume III, Chapter 5 on selected MEMS 
and NEMS materials we discuss micromachining of 
FIGURE 7.91 Masking and process sequence preparing a 
wafer for laterally grown porous polysilicon. (From Field, 
L. 1987. EECS/ERL Res. summary. University of California, 
Berkeley. With permission.220)

[Page 495]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   495
high-aspect-ratio structures in porous anodic alu-
minum oxide. The latter enables a class of MEMS 
applications such as high-temperature gas microsen-
sors, vacuum microelectronics, RF-MEMS, nozzles, 
filters, membranes, and so on.224
Comparison of Bulk Micromachining 
with Surface Micromachining
Surface and bulk micromachining have many pro-
cesses in common. Both techniques rely heavily 
on photolithography; oxidation; diffusion and ion 
implantation; LPCVD and PECVD for oxide, nitride, 
and oxynitride; plasma etching; use of polysilicon; 
and metallizations with sputtered, evaporated, and 
plated Al, Au, Ti, Pt, Cr, and Ni. Where the tech-
niques differ is in the use of anisotropic etchants, 
anodic and fusion bonding, (100) versus (110) start-
ing material, p+ etch stops, double-sided processing 
and electrochemical etching in bulk micromachin-
ing, and the use of dry etching in patterning and 
isotropic etchants in release steps for surface micro-
machines. Combinations of substrate and surface 
micromachining also frequently appear. The use 
of polysilicon avoids many challenging processing 
difficulties associated with bulk micromachining 
and offers new degrees of freedom for the design 
of integrated sensors and actuators. Design free-
dom includes many more possible shapes in the 
x,y plane and the ease of integration of several sen-
sors on one die (e.g., a two-axis accelerometer). The 
technology combined with sacrificial layers also 
allows the nearly indispensable further advantage 
of in situ assembly of the tiny mechanical structures 
because the structures are preassembled as a conse-
quence of the fabrication sequence. Another advan-
tage focuses on thermal and electrical isolation of 
polysilicon elements. Polycrystalline piezoresistors 
can be deposited and patterned on membranes of 
other materials, for example, on a SiO2 dielectric. 
This configuration is particularly useful for high-
temperature applications. The p-n junctions act as 
the only electrical insulation in the single-crystal 
sensors, resulting in high leakage currents at high 
temperatures, whereas current leakage for the poly-
silicon/SiO2 structure virtually does not exist. The 
limits of surface micromachining are striking. CVD 
silicon usually caps at layers no thicker than 1–2 µm 
because of residual stress in the films and the slow 
deposition process (thick polysilicon needs further 
investigation).* A combination of a large variety of 
layers may produce complicated structures, but each 
layer is still limited in thickness. Also, the wet chem-
istry needed to remove the interleaved layers may 
require many hours of etching (except when using 
the porous Si option discussed above), and even 
then stiction often results.
The structures made from polycrystal silicon 
exhibit inferior electronic and slightly inferior 
mechanical properties compared with single-crystal 
silicon. For example, polysilicon has a lower piezore-
sistive coefficient (resulting in a gauge factor of 30 vs. 
90 for single-crystal Si), and it has a somewhat lower 
mechanical fracture strength. Polysilicon also warps 
because of the difference of thermal expansion coef-
ficient between polysilicon and single-crystal sili-
con. Its mechanical properties strongly depend on 
processing procedures and parameters.
Table 7.25 introduces a comparison of surface 
micromachining with wet bulk micromachining. 
The status depicted reflects the mid-1990s and only 
includes polysilicon surface micromachining. As 
discussed, SOI micromachining, thick polysilicon, 
hinged polysilicon, polyimide, and millimeter-
molded polysilicon structures have dramatically 
expanded the application bandwidth of surface 
micromachining. In Chapter 10 on replication 
techniques-LIGA, we will see how x-ray lithography 
further expands the z-direction for new surface-
micromachined devices with unprecedented aspect 
ratios and extremely low surface roughness. In Table 
7.26 we compare physical properties of single-crystal 
silicon with those of polysilicon.
Although polysilicon can be an excellent mechan-
ical material, it remains a poor electronic material. 
Reproducible mechanical characteristics are diffi-
cult and complex to consistently realize. Fortunately, 
SOI surface micromachining and other newly emerg-
ing surface micromachining techniques can alleviate 
many of the problems.229
* As a direct consequence, the inertial mass in a surface-microma-
chined accelerometer, such as the ADXL05 from Analog Devices, is 
only 0.3 µg, and the corresponding noise, dominated by Brownian 
noise, is 500 µg/√Hz. By contrast, the mass for a bulk-micromachined 
accelerometer can easily be made 100 µg.

[Page 496]
496   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Examples
Example 7.9: Analog Devices Accelerometer
Both Robert Bosch GmbH (Stuttgart, Germany) 
and Analog Devices (Norwood, MA) offer sur-
face-micromachined accelerometers based  on 
lateral resonators. We will only review the 
Analog Devices ADXL accelerometer product 
family here. The ADXL-50 constituted the first 
commercially available surface-micromachined 
MEMS 
structures. 
Today, 
surface-microma-
chined accelerometers are incorporated in Ford 
and General Motors cars, among others, as well 
as inside joysticks for computer games, robots, 
watches, and shoes.
TABLE 7.26 Comparison of Materials Properties of Si Single Crystal with Crystalline Polysilicon
Material Property
Single-Crystal Si (SCS)
Polysilicon
Thermal conductivity (W/cm°K)
1.57
Strong function of the grain structure of the film; 0.30–0.35 
(for fine grains and double that for larger grains)
Thermal expansion (10−6/°K)
 2.33
2–2.8
Specific heat (cal/g°K)
0.169
0.169 
Piezoresistive coefficients
n-Si (π11 = −102.2)
p-Si (π44 = +138.1)
e.g., gauge factor of 90 
e.g., gauge factor of 30
(>50 with laser recrystallization)
Refractive index
4.1 at 600 nm
Mobility (cm2/V/s)
Holes: 600
Electrons: 1500
Maximum for electrons: 30
Density (cm−3)
2.32
2.32 
Fracture strength (GPa)
6
0.8–2.84 (Undoped polysilicon)
Dielectric constant
11.9
Sharp maxima of 4.2 and 3.4 eV at 295 and 365 nm, respectively
Residual stress
None
Depends on structure as deposited films are compressive
Temperature resistivity 
coefficient (°C−1)TCR
0.0017 (p-type)
0.0012 nonlinear, + or − through selective doping, increases 
with decreasing doping level can be made 0!
Poisson ratio
0.262 max for (111)
0.23
Young’s modulus (1011 N/m2)
1.90 (111)
1.61
Resistivity at room temperature 
(ohm.cm)
Depends on doping
Strong function of the grain structure of the film. Plateaus at 
4 10−4 above 1 1021 cm−3 P (always higher than for SCS)
Source: Based on Lin, L. 1993. Selective encapsulations of MEMS: micro channels, needles, resonators, and electromechanical filters. PhD 
thesis. University of California, Berkeley;225 Adams, A. C. 1988. VLSI technology. Ed. S. M. Sze. New York: McGraw-Hill;30 Kamins, T. 
1988. Polycrystalline silicon for integrated circuits. Boston: Kluwer;78 and Heuberger, A. 1989. Mikromechanik. Heidelberg: Springer 
Verlag.227 (See also Volume I, Table 4.15.)
TABLE 7.25 Comparison of Bulk Micromachining with Surface Micromachining
Bulk Micromachining
Surface Micromachining
Large features with substantial mass and thickness
Small features with low thickness and mass
Uses both sides of the wafer
Multiple deposition and etching required to build up structures
Vertical dimensions: one or more wafer thicknesses
Vertical dimensions are limited to the thickness of the deposited 
layers (~2 µm) leading to compliant suspended structures with 
the tendency to stick to the support
Generally involves laminating Si wafer to Si or glass
Surface micromachined device has its built-in support and is 
more cost effective
Piezoresistive or capacitive sensing
Capacitive and resonant sensing mechanisms
Wafers may be fragile near the end of the production
Cleanliness critical near end of process
Sawing, packaging, testing is difficult
Sawing, packaging, testing is difficult
Some mature products and producers
No mature products or producers
Not very compatible with IC technology
Natural but complicated integration with circuitry; integration is 
often required due to the tiny capacitive signals
Source: Adapted from Jerman, H. 1994. Hard copies of viewgraphs presented in Banff, Canada.90 

[Page 497]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   497
To facilitate integration of their surface-mi-
cromachined accelerometers with on-board elec-
tronics, Analog Devices opted for a mature 4-μm 
BiCMOS process.119 BiCMOS is a manufacturing 
process for semiconductor devices that com-
bines bipolar and CMOS to give the best balance 
between available output current and power 
consumption. Figure 7.92 presents a photograph 
of the finished accelerometer with on-chip excita-
tion, self-test, and signal conditioning circuitry.
The suspended comb-like H-shaped structure 
in the center of the die is the sensitive element, 
and its primary axis of sensitivity lies in the plane 
of the die (x-y plane). In bulk micromachining, 
the sense axis is more often orthogonal to the 
plane of the die (z-axis). The polysilicon-sensing 
element of the ADLAX-50 only occupies 5% of 
the total die area and consists of three sets of 
2-μm-thick polysilicon finger-like electrodes 
(Figure 7.93).
Two sets are anchored to the substrate, and 
a third set is suspended about 1 μm above the 
surface by means of two folded polysilicon 
beams acting as suspension springs. The fingers 
of the movable shuttle mass are interlaced with 
the fingers of the two fixed sets. The whole 
chip measures 500 × 625 μm and operates as an 
automotive airbag deployment sensor. The mea-
surement accuracy is 5% over the ±50-g range. 
Deceleration in the axis of sensitivity exerts a 
force on the central mass that, in turn, displaces 
the interleaved capacitor plates, causing a frac-
tional change in capacitance. The overall capaci-
tance is small, typically on the order of 100 fF, 
and for the ADXL-05 (rated at ±5 g), with an iner-
tial mass of 0.3 μg only, the capacitance change 
is as small as 100 aF.197 These small capacitance 
changes necessitate on-chip integrated electron-
ics to reduce the impact of parasitic sources. In 
operation, the ADXL family has a force-balance 
electronic control loop to prevent the mass 
from macroscopic movements, greatly improv-
ing output linearity because the center element 
never moves by more than a few nanometers. 
Applying a large-amplitude, low-frequency volt-
age, below the natural frequency of the sensor, 
allows one to compensate for accelerometer 
plate movement by external acceleration. At 
the same time, the sensing excitation frequency 
(1 MHz) is much higher than the resonant fre-
quency, so that it does not produce an actuation 
force on the capacitor plates. As long as sense 
and actuation signals do not interfere, sense and 
actuation plates may be the same. Straight flex-
ures were used for the layout of the lateral reso-
nator shuttle mass (see also Figure 7.76a).
In the sensor design, n+ underpasses con-
nect the sensor area to the electronic circuitry, 
replacing the usual heat sensitive aluminum 
connect lines. Most of the sensor processing is 
FIGURE 7.92 Analog Devices’ ADXL-50 accelerometer with 
a surface-micromachined capacitive sensor (center), on-chip 
excitation, self-test, and signal-conditioning circuitry. (From 
Core, T. A., W. K. Tsang, and S. J. Sherman. 1993. Fabrication 
technology for an integrated surface-micromachined 
sensor. Solid State Technol 36:39–47. With permission.119)
FIGURE 7.93 Illustration of the basic mechanical structure 
of Analog Devices’ ADXL family of surface-micromachined 
accelerometers. A comb-like plate suspended from springs 
forms the inertial mass. Displacements of the mass are 
measured capacitively with respect to two sets of station-
ary finger-like electrodes. (Based on Maluf, N. 2000. An 
introduction to microelectromechanical systems engineer-
ing. Boston: Artech House.3)

[Page 498]
498   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
inserted into the BiCMOS process right after 
the borophosphosilicate glass (BPSG) planariza-
tion. After planarization, a designated sensor 
region or moat is cleared in the center of the 
die (Figure  7.94a). A thin oxide is then depos-
ited to passivate the n+ underpass connects, fol-
lowed by a thin, low-pressure, vapor-deposited 
nitride to act as an etch stop (buffer layer) for 
the final polysilicon release etch (Figure 7.94b). 
The spacer or sacrificial oxide used is a 1.6-μm 
densified low-temperature oxide (LTO) depos-
ited over the whole die (Figure 7.94c). In a first 
timed etch, small depressions that will form 
bumps or dimples on the underside of the poly-
silicon sensor are created in the LTO layer. These 
will limit stiction in case the sensor comes in con-
tact with the substrate. A subsequent etch cuts 
anchors into the spacer layer to provide regions 
of electrical and mechanical contact (Figure 
7.94c). The 2-μm-thick sensor polysilicon is then 
deposited, implanted, annealed, and patterned 
(Figure 7.95a). The relatively deep junctions of 
the BiCMOS process permit the polysilicon ther-
mal anneal and brief dielectric densifications 
without resulting in degradation of the elec-
tronic functions. Next is the IC metallization, 
which starts with the removal of the sacrificial 
spacer oxide from the circuit area along with the 
LPCVD nitride and LTO layer. A low-temperature 
oxide is deposited on the polysilicon sensor part, 
and contact openings appear in the IC part of 
the die where platinum is deposited to form a 
platinum silicide (Figure 7.95b). The trimmable 
thin-film material, TiW barrier metal, and Al/Cu 
interconnect metal are sputtered on and pat-
terned in the IC area. The circuit area is then pas-
sivated in two separate deposition steps. First, 
plasma oxide is deposited and patterned (Figure 
7.95c), followed by a plasma nitride (Figure 7.96a) 
to form a seal with the earlier deposited LPCVD 
nitride. The nitride acts as an HF barrier in the 
subsequent long etch release. The plasma oxide 
left on the sensor acts as an etch stop for the 
removal of the plasma nitride. Subsequently, the 
sensor area is prepared for the final release etch. 
FIGURE 7.95 Polysilicon deposition and IC metalliza-
tion. (a) Cross-sectional view after polysilicon deposition, 
implant, anneal, and patterning. (b) Sensor area after 
removal of dielectrics from circuit area, contact mask, 
and Pt silicide. (c) Metallization scheme and plasma oxide 
passivation and patterning. (From Core, T. A., W. K. Tsang, 
and S. J. Sherman. 1993. Fabrication technology for an 
integrated surface-micromachined sensor. Solid State 
Technol 36:39–47. With permission.119)
FIGURE 7.94 Preparation of IC chip for polysilicon. 
(a) Sensor area post-BPSG planarization and moat mask. 
(b) Blanket deposition of thin oxide and thin nitride layer. 
(c) Bumps and anchors made in LTO spacer layer. (From 
Core, T. A., W. K. Tsang, and S. J. Sherman. 1993. Fabrication 
technology for an integrated surface- micromachined sen-
sor. Solid State Technol 36:39–47. With permission.119)

[Page 499]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   499
The undensified dielectrics are removed from 
the sensor, and the final protective resist mask is 
applied. The photoresist protects the circuit area 
from the long-term buffered oxide etch (Figure 
7.96b). The final device cross-section is shown in 
Figure 7.96c.
Example 7.10: TI Micromirrors
In 1987 the first digital micromirror device 
(DMD™) was developed at TI by Dr. Larry 
Hornbeck [US Patent 4,615,595 (October 7, 
1986)]. A typical DMD consists of a 2D array of 
optical switching elements (pixels) on a silicon 
substrate, as shown in Figure 7.97.
Two pixels are schematically illustrated in 
Figure 7.98 together with the underlying Si chip 
and circuitry. Each pixel is made up of a reflective 
aluminum micromirror supported from a central 
post. The central mirror post at the back of the 
mirror is mounted on a lower aluminum metal 
platform—the yoke. The yoke is suspended 
above the silicon substrate by thin compliant 
L-shaped hinges (made from a proprietary Al 
alloy) anchored to the underlying substrate by 
two stationary posts. The different components 
of an individual micromirror are illustrated in 
Figure 7.99. Two bias electrodes tilt the mirror 
either +10° or –10° by applying 24 V between 
one electrode or the other and the yoke. Off-
axis illumination of the Al mirror reflects into 
the projection lens only when the micromirror 
is in its +10° state, producing a bright appear-
ance or ON state. In the flat position and in the 
–10° state the pixel appears dark. In the fully 
deflected position, the yoke touches a landing 
FIGURE 7.96 Prerelease preparation and release. 
(a) Postplasma nitride passivation and patterning. 
(b) Photoresist protection of the IC. (c) Freestanding, 
released polysilicon beam. (From Core, T. A., W. K. Tsang, 
and S. J. Sherman. 1993. Fabrication technology for an 
integrated surface-micromachined sensor. Solid State 
Technol 36:39–47. With permission.119)
FIGURE 7.97 Texas Instruments DMD pixel array. One 
pixel has been removed to show the silicon chip below the 
reflective aluminum mirrors.
FIGURE 7.98 Schematic of two pixels in a Texas 
Instruments of a DMD. The mirrors are made transparent 
for clarity of the drawing. The +10° mirror is in the ON 
position, and the −10° is in the OFF position.

[Page 500]
500   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
site with its landing tips, and because the land-
ing site is biased at the same voltage, electrical 
shorting is prevented. Once the applied voltage 
is removed, the springy aluminum alloy hinges 
restore the micromirror to its initial position. A 
standard DMD microchip contains more than 
442,000 switchable mirrors on a surface 5/8 in. 
wide. Mirrors are switched according to memory 
impulses stored in static-random-access memory 
(SRAM) cells beneath the tiny array, with mir-
rors tilting plus or minus 10º to reflect light 
into or away from an imaging lens. The mirrors 
can be independently cycled at 100,000 flips/s. 
Grays can be achieved by multiple mirrors or by 
flipping the mirror quickly between black and 
white states. Colors can be generated by having 
the incident light shine through a rotating disk 
divided into three colored segments: red, blue, 
and green. A separate image is generated for 
each color, timed to appear as the appropriate 
segment covers the light source. Printing and 
display technology can now enjoy the advan-
tage of digital fidelity and digital stability.
In Figure 7.99, one single pixel is illustrated 
with its various components.197
FIGURE 7.100 Fabrication steps of the Texas Instruments DMD. Steps (a) through (f) are explained in the text. (Based on 
Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechanical systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.3)
FIGURE 7.99 Illustration of the various components of a 
single DMD pixel. The basic structure consists of a bot-
tom aluminum layer containing two electrodes, a middle 
aluminum layer containing a yoke suspended by two 
torsional hinges, and a top reflective aluminum mirror. An 
applied electrostatic voltage on a bias electrode deflects 
the yoke and the mirror toward that electrode. A pixel 
measures approximately 17 µm on a side. (Adapted from 
Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechani-
cal systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.3)

[Page 501]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   501
The surface micromachining process to fabri-
cate DMDs on wafers incorporating CMOS elec-
tronic address and control circuitry is illustrated 
in Figure 7.100. Because of the underlying active 
circuitry and the presence of Al metal for con-
nectors and MEMS structures, all micromachin-
ing process steps are carried out at temperatures 
less than 400ºC. After completing the CMOS cir-
cuitry, a thick oxide is deposited over the whole 
Si wafer and is chemomechanically polished to 
provide a flat surface to start building the mir-
ror array. A sputter-deposited Al layer is pat-
terned to provide bias and address electrodes, 
landing pads, and electrical interconnects to the 
underlying electronics. Hardened photoresist is 
used as the sacrificial material (Figure 7.100a). 
A proprietary Al alloy is sputter deposited to 
form the hinges for the mirror. It is the nature of 
this aluminum alloy that secures the mechanical 
integrity of the mirror actuation. Subsequently, 
the torsion hinge regions are protected by a 
patterned thin PECVD-deposited silicon diox-
ide (Figure 7.100b). In the next step, a thicker 
coat of another proprietary aluminum alloy is 
deposited to form the yoke structure; this new 
coat of Al buries the thin oxide hinge mask. A 
second PECVD oxide mask is deposited over 
this second level of Al metal and patterned in 
the shape of the yoke and anchor posts (Figure 
7.100c). In a dry etch step, the exposed alumi-
num areas are removed down to the organic sac-
rificial resist except where the oxide hinge mask 
remains. In those regions, only the thick yoke 
metal is removed, stopping on the SiO2 mask 
and so preserving the underlying hinge struc-
ture (Figure 7.100d). Both thin layers of PECVD 
oxide mask are stripped before a second layer 
of sacrificial resists is deposited, UV-hardened, 
and patterned. A third aluminum alloy is sput-
ter deposited and defines the mirror and the 
central mirror post. Again a thin layer of PECVD 
silicon dioxide is deposited and patterned to 
define the mirror (Figure 7.100e). An oxygen 
plasma etch removes both sacrificial layers and 
releases the micromirrors (Figure 7.100f). Finally 
after release a special passivation step depos-
its a thin antistiction layer to prevent adhesion 
between the yoke tips and the landing pads. 
Because the weight of the micromirrors is insig-
nificant, the DMD micromirrors can withstand 
1500-G mechanical shocks. Optimization of the 
hinge metal alloy and fabrication processes have 
resulted in a mean time between failure of more 
than 100,000 h. Invented by Larry Hornbeck at 
TI, DMD is the key component in more than 17 
projector brands and brought the first digital 
cinema to Star Wars and Toy Story II. A compet-
ing technology, the actuated mirror array (AMA; 
now Daewoo’s TMA) invented by Gregory Um, 
is also a MEMS technology. Unlike DMD, TMA is 
built with piezo materials, and for high resolu-
tion its large array size and consequent cost still 
pose “sticky issues,” but it achieves brightness 
15% higher than any other projector. DMDs are 
also used in place of masks to map the human 
genome. At the University of Wisconsin, arrays 
for “gene expression analysis,” usually produced 
with lithographic masks like displays, are being 
replaced with the same DMD used for projec-
tion display to make “virtual masks” containing 
nearly half a million features.
For his amazing piece of engineering, TI’s Larry 
J. Hornbeck received the first Emmy Award ever 
bestowed for a projection display technology.
Questions
 7.1: What is the mean free path (MFP)? How can 
you increase the MFP in a vacuum cham-
ber? For metal deposition in an evaporation 
system, compare the distance between tar-
get and evaporation source with the working 
MFP. Which one has the smaller dimension? 
1 atmosphere pressure = … mm Hg = … torr. 
What are the physical dimensions of impinge-
ment rate?
 7.2: If we want to deposit a metal film on a sub-
strate by resistance heated evaporation (as 
opposed to E-beam), what kind of metals are 
preferred? How is the thickness of a deposited 
thin film measured during evaporation?
 7.3: Why is sputter deposition so much slower 
than evaporation deposition? Make a detailed 
comparison of the two deposition methods.
 7.4: Develop the principal equation for the mate-
rial flux to a substrate in a CVD process, and 
indicate how one moves from a mass trans-
port limited to reaction-rate limited regime. 

[Page 502]
502   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Explain why, in one case, wafers can be stacked 
close and vertically, while in the other a hori-
zontal stacking is preferred.
 7.5: Describe step coverage in CVD processes. 
Explain how gas pressure and surface tem-
perature may influence the different coverage 
profiles.
 7.6: Compare sputter deposition with evaporation 
for a simple metal such as Ag. Compare the 
two techniques for as many different param-
eters as you remember. Give examples where 
you would use one technique over the other.
 7.7: CVD: (a) Show different types of step coverage 
and explain the most important parameters 
influencing each. (b) Describe the difference 
between PECVD and LPCVD.
 7.8: What are the characteristics of electron beam 
heated evaporation compared to resistance 
heated evaporation? Mark correct answers 
with an X.
  
( ) It is more complex. 
  
( ) It is very versatile. 
  
( )  It only works under lower temperatures. 
  
( )  Everything a resistance heated evaporator 
can deposit can also be accommodated by 
electron beam heated evaporation. 
  
( )  A magnetic field can be used to increase 
the temperature. 
  
( )  It is not possible to provide a large evapo-
rant surface area in electron beam heated 
evaporation. 
  
( )  The adhesion between an evaporant and 
a substrate is accomplished by local reac-
tions (sticking). Titanium and chromium 
are often used as a “glue” to improve the 
adhesion between an evaporant and a 
substrate. 
  
( )  When the partial pressure of an evaporant 
vapor exceeds its equilibrium vapor pres-
sure, it will condense. 
  
( )  When a system is under equilibrium vapor 
pressure, the net transfer rate of material 
from one state to the other state is equal 
to 1.
  
( )  The cosine law is the underlying principle 
that a Kundsen cell can deposit a perfectly 
uniform coating inside a spherical glass jar.
 7.9: Design at least three micromachines enabling 
the testing of thin film mechanical properties.
 7.10: Detail several processes to create vacuum 
shells in a solid. 
 7.11: Consider a MEMS-based condenser acoustic 
transducer as shown in the figure below. The 
diaphragm is made of silicon nitride, and the 
back plate is perforated. A stress gauge was 
used to measure the stress in the silicon nitride 
and was found to be 1.5 × 108N/m2.
 
P+
Silicon nitride
Total of 2500 square holes
1000 mm =
50 holes +51 spaces
10 mm
Tickness of air gap = 5 mm
Tickness of diaphragm = 5 mm
Density of Si3N4 = 3 ×103kg/m3
  
(a)  Write the differential equation governing 
the dynamic behavior of the movable dia-
phragm.
  
(b)  Solve the differential equation under the 3 
cases of overdamped, underdamped, and 
critically damped conditions.
  
(c)  Calculate the mass of the diaphragm, 
the small signal capacitance, and the air-
 streaming resistance as per the layout 
shown if the device is to be operated in air 
and water.
  
(d)  Calculate the cut-off frequency for the 
overdamped case in air and in water.
 7.12: Discuss the advantages/disadvantages of using 
surface vs. bulk micromachining.
 7.13: Define the following terms in 3–4 lines with 
examples where applicable:
  
LPCVD
  
PECVD
  
DRIE
  
Difference between RIE and plasma etching
  
LIGA process
  
SCREAM process

[Page 503]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   503
  
Silicon fusion bonding
  
Dissolved wafer process 
 7.14: Describe 5 methods you could implement to 
prevent stiction between surface microma-
chined components.
 7.15: Design a comb drive for the MUMPs process.
  
(a)  Show the mask layouts (top view) of the 
relevant layers.
  
(b)  Calculate the maximum force, maximum 
displacement, and resonance frequency that 
you expect to achieve with this design.
  
Make sure the following constraints are 
satisfied:
• The total number of comb fingers should be 
less than 80.
• The device fits into a 200 × 200 µm2 square 
area.
• The maximum applied voltage is 30V.
• The device satisfies all design rules for 
MUMPs processing.
 7.16:  For pressure sensing diaphragms of the order 
of 100 µm square, why is it impractical to use 
capacitance to measure deflection?
 7.17:  List five methods you could use to release stress 
in a poly-Si comb resonator and describe the 
relative merits of each approach.
 7.18:  Take a look at the Sandia website at http://
mems.sandia.gov/scripts/images.asp. Many of 
the surface micromachined gears have tiny 
holes in their surfaces. Why are these there?
References
 
1. Brodie, I., and J. J. Muray. 1982. The physics of microfabrica-
tion. New York: Plenum Press.
 
2. Murarka, S. P. 1988. VLSI technology. Ed. S. M. Sze. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
 
3. Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechanical 
systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.
 
4. ERL. 1985. SAMPLE version 1.6a user’s guide. Berkeley, 
CA: Electronics Research Laboratory (ERL), University of 
California, Berkeley.
 
5. Fichtner, W. 1988. VLSI technology. Ed. S. M. Sze. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
 
6. Vossen, J. L., and W. Kern, eds. 1978. Thin film processes. 
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
 
7. Maissel, L. I., and R. Glang, eds. 1970. Handbook of thin film 
technology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 
8. Kinoshita, K., and M. J. Madou. 1984. Electrochemical 
measurement on Pt, Ir, and Ti oxides as pH probes. J 
Electrochem Soc 131:1089–94.
 
9. Studt, T. 1992. Better living through sputtering. Res Dev 54.
 10. Comello, V. 1992. Tough coatings are a cinch with new 
PVD method. Res Dev January:59–60.
 11. Editorial. 1994. Brochure B-9870. Zulte, Belgium: Innovative 
Sputtering Technology (IST).
 12. Honer, K. A., and G. T. A. Kovacs. 2000. Solid-state sensor 
and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 13. Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. Mikrosystemtechnik fur 
Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: VCH Publishers.
 14. Dutta, B., X. D. Wu, A. Inam, and T. Venkatesan. 1989. 
Pulsed laser deposition: a viable process for superconduct-
ing thin films? Solid State Technol February:106–10.
 15. Inam, A. 1991. Pulsed laser takes the heat off HTS materials 
deposition. Res Dev February:90–92.
 16. Cotell, C. M. 1993. Pulsed laser deposition and processing 
of biocompatible hydroxylapatite thin films. App Surf Sci 
69:140–48.
 17. Guo, T., P. Nikolaev, A. Thess, D. T. Colbert, and R. E. 
Smalley. 1995. Catalytic growth of single-walled nanotubes 
by laser vaporization. Chem Phys Lett 243:49–54. 
 18. Cotell, C. M., and K. S. Grabowski. 1992. Novel materi-
als applications of pulsed laser deposition. MRS Bull 
17:44–53.
 19. Cotell, C. M., D. B. Chrisey, K. S. Grabowski, J. A. Sprague, 
and C. R. Gossett. 1992. Pulsed laser deposition of hydrox-
ylapatite thin films on Ti-6Al-4V. J Appl Biomater 3:87–93. 
 20. Parker, E. H. C. 1985. The technology and physics of molecular 
beam epitaxy. New York: Plenum Press.
 21. Comello, V. 1992. Silicon MBE research races toward pro-
duction. Res Dev April:87–88.
 22. Akedo, J., and M. Lebedev. 1999. Microstructure and elec-
trical properties of lead zirconate titanate (Pb(Zr52/Ti48)O3) 
thick films deposited by aerosol deposition method. Jpn J 
Appl Phys 38:5397.
 23. Jensen, K. F. 1989. Microelectronics processing: chemi-
cal engineering aspects. Eds. D. W. Hess, and K. F. Jensen. 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society. 
 24. Ehrlich, D. J., R. M. J. Osgood, and J. Deutsch. 1982. 
Photodeposition of metal films with ultraviolet laser light. 
J Vac Sci Technol 21:23–32.
 25. Wallenberger, F. T., and P. C. Nordine. 1993. Inorganic 
fibers and microstructures by laser assisted chemical vapor 
deposition. Mater Technol 8:198–202.
 26. Granger, R. A. 1995. Fluid mechanics. New York: Dover 
Publications.
 27. Wolf, S., and R. N. Tauber. 1987. Silicon processing for the 
VLSI era. Sunset Beach, CA: Lattice Press.
 28. Lee, H. H. 1990. Fundamentals of microelectronics processing. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
 29. Coronell, D. G., and K. F. Jensen. 1994. Simulation of 
rarified gas transport and profile evolution in nonplanar 
substrate chemical vapor deposition. J Electrochem Soc 
141:2545–51.
 30. Adams, A. C. 1988. VLSI technology. Ed. S. M. Sze. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
 31. Hess, D. W., and K. F. Jensen, eds. 1989. Microelectronics 
processing: chemical engineering aspects. Washington, DC: 
American Chemical Society.
 32. Sze, S. M., ed. 1988. VLSI technology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 33. Lee, J. G., S. H. Choi, T. C. Ahn, C. G. Hong, P. Lee, K. Law, 
M. Galiano, P. Keswick, and B. Shin. 1992. SA CVD: a new 
approach for 16 Mb dielectrics. Semicond Int May:115–20.
 34. Huang, S., X. Cai, and J. Liu. 2003. Growth of millimeter-
long and horizontally aligned single-walled carbon nano-
tubes on flat substrates. J Am Chem Soc 125:5636–37. 

[Page 504]
504   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 35. Compton, R. D. 1992. PECVD: a versatile technology. 
Semicond Int July:60–65. 
 36. Nguyen, S. V. 1999. High-density plasma chemical vapor 
deposition of silicon-based dielectric films for integrated 
circuits. IBM J Res Dev 43:109–26.
 37. Burggraaf, P. 1993. The status of MOCVD technology. 
Semicond Int 16:80–83. 
 38. Peters, L. 1993. SOI takes over where silicon leaves off. 
Semicond Int March:48–51. 
 39. Anderson, T. J. 1989. Microelectronics processing: chemi-
cal engineering aspects. Eds. Hess, D. W., and K. F. Jensen. 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.
 40. Borland, J., R. Wise, Y. Oka, M. Gangani, S. Fong, and Y. 
Matsumoto. 1988. Silicon epitaxial growth for advanced 
device structures. Solid State Technol January:111–19.
 41. Rehrig, D. L. 1990. In search of precise epi thickness mea-
surements. Semicond Int 13:90–95.
 42. Singer, P. 1992. CVC builds cluster tool through partner-
ing. Semicond Int 15:46.
 43. Vinci, R. P., and J. C. Braveman. 1991. Mechanical testing of 
thin films. Sixth international conference on solid-state sensors 
and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 44. Bushan, B. 1996. Proceedings: IEEE ninth annual international 
workshop on micro electro mechanical systems. San Diego, CA.
 45. Bushan, B., ed. 1995. Handbook of micro/nanotribology. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
 46. Schiotz, J., and K. W. Jacobsen. 2003. A maximum in the 
strength of nanocrystalline copper. Science 301:1357–59.
 47. Schiotz, J., F. D. D. Tolla, and K. W. Jacobsen. 1998. 
Softening of nanocrystalline metals at very small grains. 
Nature 391:561.
 48. Chokshi, A. H., A. Rosen, J. Karch, and H. Gleiter. 1989. On 
the validity of the hall-petch relationship in nanocrystal-
line materials. Scripta Metallurgica 23:1679–83.
 49. Gleiter, H. 1989. Nanocrystalline materials. Prog Mater Sci 
33:223–315.
 50. Yu, D. Y. W., and F. Spaepen. 2004. The yield strength of 
thin copper films on Kapton. J Appl Phys 95:2991–97.
 51. Ehmann, K. F., D. Bourell, M. L. Culpepper, T. J. Hodgson, 
T. R. Kurfess, M. Madou, K. Rajukar, and R. DeVor. 2007. 
Micromanufacturing: international research and development. 
New York: Springer.
 52. Biebl, M., G. Brandl, and R. T. Howe. 1995. Young’s 
modulus of in-situ phosphorus-doped polysilicon. Eighth 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 53. Campbell, D. S. 1970. Handbook of thin film technology. Eds. 
L. I. Maissel, and R. Glang. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 54. Greek, S., F. Ericson, S. Johansson, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 1995. 
In situ tensile strength measurement of thick-film and thin-
film micromachined structures. Eighth international confer-
ence on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). 
Stockholm, Sweden.
 55. Senturia, S. 1987. Proceedings: IEEE micro robots and teleop-
erators workshop. Hyannis, MA.
 56. Krulevitch, P. A. 1994. Micromechanical investigations of 
silicon and Ni–Ti–Cu thin films. PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley.
 57. Pratt, R. I., G. C. Johnson, R. T. Howe, and D. J. J. Nikkel. 
Characterization of thin films using micromechanical 
structures. Mat Res Soc Symp Proc 276:197–202.
 58. Judy, M. W., Y. H. Cho, R. T. Howe, and A. P. Pisano. 1991. 
Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS 
’91). Nara, Japan.
 59. Wu, T. H. T., and R. S. Rosler. 1992. Stress in PSG and 
nitride films as related to film properties and annealing. 
Solid State Technol May:65–71.
 60. Hey, H. P. W., B. G. Sluijk, and D. G. Hemmes. 1990. Ion 
bombardment factor in plasma CVD. Solid State Technol 
April:139–44.
 61. Chou, P. C., and N. J. Pagano. 1967. Elasticity: tensor, dyadic, 
and engineering approaches. New York: Dover Publications.
 62. Guckel, H., D. W. Burns, H. A. C. Tilmans, C. C. G. Visser, 
D. W. DeRoo, T. R. Christenson, P. J. Klomberg, J. J. 
Sniegowski, and D. H. Jones. 1988. Processing conditions 
for polysilicon films with tensile strain for large aspect ratio 
microstructures. Technical digest: 1988 solid state sensor and 
actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 63. Maseeh, F., and S. D. Senturia. 1990. Technical digest: 1990 
solid state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, 
SC.
 64. Hoffman, R. W. 1976. Physics of nonmetallic thin films (NATO 
advanced study institutes series: series B, physics. Eds. C. H. S. 
Dupuy, and A. A. Cachard. New York: Plenum Press.
 65. Hoffman, R. W. 1975. Stresses in thin films: the relevance 
of grain boundaries and impurities. Thin Solid Films 
34:185–90.
 66. Iscoff, R. 1991. Hotwall LP CVD reactors: considering the 
choices. Semicond Int June:60–64.
 67. Adams, A. C. 1988. VLSI technology. Ed. S. M. Sze. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
 68. Guckel, H., J. J. Sniegowski, T. R. Christenson, and F. Raissi. 
1990. The application of fine-grained, tensile polysilicon 
to mechanically resonant transducers. Sensors Actuators A 
A21:346–51.
 69. van der Drift, A. 1967. Evolutionary selection, a principle 
governing growth orientation in vapour-deposited layers. 
Philips Res Rep 22:267–88.
 70. Matson, E. A., and S. A. Polysakov. 1977. On the evolution-
ary selection principle in relation to the growth of polycrys-
talline silicon films. Phys Sta Sol (A) 41:K93–K95.
 71. Lober, T. A., J. Huang, M. A. Schmidt, and S. D. Senturia. 
1988. Characterization of the mechanisms producing 
bending moments in polysilicon micro-cantilever beams 
by interferometric deflection measurements. Technical 
digest: 1988 solid state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton 
Head Island, SC.
 72. Shimizu, T., and S. Ishihara. 1995. Effect of SiO2 surface 
treatment on the solid-phase crystallization of amorphous 
silicon films. J Electrochem Soc 142:298–302.
 73. Abe, T., and M. L. Reed. 1996. Ninth annual international 
workshop on micro electro mechanical systems. San Diego, CA.
 74. Guckel, H., D. W. Burns, C. C. G. Visser, H. A. C. Tilmans, 
and D. Deroo. 1988. Fine-grained polysilicon films with 
built-in tensile strain. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 35: 
800–01.
 75. Drosd, R., and J. Washburn. 1982. Some observation on 
the amorphous to crystalline transformation in silicon. J 
Appl Phys 53:397–403.
 76. Elwenspoek, M., U. Lindberg, H. Kok, and L. Smith. 1994. 
IEEE international workshop on micro electro mechanical sys-
tems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan.
 77. Harbeke, G., L. Krausbauer, E. F. Steigmeier, and A. E. 
Widmer. 1983. LP CVD polycrystalline silicon: growth 
and physical properties of in-situ phosphorous doped and 
undoped films. RCA Rev 44:287–313.
 78. Kamins, T. 1988. Polycrystalline silicon for integrated circuits. 
Boston: Kluwer.

[Page 505]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   505
 79. Mulder, J. G. M., P. Eppenga, M. Hendriks, and J. E. Tong. 
1990. An industrial LP CVD process for in situ phospho-
rus-doped polysilicon. J Electrochem Soc 137:273–79. 
 80. Kinsbron, E., M. Sternheim, and R. Knoell. 1983. 
Crystallization of amorphous silicon films during low pres-
sure chemical vapor deposition. Appl Phys Lett 42: 835–37.
 81. Lietoila, A., A. Wakita, T. W. Sigmon, and J. F. Gibbons. 1982. 
Epitaxial regrowth of intrinsic, 31P-doped and compensated 
(31P+11B-Doped) amorphous Si. J Appl Phys 53:4399–405.
 82. Meyerson, B. S., and W. Olbricht. 1984. Phosphorous-
doped polycrystalline silicon via LPCVD I. process charac-
terization. J Electrochem Soc 131:2361–65.
 83. Hendriks, M., and C. Mavero. 1991. Phosphorous doped 
polysilicon for double poly structures. Part I. morphology 
and microstructure. J Electrochem Soc 138:1466–70.
 84. Kurokawa, H. 1982. P-doped polysilicon film growth tech-
nology. J Electrochem Soc 129:2620–24.
 85. Biebl, M., and H. von Philipsborn. 1993. Fracture strength 
of doped and undoped panical filters. PhD thesis. University 
of California, Berkeley.
 86. Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechani-
cal systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.
 87. Compton, R., D. 1992. PECVD: a versatile technology. 
Semicond Int July:60–65. 
 88. Honer, K. A., and G. T. A. Kovacs. 2000. Solid-state sensor 
and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: Transducers 
Research Foundation.
 89. Sharpe, W. N., B. Yuan, R. Vaidyanathan, and R. L. Edwards. 
1997. Tenth IEEE international workshop on microelectrome-
chanical systems. Nagoya, Japan: IEEE.
 90. Jerman, H. 1994. Hard copies of viewgraphs presented in 
Banff, Canada.
 91. Biebl, M., and H. von Philipsborn. 1993. Fracture strength 
of doped and undoped panical filters. PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley.
 92. Greek, S., F. Ericson, S. Johansson, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 1995. 
In situ tensile strength measurement of thick-film and thin-
film micromachined structures. Eighth international confer-
ence on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). 
Stockholm, Sweden.
 93. Le Berre, M., P. Kleinmann, B. Semmache, D. Barbier, and 
P. Pinard. 1996. Smart electronics and MEMS: proceedings of 
the smart structures and materials 1996 meeting. Eds. V. K. 
Varadan, and P. J. McWhorter. San Diego: SPIE.
 94. Howe, R. T. 1995. Recent advances in surface micromachin-
ing. Technical digest: 13th sensor symposium. Tokyo, Japan.
 95. Diem, B., M. T. Delaye, F. Michel, S. Renard, and G. 
Delapierre. 1993. SOI(SIMOX) as a substrate for surface 
micromachining of single crystalline silicon sensors and 
actuators. Seventh international conference on solid-state 
sensors and actuators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan: 
IEEE.
 96. Pister, K. S. J. 1992. Hinged polysilicon structures with inte-
grated CMOS TFTS. Technical digest: 1992 solid state sensor 
and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 97. Keller, C., and M. Ferrari. 1994. Milli-scale polysilicon 
structures. Technical digest: 1994 solid state sensor and actua-
tor workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 98. Lange, P., M. Kirsten, W. Riethmuller, B. Wenk, G. Zwicker, 
J. R. Morante, F. Ericson, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 1995. Thick 
polycrystalline silicon for surface micromechanical appli-
cations: deposition, structuring and mechanical. Eighth 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 99. Noworolski, J. M., E. Klaassen, J. Logan, K. Petersen, and 
N. Maluf. 1995. Eighth international conference on solid-state 
sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden: 
IEEE.
 100. Chu, P. B., P. R. Nelson, M. L. Tachiki, and K. S. J. Pister. 
1995. Dynamics of polysilicon parallel-plate electrostatic 
actuators. Eighth international conference on solid-state sensors 
and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 101. Memming, R., and G. Schwandt. 1966. Anodic dissolu-
tion of silicon in hydrofluoric acid solutions. Surf Sci 
4:109–24.
 102. Zhang, X. G., S. D. Collins, and R. L. Smith. 1989. Porous 
silicon formation and electropolishing of silicon by 
anodic polarization in HF solution. J Electrochem Soc 
136:1561–65.
 103. Anderson, R. C., R. S. Muller, and C. W. Tobias. 1994. 
Porous polycrystalline silicon: a new material for MEMS. J 
Microelectromech Syst 3:10–18.
 104. Nathanson, H. C., W. E. Newell, R. A. Wickstrom, and J. 
R. Davis. 1967. The resonant gate transistor. IEEE Trans 
Electron Devices ED–14:117–33.
 105. Dutta, B., P. Dev, P. Dewilde, B. Sharma, and R. Newcomb. 
1970. Integrated micromotors concepts. International con-
ference on microelectronic circuits and systems theory. Sydney, 
Australia.
 106. Howe, R. T., and R. S. Muller. 1982. Polycrystalline silicon 
micromechanical beams. Spring meeting of the electrochemi-
cal society. Montreal, Canada.
 107. Guckel, H., and D. W. Burns. 1985. A technology for inte-
grated transducers. International conference on solid-state sen-
sors and actuators. Philadelphia.
 108. Gabriel, K., J. Jarvis, and W. Trimmer. 1988. Small machines, 
large opportunities: a report on the emerging field of micrody-
namics. Murray Hill, NJ: National Science Foundation, 
published by AT&T Bell Laboratories.
 109. Muller, R. S. 1987. Proceedings: IEEE micro robots and teleop-
erators workshop. Hyannis, MA: IEEE.
 110. Fan, L.-S., Y. C. Tai, and R. S. Muller. 1987. Pin joints, gears, 
springs, cranks, and other novel micromechanical struc-
tures. Fourth international conference on solid-state sensors and 
actuators (Transducers ’87). Tokyo, Japan, June 2–5, 1987, 
pp. 849–52.
 111. Editor. 1991. Analog devices combine micromachining 
with BICMOS. Semicond Int14:17.
 112. Hornbeck, L. J. 1995. Micromachining and microfabrication 
process technology. Austin, TX.
 113. Hermansson, K., U. Lindberg, B. Hok, and G. Palmskog. 
1991. Sixth international conference on solid-state sensors and 
actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 114. Tang, W. C. K. 1990. Electrostatic comb drive for resonant 
sensor and actuator applications. PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley.
 115. Adams, A. C. 1988. VLSI technology. Ed. S. M. Sze. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
 116. Howe, R. T. 1995. Eighth international conference on solid-
state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, 
Sweden.
 117. Biebl, M., G. T. Mulhern, and R. T. Howe. 1995. In situ 
phosphorus doped polysilicon for integrated MEMS. Eighth 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 118. Fresquet, G., C. Azzaro, and J.-P. Couderc. 1995. Analysis 
and modeling of in situ boron-doped polysilicon deposi-
tion by LP CVD. J Electrochem Soc 142:538–47.

[Page 506]
506   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 119. Core, T. A., W. K. Tsang, and S. J. Sherman. 1993. Fabrication 
technology for an integrated surface-micromachined sen-
sor. Solid State Technol 36:39–47.
 120. Monk, D. J., D. S. Soane, and R. T. Howe. 1992. LPCVD 
silicon dioxide sacrificial layer etching for surface micro-
machining. Symposium on “smart” materials fabrication/mate-
rials for micro-electro-mechanical systems. Materials Research 
Society Spring Meeting, San Francisco, April 27–May 1, 
1992, MRS Symposium Proceedings, pp. 303–10.
 121. Tenney, A. S., and M. Ghezzo. 1973. Etch rates of doped 
oxides in solutions of buffered HF. J Electrochem Soc 
120:1091–95.
 122. Levy, R. A., and K. Nassau. 1986. Viscous behavior of phos-
phosilicate and borophosphosilicate glasses in VLSI pro-
cessing. Solid State Technol October:123–30.
 123. North, J. C., T. E. McGahan, D. W. Rice, and A. C. Adams. 
1978. Tapered windows in phosphorous-doped silicon 
dioxide by ion implantation. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 
ED–25:809–12.
 124. Goetzlich, J., and H. Ryssel. 1981. Tapered windows in sili-
con dioxide, silicon nitride, and polysilicon layers by ion 
implantation. J Electrochem Soc 128:617–19.
 125. White, L. K. 1980. Bilayer taper etching of field oxides and 
passivation layers. J Electrochem Soc 127:2687–93.
 126. Monk, D. J., D. S. Soane, and R. T. Howe. 1994. Hydrofluoric 
acid etching of silicon dioxide sacrificial layers-part I: exper-
imental observations. J Electrochem Soc 141:264–69.
 127. Monk, D. J., D. S. Soane, and R. T. Howe. 1994. Hydrofluoric 
acid etching of silicon dioxide sacrificial layers-part II: 
modeling. J Electrochem Soc 141:270–74.
 128. Eaton, W. P., and J. H. Smith. 1996. SPIE proceedings: micro-
machining and microfabrication process technology. Austin, TX: 
SPIE.
 129. Liu, J., Y.-C. Tai, J. Lee, K.-C. Pong, Y. Zohar, and C.-H. Ho. 
1993. In situ monitoring and universal modelling of sacrifi-
cial PSG etching using hydrofluoric acid. Proceedings: micro 
electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, 
FL.
 130. Goossen, K., J. Walker, and S. Arney. 1994. Silicon modula-
tor based on mechanically-active antireflection layer with 1 
Mbit/sec capability. IEEE Photonics Tech Lett 6:1119. 
 131. Lober, T. A., and R. T. Howe. 1988. Surface-micromachining 
processes for electrostatic microactuator fabrication. 
Technical digest: 1988 solid state sensor and actuator workshop. 
Hilton Head Island, SC.
 132. Fan, L.-S., Y. C. Tai, and R. S. Muller. 1988. Integrated mov-
able micromechanical structures for sensors and actuators. 
IEEE Trans Electron Devices 35:724–30.
 133. Mehregany, M., K. J. Gabriel, and W. S. N. Trimmer. 1988. 
Integrated fabrication of polysilicon mechanisms. IEEE 
Trans Electron Devices 35:719–23.
 134. Walker, J. A., K. J. Gabriel, and M. Mehregany. 1991. 
Mechanical integrity of polysilicon films exposed to hydro-
fluoric acid solutions. J Electron Mater 20:665–70. 
 135. Eaton, W. P., and J. H. Smith. 1995. Smart structures and 
materials 1995: smart electronics (Proceedings of the SPIE). 
San Diego, CA.
 136. Watanabe, H., S. Ohnishi, I. Honma, H. Kitajima, H. Ono, 
R. J. Wilhelm, and A. J. L. Sophie. 1995. Selective etch-
ing of phosphosilicate glass with low pressure vapor HF. J 
Electrochem Soc 142:237–43.
 137. Nakamura, M., S. Hoshino, and H. Muro. 1985. Monolithic 
sensor device for detecting mechanical vibration. Densi 
Tokyo (IEEE Tokyo Section) 24:87–88.
 138. Bassous, E., and C.-Y. Liu. 1978. Polycrystalline silicon 
etching with tetramethylammonium hydroxide.US Patent 
4113551.
 139. Gennissen, P. T. J., P. J. French, D. P. A. D. Munter, T. E. Bell, 
H. Kaneko, and P. M. Sarro. 1995. Porous silicon microma-
chining techniques for acceleration fabrication. Proceedings 
of the European Solid-State Device Research Conference. 
ESSDERC ’95. The Hague, the Netherlands.
 140. Chen, L.-Y., and N. C. MacDonald. 1991. Selective tungsten 
process. Sixth international conference on solid-state sensors 
and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 141. Sugiyama, S., T. Suzuki, K. Kawahata, K. Shimaoka, M. 
Takigawa, and I. Igarashi. 1986. Micro-diaphragm pressure 
sensor. Technical digest: IEEE international electron devices 
meeting (IEDM ’86).
 142. Sugiyama, S., K. Kawakata, M. Abe, H. Funabashi, and I. 
Igarashi. 1987. Fourth international conference on solid-state 
sensors and actuators (Transducers ’87). Tokyo, Japan.
 143. Kim, Y. W., and M. G. Allen. 1991. Surface microma-
chined platforms using electroplated sacrificial layers. Sixth 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’91). San Francisco: IEEE.
 144. Suzuki, K., I. Shimoyama, and H. Miura. 1994. Insect–model 
based microrobot with elastic hinges. J Microelectromech 
Syst 3, 4–9.
 145. Chang, S., W. Eaton, J. Fulmer, C. Gonzalez, B. Underwood, 
J. Wong, and R. L. Smith. 1991. Micromechanical structures 
in amorphous silicon. Sixth international conference on solid-
state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 146. Scheeper, P. R., W. Olthuis, and P. Bergveld. 1991. Fabrication 
of a subminiature silicon condenser microphone using 
the sacrificial layer technique. Sixth international confer-
ence on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San 
Francisco.
 147. Yamada, K., and T. Kuriyama. 1991. Sixth international con-
ference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). 
San Francisco.
 148. van Mullem, C. J., K. J. Gabriel, and H. Fujita. 1991. Large 
deflection performance of surface micromachined corru-
gated diaphragms. Sixth international conference on solid-
state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco: 
IEEE.
 149. Mastrangelo, C. H., and C. H. Hsu. 1993. Mechanical sta-
bility and adhesion of microstructures under capillary forc-
es—part I: basic theory. J Microelectromech Syst 2:33–43.
 150. Mastrangelo, C. H., and C. H. Hsu. 1993. Mechanical sta-
bility and adhesion of microstructures under capillary forc-
es—part II: experiments. J Microelectromech Syst 2:44–55.
 151. Fan, L.-S. 1989. Integrated micromachinery: moving structures on 
silicon chips. PhD thesis. University of California, Berkeley.
 152. Abe, T., W. C. Messner, and M. L. Reed. 1995. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’95). 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
 153. Fedder, G. K., J. C. Chang, and R. T. Howe. 1992. Thermal 
assembly of polysilicon microstructures with narrow-gap 
electrostatic comb drive. Technical digest: 1992 solid state 
sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 154. Mastrangelo, C. H., and G. S. Saloka. 1993. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort 
Lauderdale, FL: IEEE.
 155. Guckel, H., J. J. Sniegowski, T. R. Christenson, S. Mohney, 
and T. F. Kelly. 1989. Fabrication of micromechanical 
devices from polysilicon films with smooth surfaces. 
Sensors Actuators 20:117–21.

[Page 507]
Physical and Chemical Vapor Deposition—Thin Film Properties and Surface Micromachining   507
 156. Guckel, H., J. J. Sniegowski, T. R. Christenson, and F. Raissi. 
1990. The application of fine-grained, tensile polysilicon 
to mechanically resonant transducers. Sensors Actuators A 
A21:346–51.
 157. Takeshima, N., K. J. Gabriel, M. Ozaki, J. Takahashi, H. 
Horiguchi, and H. Fujita. 1991. Electrostatic parallelogram 
actuators. Sixth international conference on solid-state sensors 
and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 158. Mulhern, G. T., D. S. Soane, and R. T. Howe. 1993. 
Supercritical carbon dioxide drying of microstructures. 
Seventh international conference on solid-state sensors and 
actuators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan.
 159. Kozlowski, F., N. Lindmair, T. Scheiter, C. Hierold, and 
W. Lang. 1995. A novel method to avoid sticking of surface 
micromachine structures. Eighth international conference on 
solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, 
Sweden.
 160. Alley, R. L., P. Mai, K. Komvopoulos, and R. T. Howe. 1993. 
Surface roughness modification of interfacial contacts in poly-
silicon microstructures. Seventh international conference on solid-
state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan.
 161. Alley, R. L., R. T. Howe, and K. Komvopoulos. 1992. The 
effect of release etch processing on the surface microstruc-
ture stiction. Technical digest: 1992 solid state sensor and actu-
ator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 162. Man, P. F., B. P. Gogoi, and C. H. Mastrangelo. 1996. 
Elimination of post-release adhesion in microstructures 
using thin conformal fluorocarbon films. Ninth annual 
international workshop on micro electro mechanical systems 
(MEMS ’96). San Diego, CA..
 163. Houston, M. R., R. Maboudian, and R. Howe. 1995. 
Ammonium fluoride antistiction treatments for polysilicon 
microstructures. Eighth international conference on solid-state 
sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 164. Gogoi, B. P., and C. H. Mastrangelo. 1995. Post-processing 
release of microstructures by electromagnetic pulses. Eighth 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 165. Li, J., J. Xu, and C. P. Wong. 2004. Lotus effect coating and 
its application for microelectromechanical systems stiction 
prevention. Proceedings of the 54th Electronic Components 
and Technology Conference (ECTC). Las Vegas, NV. 
 166. Nguyen, C. T. C., and R. T. Howe. 1993. Electron devices 
meeting, 1993. IEDM ’93. Technical Digest, International. 
Washington DC: IEEE.
 167. Guckel, H., T. Randazzo, and D. W. Burns. 1985. A sim-
ple technique for the determination of mechanical strain 
in thin films with applications to polysilicon. J Appl Phys 
57:1671–75.
 168. Howe, R. T., and R. S. Muller. 1983. Stress in polycrystalline 
and amorphous silicon thin films. J Appl Phys 54:4674–75.
 169. Murarka, S. P., and T. F. J. Retajczyk. 1983. Effect of phos-
phorous doping on stress in silicon and polycrystalline sili-
con. J Appl Phys 54:2069–72.
 170. Orpana, M., and A. O. Korhonen. 1991. Control of residual 
stress of polysilicon thin films by heavy doping in surface 
micromachining. Sixth international conference on solid-state 
sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 171. Lin, L., R. T. Howe, and A. P. Pisano. 1993. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort 
Lauderdale, FL: IEEE.
 172. Choi, M. S., and E. W. Hearn. 1984. Stress effects in 
boron-implanted polysilicon films. J Electrochem Soc 
131:2443–46.
 173. Ding, X., and W. Ko. 1991. Buckling behavior of boron- 
doped P+ silicon diaphragms. Sixth international confer-
ence on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San 
Francisco.
 174. Hendriks, M., R. Delhez, and S. Radelaar. 1983. Studies in 
inorganic chemistry. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
 175. Tang, W. C., T.-C. H. Nguyen, and R. T. Howe. 1989. 
Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems 
(MEMS ’89). Salt Lake City, UT.
 176. Sekimoto, M., H. Yoshihara, and T. Ohkubo. 1982. 
Silicon nitride single-layer x-ray mask. J Vac Sci Technol 
21:1017–21.
 177. Guckel, H., D. K. Showers, D. W. Burns, C. R. Rutigliano, 
and C. G. Nesler. 1986. Deposition techniques and proper-
ties of strain compensated LP CVD silicon nitride. Technical 
digest: 1986 solid state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton 
Head Island, SC.
 178. Tang, W. C., T. H. Nguyen, and R. T. Howe. 1989. Laterally 
driven polysilicon resonant microstructures. Sensors 
Actuators 20:25–32.
 179. Jerman, J. H. 1990. The fabrication and use of microma-
chined corrugated silicon diaphragms. Sensors Actuators A 
A23:988–92.
 180. Spiering, V. L., S. Bouwstra, R. M. E. J. Spiering, and 
M. Elwenspoek. 1991. On-chip decoupling zone for 
package-stress reduction. Sixth international conference 
on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San 
Francisco.
 181. Offereins, H. L., H. Sandmaier, B. Folkmer, U. Steger, and 
W. Lang. Stress-free assembly technique for a silicon-based 
pressure sensor. Sixth international conference on solid-state 
sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 182. Spiering, V. L., S. Bouwstra, J. Burger, and M. Elwenspoek. 
1993. Membranes fabricated with a deep single corruga-
tion for package stress reduction and residual stress relief. 
Fourth European workshop on micromechanics (MME ’93). 
Neuchatel, Switzerland.
 183. Zhang, Y., and K. D. Wise. 1994. Performance of non-
planar silicon diaphragms under large deflections. J 
Microelectromech Syst 3:59–68.
 184. Scheeper, P. R., W. Olthuis, and P. Bergveld. 1994. The 
design, fabrication, and testing of corrugated silicon nitride 
diaphragms. J Microelectromech Syst 3:36–42.
 185. Yun, W. 1992. A surface micromachined accelerometer with 
integrated CMOS detection circuitry. PhD thesis. University 
of California, Berkeley.
 186. Guckel, H., D. W. Burns, H. A. C. Tilmans, D. W. DeRoo, 
and C. R. Rutigliano. 1988. Mechanical properties of fine 
grained polysilicon—the repeatability issue. Technical digest: 
1988 solid state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head 
Island, SC.
 187. Nguyen, C. T.-C. 1998. Aerospace conference. Snowmass, 
CO: IEEE.
 188. Smith, J., S. Montague, J. Sniegowski, and P. McWhorter. 
1995. Technical digest: IEEE international electron devices 
meeting (IEDM ’95). Washington, DC.
 189. Varadan, V. K., and P. J. McWhorter, eds. 1996. Smart elec-
tronics and MEMS: proceedings of the smart structures and 
materials 1996 meeting. San Diego: SPIE.
 190. Dunn, P. N. 1993. SOI: ready to meet CMOS challenge. 
Solid State Technol October32–35.
 191. Abe, T., and J. H. Matlock. 1990. Wafer bonding technique 
for silicon-on-insulator technology. Solid State Technol 
November:39–40.

[Page 508]
508   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 192. Kanda, Y. 1991. What kind of SOI wafers are suitable for 
what type of machining purposes? Sixth international con-
ference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). 
San Francisco.
 193. Kuhn, G. L., and C. J. Rhee. 1973. Thin silicon film on insu-
lating substrate. J Electrochem Soc 120:1563–66.
 194. Pourahmadi, F., L. Christel, and K. Petersen. 1992. Silicon 
accelerometer with new thermal self-test mechanism. 
Technical digest: 1992 solid state sensor and actuator workshop. 
Hilton Head Island, SC.
 195. Gennissen, P. T. J., M. Bartke, P. J. French, P. M. Sarro, and 
R. F. Wolffenbuttel. 1995. Automatic etch stop on buried 
oxide using epitaxial lateral overgrowth. Eighth international 
conference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers 
’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 196. Bartek, M., P. T. J. Gennissen, P. J. French, and R. F. 
Wolffenbuttel. 1995. Confined selective epitaxial growth: 
potential for smart silicon sensor fabrication Eighth 
international conference on solid-state sensors and actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden: IEEE.
 197. Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechanical 
systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.
 198. Greiff, P. 1995. Micromachining and microfabrication process 
technology. Proceedings of the SPIE. Austin, TX: SPIE.
 199. Neudeck, G. W., P. J. Schuberts, J. L. Glenn, Jr., J. A. Friedrich, 
W. A. Klaasan, R. P. Zingg, and J. P. Denton. 1990. Three 
dimensional devices fabricated by silicon epitaxial lateral 
overgrowth. J Electron Mater 19:1111–17.
 200. Schubert, P. J., and G. W. Neudeck. 1990. Confined lateral 
selective epitaxial growth of silicon for device fabrication. 
IEEE Electron Device Lett 11:181–83.
 201. Bashir, R., G. W. Neudeck, H. Yen, E. P. Kvam, and J. P. 
Denton. 1995. Characterization of sidewall defects in selec-
tive epitaxial growth of silicon. J Vac Sci Technol 11:923–28.
 202. Luder, E. 1986. Polycrystalline silicon-based sensors. Sensors 
Actuators 10:9–23.
 203. Obermeier, E., and P. Kopystynski. 1992. Polysilicon as a 
material for microsensor applications. Sensors Actuators A 
A30:149–55.
 204. Voronin, V. A., A. A. Druzhinin, I. I. Marjamora, V. G. 
Kostur, and J. M. Pankov. 1992. Laser-recrystallized poly-
silicon layers in sensors. Sensors Actuators A A30:143–47.
 205. Burggraaf, P. 1991. Epi’s leading edge. Semicond Int 
June:67–71.
 206. Lin, L. Y., S. S. Lee, M. C. Wu, and K. S. J. Pister. 1995. 
Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS 
’95). Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
 207. Burgett, S. R., K. S. Pister, and R. S. Fearing. 1992. ASME 
1992, micromechanical sensors, actuators, and systems. 
Anaheim, CA: ASME.
 208. Ross, M., and K. Pister. 1994. Micro-windmill for opti-
cal scanning and flow measurement. Sensors Actuators A 
46–47:576–79.
 209. Lin, G., K. S. J. Pister, and K. P. Roos. 1996. Standard CMOS 
piezoresistive sensor to quantify heart cell contractile 
forces. Ninth annual international workshop on micro electro 
mechanical systems (MEMS ’96). San Diego, CA.
 210. Yeh, R., E. J. Kruglick, and K. S. J. Pister. 1994. ASME 1994, 
micromechanical sensors, actuators, and systems. Chicago: 
ASME.
 211. Hoffman, E., B. Warneke, E. Kruglick, J. Weigold, and K. 
S. J. Pister. 1995. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical 
systems (MEMS ’95). Amsterdam, the Netherlands: IEEE.
 212. Keller, C. G., and R. T. Howe. 1995. Eighth international con-
ference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95), 
376–79. Stockholm, Sweden.
 213. Keller, C. G., and R. T. Howe. 1995. Eighth international con-
ference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95), 
99–102. Stockholm, Sweden.
 214. Kahn, H., S. Stemmer, K. Nandakumar, A. H. Heuer, R. L. 
Mullen, R. Ballarini, and M. A. Huff. 1996. Mechanical 
properties of thick, surface micromachined polysilicon 
films. Ninth annual international workshop on micro electro 
mechanical systems (MEMS ’96). San Diego, CA.
 215. Brodie, I., H. R. Gurnick, C. E. Holland, and H. A. Moessner. 
1990. Method for providing polyimide spacers in a field emission 
panel display. US Patent 4923421.
 216. Frazier, A. B., and M. G. Allen. 1993. Metallic microstruc-
tures fabricated using photosensitive polyimide electro-
plating molds. J Microelectromech Syst 2:87–94.
 217. Ahn, C. H., Y. J. Kim, and M. G. Allen. 1993. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort 
Lauderdale, FL: IEEE.
 218. Acosta, R. E., C. Ahn, I. V. Babich, E. I. Cooper, J. M. Cotte, 
W. J. Horkans, C. Jahnes, S. Krongelb, K. T. Kwietniak, N. C. 
Labianca, et al. 1995. Integrated variable reluctance mag-
netic mini–motor. J Electrochem Soc 95-2:494–95.
 219. LaBianca, N. C., J. D. Gelorme, E. Cooper, E. O’Sullivan, 
and J. Shaw. 1995. JECS 188th Meeting. Chicago: JECS.
 220. Field, L. 1987. Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Sciences/Electronics Research Lab; Research summary. 
University of California, Berkeley.
 221. Judy, M. W., and R. T. Howe. 1993. Proceedings: IEEE micro 
electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL.
 222. Judy, M. W., and R. T. Howe. 1993. Highly compliant lat-
eral suspensions using sidewall beams. Seventh international 
conference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers 
’93). Yokohama, Japan.
 223. Lebouitz, K. S., R. T. Howe, and A. P. Pisano. 1995. 
Permeable polysilicon etch-access windows for microshell 
fabrication. Eighth international conference on solid-state sen-
sors and actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 224. Mardilovich, P., D. Routkevitch, and A. Govyadinov. 2000. 
Eds. P. J. Hesketh, S. S. Ang, W. E. Bailey, J. L. Davidson, 
H. G. Hughes, and D. Misra. Micro-fabricated systems and 
MEMS. Electrochemical Society: Pennington, Vol. 2000–19, 
p. 33.
 225. Lin, L. 1993. Selective encapsulations of MEMS: micro chan-
nels, needles, resonators, and electromechanical filters. PhD the-
sis. University of California, Berkeley.
 226. Kamins, T. 1988. Polycrystalline silicon for integrated circuits. 
Boston: Kluwer.
 227. Heuberger, A. 1989. Mikromechanik. Heidelberg: Springer 
Verlag.
 228. Sharpe, W. N., B. Yuan, R. Vaidyanathan, and R. L. Edwards. 
1997. Tenth IEEE international workshop on microelectrome-
chanical systems. Nagoya, Japan: IEEE.
 229. Petersen, K., D. Gee, F. Pourahmadi, R. Craddock, J. Brown, 
and L. Christel. 1991. Resonant beam pressure sensor fabri-
cated with silicon fusion bonding. Sixth international confer-
ence on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San 
Francisco.
 230. Chrisey, D. B., and G. K. Hubler. (Eds.) 1994. Pulsed laser 
deposition of thin films. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
 231. 2006. Atomic layer deposition. Cambridge NanoTech Inc., 
April 24. http://www.cambridgenanotech.com

[Page 509]
509
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Chemical Forming
Photochemical Forming
Electrochemical Forming Processes
Questions
References
8
Chemical, 
Photochemical, and 
Electrochemical 
Forming Techniques
 “The Sounds of Earth,” a gold-plated copper record placed on Voyager. Two 
hours of sound and a movie plus some pictures and a message from President 
Jimmy Carter (From http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/spacecraft/goldenrec.html.)
 Photochemical forming: Light causes a polymer to solidify. Structural details 
of 120 nm (as a result of two-photon photopolymerization). (From Kawata, S., 
H.-B. Sun, T. Tanaka, and K. Takada, 2001. Finer features for functional microdevices. 
Nature 412:697–698.86)

[Page 510]
510   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Elderly: In physics, mathematics and astronautics it 
means over thirty; in other disciplines, senile decay 
is sometimes postponed to the forties. There are of 
course, glorious exceptions; but as every researcher 
just out of college knows, scientists of over fifty are 
good for nothing but board meetings, and should at 
all costs be kept out of the laboratory.
Arthur C. Clarke
Profiles of the Future
Introduction
In this chapter we review chemical, photochemical, 
and electrochemical forming.* In chemical forming, 
chemical reactions create features by forming new 
compounds. The energy source at the work piece 
in this additive process is chemical. The method is 
extremely broad and covers fabrication with metals, 
ceramics, and polymers. Reactions are induced by 
combining different reagents and are often aided by 
* In Part II on subtractive manufacturing techniques, we did make the 
same distinction between chemical, photochemical, and electro-
chemical etching. All three subtractive manufacturing techniques 
were covered in Chapter 4 on wet chemical etching and wet bulk 
micromachining-pools as tools.
heat and/or catalysts and also may be accompanied 
by a shape-forming step using, for example, a 
spraying nozzle, a mold, or a template. Almost all 
manufacturing processes include one or more chem-
ical forming steps and can be part of lithography- 
or nonlithography-based schemes. Chemical and 
thermal forming processes are difficult to distin guish 
because they are almost always intertwined. Some 
chemical forming processes involve an exothermic 
reaction, and such processes we classify as purely 
chemical (they do not require the application of 
external heat). This is the case, for example, in re action 
injection molding (RIM; see Chapter 10) and for self-
assembled monolayers (SAMs; see page 523 below). 
Other chemical forming processes are endo thermic 
and require a significant increase in  temperature 
for the reaction to initiate such as in the oxidation 
of Si (see Volume I, Chapter 4) or chemical vapor 
deposition of polycrystalline Si (CVD; see Chapter 7). 
The distinction between chemical and thermal 
forming is somewhat arbi trary, and in this chapter 
we cover as additional chemical forming methods 
those low temperature material deposition tech-
niques that are used in chemical and biological 
sensor manufacture, often arranged in some type 
of an array configuration. The additional chemical 
forming methods covered are sol-gel deposition 
from alkoxide-based precursors, organic film spin 
coating, polymer dry film lamination, polymer dip 
coating, polymer spraying, polymer casting, organic 
film doctor’s blade (also called knife coating), glow 
dis charge polymerization, low temperature silk 
screening of organics, Langmuir-Blodgett deposition, 
and SAMs. Some of the chemical forming pro-
cesses discussed here involve self-assembly such 
as in the case of SAMs, in which case one refers 
to bottom-up manufacturing. Whereas top-down 
nanofabrication is principally based on lithography 
and traditional mechanical machining, etching, 
and grinding, bottom-up manufacturing, which 
we also call nanochemistry in this book, is based 
in chemical synthesis, self-assembly, and positional 
assembly (see Volume III, Chapter 3). Arraying of 
low temperature materials (often organics) for 
sensor arrays may be accomplished by lithography, 
digital mirror deposition (a type of lithography as 
well), ink-jetting, mechanical microspotting, and 
 DNA array and the human genome.

[Page 511]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   511
microcontact printing. Some of the same additive 
methods discussed in this section will reappear 
in Chapter 9 on thermal forming where they 
involve the manufacture of ceramics in which heat 
application is more essential.
In photochemical forming, photoenergy solidi-
fies a material into a three-dimensional (3D) shape 
as we illustrate with our description of rapid proto-
typing and microphotoforming (stereolithography) 
with, as newest embodiments, parallel stereolitho-
graphy and two-photon polymerization.
In the case of electrochemical forming, the 
energy at the work piece is electrochemical. 
Electro chemi cal and electroless metal  deposition 
are gaining renewed interest because of their 
emerging importance in making mold inserts for 
replication meth-odologies in both microelectro-
mechanical sys- tems (MEMS) and nanoelectrome-
chanical systems (NEMS) (see also Chapter  10). 
The foundations underlying electrochemical  depo-
sition were covered in detail in Volume I, Chapter 7; 
here we contrast electroless metal deposition 
with electrodeposition and introduce some addi-
tional electrochemical techniques. These new 
electrodeposition methods sort out into through-
mask plating, such as in the fabrication of thin-
film read-write heads, the damascene process, 
and in  anodization; instant masking in EFAB 
(Electrochemical FABrication); and maskless metal 
deposition methods such as microjet plating, laser-
enhanced jet plating, local electrochemical deposi-
tion using scanning electrochemical microscopes 
(SECMs), and techniques to electrodeposit slanted 
and curved surfaces.
Chemical Forming
Introduction
It should come as no surprise that chemical form-
ing techniques are gaining importance because 
today bottom-up manufacturing or nanochemistry, 
a type of chemical forming, constitutes one of the 
most intensely researched topics. Bottom-up fabri-
cation or nanochemistry constitutes a special class 
of chemical forming incorporating chemical synthe-
sis of small particles, self-assembly, and positional 
assembly. In nanochemistry device structures are 
created via systematic assembly of atoms, molecules, 
or other basic units of matter. Instead of manipulat-
ing Si wafers or other solid substrates, we manipu-
late small amounts of chemicals, even molecules 
and atoms. Molecular engineers, manipulating and 
modifying natural polymers such as DNA and pro-
teins, led the way into nanochemistry and practiced 
this type of nanotechnology long before electrical 
and mechanical engineers got involved. Now we are 
designing and manipulating at the molecular level, 
whereas before it was either evolution that did it for 
us (e.g., a virus as a nanomachine) or results hap-
pened that we never really understood and so could 
not optimize (e.g., stained glass window—small 
metal nanoparticle comparable in size with the 
wavelength of light).
Although there is some overlap, not all chemical 
forming techniques involve minute amounts of reac-
ting chemicals, nor do they all entail self-assembly or 
positional assembly. The chemical forming methods 
covered in this chapter are sol-gel, organic film spin 
coating, polymer dry film lamination, polymer 
dip coating, polymer spraying, polymer casting, 
organic film doctor’s blade (or knife coating), glow 
discharge polymerization, low temperature silk 
screening of organics, Langmuir-Blodgett deposition, 
and self-assembled monolayers (SAMs).
Arraying of organics for sensor arrays may be 
accomplished by lithography, digital mirror depo-
sition, ink-jetting, mechanical microspotting, and 
microcontact printing.
Sol-Gel Technique
Introduction
Colloids, we saw in Volume I, Chapter 7, are 
mixtures in which one material is dispersed in 
another, with the dispersed material divided into 
particles ranging in size from 1 nm to 10 µm. 
They have many properties distinct from those of 
solutions of ordinary-sized molecules and from 
mixtures of macroscopic phases such as slurries 
of visible particles. The dispersed material may 
either be dissolved (i.e., in the case of solutions of 
macromolecules), giving a lyophilic colloid, or they 
may constitute a separate phase, giving a lyophobic 
colloid. We only deal with lyophobic colloids here, 

[Page 512]
512   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
which may be further classified according to the 
types of phases that compose them, as shown in 
Volume I, Chapter 7. Some important definitions 
pertaining to the sol-gel field follow and might help 
in the understanding of the sol-gel process.
 
◾Colloid: A colloid is a suspension in which the 
dispersed phase is so small (1 nm–10 µm) that 
gravitational force is negligible, and interac-
tions are dominated by short-range forces, such 
as van der Waals attraction and surface charges. 
The 
suspended 
particles 
usually 
exhibit 
Brownian motion.
 
◾Sol: A sol is a colloidal suspension of solid par-
ticle or clusters in a liquid.
 
◾Gel: Semirigid mass of a lyophilic sol in which 
all the dispersion medium is penetrated into 
the sol particles.
 
◾Emulsion: An emulsion is a suspension of liq-
uid droplets in another liquid.
 
◾Aerosol: An aerosol is a collection of very small 
particles suspended in a gas. The particles can 
be liquid (mist) or solid (dust or fume). The 
term aerosol is also commonly used for a pres-
surized container (aerosol can) designed to 
release a fine spray of a material such as paint.
 
◾Precursors: The starting compound of the sol-
gel process.
 
◾Alkoxide: A basic salt derived from an alcohol 
by the replacement of the hydroxyl hydrogen 
with a metal. They are formed by the reaction 
of an alcohol and an alkali metal. For example, 
silicon tetraethoxide (TEOS), Si(OC2H5)4.
 
◾Hydrolysis: Reaction in which a hydroxyl ion is 
attached to the metal atom [Si(OR)4 + H2O → 
HO−Si(OR)3 + ROH, where R is an alkyl].
 
◾Condensation reaction: Reagents combine 
splitting off water [HO−Si(OR)3 + HO−Si(OR)3 
→ (OR)3 SiO-Si(OR)3 + H2O].
The sol-gel process is a wet-chemical additive 
technique for the fabrication of materials (typically 
metal oxides) starting from a chemical solution 
that reacts to produce colloidal particles (a sol). The 
Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey, and Overbeek theory 
(the DLVO theory) was introduced in Volume I, 
Chapter 7 to describe the stability of these colloids.
Sol-gel processing received increasing attention 
since the 1990s from both the research community 
and industry as nanoparticles became more impor-
tant. Colloids form a most important gateway toward 
bottom-up nanotechnology: the sol-gel technique 
constitutes a chemical forming process for making 
very small particles, e.g., 20–40-nm diameter, a 
particle size that is virtually impossible to make by 
conventional mechanical ball milling or grinding* 
(Figure 8.1).
Sol-Gel Process
The first metal alkoxides were prepared in 1846 
by Ebelmen using SiCl4. Ebelmen noticed that on 
exposure to the atmosphere, these chemicals formed 
a gel. This process was then used in the 1930s by the 
Schott glass company in Germany to produce metal 
oxides (http://www.solgelchemist.com/web1.doc). In 
a sol-gel process, as illustrated in Figure 8.2, chemi-
cal precursors, mainly alkoxides (organic epoxides 
are an alternative for alkoxides) and metal chlorides, 
are dissolved in an aqueous or alcohol-based solu-
tion. Hydrolysis and condensation reactions nucleate 
* High-energy ball milling is required to make particles less than 
50 nm (see Volume III, Chapter 3).
Transparent pigments
Iron oxides, TiO2-based UV absorbers
50 nm
5 nm
100 nm
Sol gel processing
Conventional/grinding processing
Conventional tinting
“Quantum dots”
Pigments
Ceramics
FIGURE 8.1 Nanoparticle products and their manufacture.

[Page 513]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   513
and generate many small nucleation seeds (groups 
of atoms that build the basic crystal structure). The 
seeds grow by taking more atoms/molecules from 
the solution to form clusters. The growth pattern is 
random, with the atoms or molecules coming from 
every direction, and fractal-like cluster structures 
result. The clusters are nanosized, forming a colloid. 
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 7, the stability of 
this colloid depends on the electrokinetic potential 
ζ (also the zeta potential), from which all electro-
kinetic effects can be derived. When the absolute 
value of the zeta potential is more than 50 mV, the 
dispersion is very stable, whereas with a ζ potential 
close to zero, the coagulation of particles leads to 
precipitation.
When growth continues, the nanoclusters start 
to build up a porous network. This is when gelation 
takes place. The gel point is the point in the phase 
diagram where the sol abruptly changes from a vis-
cous liquid to a gelatinous, polymerized network 
and where the dispersion medium is fully pene-
trated into the sol network (Figure 8.3). Both sol and 
gel formation are low-temperature processes.
The transformation to a gel can be initiated in 
several ways, but the most convenient approach is to 
change the pH of the reaction solution. Formation of 
a metal oxide involves connecting the metal centers 
with oxo (M-O-M) or hydroxo (M-OH-M) bridges, 
therefore generating metal-oxo or metal-hydroxo 
polymers in solution. The drying process serves to 
remove the liquid phase from the gel, thus forming 
a porous material; then a thermal treatment (firing) 
may be performed to favor further polycondensa -
tion and enhance mechanical properties. The 
method  used to remove the solvent from the gel 
strongly affects the end product’s properties. For 
example, from Figure 8.2 it can be seen that if the 
solvent in a wet “gel” is removed under a supercritical 
condition, the gel’s original 3D structure is pre-
served, and a highly porous and extremely low-
density material called an aerogel is obtained. The 
supercritical processing condition is realized by 
exchanging the liquid solvent with CO2. The latter 
is then removed at slightly elevated temperatures 
and under high pressure. This way aerogels can be 
FIGURE 8.2 Sol-gel processes and sol-gel products. In sol-gel chemistry, molecular precursors are converted to nanome-
ter-sized particles, to form a colloidal suspension, or sol. The gel can be processed by various drying methods (shown by 
the arrows) to develop materials with distinct properties.
FIGURE 8.3 Gelation: TiO2 from sol (left) to wet gel (right).

[Page 514]
514   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
produced where 99% of the bulk material consists 
of pores (Figure 8.4). A Lawrence Livermore group 
created an aerogel weighing only 1.0 mg/cm3, which 
is listed in the Guinness Book of World Records 2005 as 
the lightest material on Earth.1
If, in an alternative process route, the gel is dried 
slowly in a fluid-evaporation process, the gel’s struc-
tural network collapses, which creates a high- density 
material known as a xerogel. When a xerogel is fur-
ther densified by sintering, a dense ceramic material 
forms.
As the viscosity of a sol is adjusted into a proper 
viscosity range, ceramic fibers can be drawn; it can 
be applied as a film onto a substrate by spinning, dip-
ping, or spraying and cast into a suitable container 
with the desired shape (e.g., to obtain a monolithic 
ceramics, glasses, fibers, membranes, and aerogels); 
or finally, ultrafine and uniform ceramic powders 
may be formed by grinding of the xerogel or by 
slowly drying the sol.
For a silica sol formation, an appropriate chemi-
cal precursor is dissolved in a liquid, for example, 
tetraethylsiloxane (TEOS) in water. In this case, a 
silica gel is formed by hydrolysis and condensation 
using hydrochloric acid as the catalyst. Drying and 
sintering at temperatures between 200 and 600°C 
transforms the gel into a glass and then densifica-
tion into silicon dioxide.
Alkoxides can be very reactive and are commer-
cially available for only a select number of elements. 
Livermore chemists have found that organic epox-
ides also initiate the sol-gel reaction. With this 
approach, precursors that are more widely available 
can be used, thus increasing the number of poten-
tial materials that can be developed. In addition, the 
starting materials, solvents, and gelling agents used 
with epoxides are less expensive than those used 
with alkoxides.
Summarizing, sol-gel is a cheap and low-
 temperature technique that enables mixing of 
precursors at the molecular level, leading to finer 
control and higher purity than most other ceramic 
synthesis methods (even small quantities of dop-
ants, such as organic dyes and rare earth metals, can 
be introduced in the sol and end up finely dispersed 
in the final product). The method is particularly 
suited for the production of nanosized multicom-
ponent ceramic powders densified through thermal 
annealing (sintering at relatively low temperature) 
to an inorganic product like a glass or polycrystal or 
a dry gel. Applying the sol-gel process, it is possible 
to fabricate ceramic or glass materials in a wide vari-
ety of forms: ultrafine or spherical-shaped powders, 
thin film coatings, ceramic fibers, microporous inor-
ganic membranes, monolithic ceramics and glasses, 
or extremely porous aerogel materials. Different 
material compositions with different porosity may 
be fabricated depending on the process parameters 
(such as temperature) and the chemicals used. Its 
main traditional use is for optical coatings, where 
the finer particles give better optical clarity, and for 
the manufacture of fine ceramic fibers.
Sol-gel-derived materials have diverse applica-
tions in optics, electronics, energy, space, (bio)sen-
sors, medicine (e.g., controlled drug release), and 
separation (e.g., chromatography) technology.
Sol-gel methods have been used in MEMS, for 
example, in the fabrication of piezoelectrics such as 
lead-zirconate-titanate (see Volume III, Chapter 8). 
Also, a commercially available, room temperature 
chemical gas sensor (a CO fire alarm) is fabricated with 
the sol-gel process (available from Quantum Group 
Inc.; http://www.qginc.com). The Sol-Gel Gateway 
(http://www.solgel.com/bookstore/bookstore.htm) 
is an excellent take-off point for further study of the 
sol-gel technique on the Internet (in particular, check 
http://www.solgel.com/Tutorials/tutorials.htm).
FIGURE 8.4 Aerogel. This photo illustrates the excellent 
insulating properties of aerogel. The crayons on top of the 
aerogel are protected from the flame underneath and are 
not melting.

[Page 515]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   515
Deposition and Arraying Methods 
of Organic Layers in Bio-MEMS
Introduction
Today, miniaturization methods are often applied 
to biotechnology and biomedical problems. With 
the growth of the “bio-MEMS” field, techniques 
for depositing organic materials for chemical and 
biological sensors, often arranged in some type of an 
array configuration, are gaining importance. Organic 
gas-permeable membranes, ion selective membra-
nes, hydrogels, and organic monolayers are nee ded 
for the manufacture of room temperature gas sensors, 
ion-selective electrodes (ISEs), enzyme-based sen-
sors, immunosensors, and DNA and protein arrays. 
Their deposition presents challenges not typically 
encountered in the integrated circuit (IC) world. 
Membranes may be based on classical polymers, such 
as PVC (polyvinylchloride), PVA (polyvinylalcohol), 
PHEMA (polyhydroxyethylmethacrylate), or silicone 
rubber, and incorporate pH and temperature-
sensitive biological materials such as enzymes, anti-
gens, and antibodies. Single layers of molecules may 
be deposited by Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) deposition 
techniques or as self-assembled mono layers (SAMs). 
Those LB films or SAMs may then be further used 
as anchor points for proteins or DNA probes, and 
the latter natural polymer molecules may be synthe-
sized in situ. Not only are the materials dealt with 
very different, the fact that most of the bio-MEMS 
sensors are disposable requires new manufacturing 
approaches as well. Although the num ber of new 
tools available for microfabrication has grown 
dramatically, few methods have  been gainfully 
applied to disposable biosensor construc tion for 
clinical applications. The low cost require ments 
and the tremendous variety and fragmentation of 
biomedical sensor applications often necessitate a 
nonsilicon, modular approach. The Si approach  is 
mostly based on thin film techniques with a limited 
number of materials, too expensive cost, all steps 
tightly integrated, and too many requirements on pro-
cess and materials compatibility. Having addressed 
materials choice and modularity, various competing 
manufacturing processes must be compared.
Because of the importance of this emerging field, 
we review the different options available to coat and 
pattern organic materials on various substrates for 
bio-MEMS in the following section. For the organic 
film deposition techniques reviewed earlier in this 
book, we provide a short summary only.
Deposition Methods for Organic Materials
Organic Film Spin Coating As we know from 
Chapter 1 on lithography, spin coating technology 
has been optimized for the deposition of thin layers 
of photoresist, about 1–2 µm thick, on round and 
nearly ideally flat Si wafers. A typical spin coater 
schematic is shown in Figure 1.14. Resists are 
applied by dropping the resist solution, a polymer, 
a sensitizer (for two-component resists), and a 
solvent on the wafer. The wafer is then rotated on 
a spinning wheel at high speed so that centrifugal 
forces push the excess solution over the edge of 
the wafer, and a residue on the wafer remains as a 
result of surface tension. In this way, films down 
to 0.1 µm can be made. An empirical expression 
relating film thickness to solution viscosity and 
rotation speed was given in Chapter 1 (Equation 
1.3). However, biosensor substrates rarely are round 
or flat, and many chemical sensor membranes 
require a thickness considerably thicker than 1 µm 
for proper functioning. For example, a typical ion-
selective electrode (ISE) membrane is 50 µm thick 
(see Volume I, Chapter 7). Consequently, spin coat-
ing technology does not necessarily fit in with thick 
chemical membranes on a variety of substrates, 
and for monolayer deposition the meth od is not 
adequate. For building ISEs, dip coating or mem-
brane casting is preferred, and for monolayer 
deposition one chooses Langmuir-Blodgett or self-
assembled monolayer (SAM) methods (see below). 
For a tutorial on spin coating, visit http://www.mse.
arizona.edu/faculty/birnie/Coatings/index.htm.
In Chapter 1, we compared several alternatives to 
spin coating for depositing photoresist (see Figure 
1.15). Obviously all these techniques can be adapted 
to deposit other organic coatings. This includes spray 
coating, curtain coating, extrusion coating, roller 
coating, dip coating, plasma deposited, electrode-
posited, silk screening, and meniscus coating. We 
provide some additional information here comple-
menting the material presented in Chapter 1.

[Page 516]
516   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Polymer Dip Coating In the dip-coating method a 
substrate is slowly dipped into and withdrawn from 
a tank containing the dissolved polymer, with a 
uniform velocity, to obtain a uniform coating. The 
dip-coating process may be divided in five stages: 
immersion, startup, deposition, evaporation, and 
drainage. Dip coating of a substrate in a solution of 
a dissolved polymer typifies the simplest method to 
apply an organic layer to a substrate. It is especially 
suited for wire-type ISEs and enzyme-based biosen-
sors where the membrane forms a droplet at the end 
of a wire (see Volume I, Chapter 7). A substrate, for 
example, a chloridized silver wire, is dipped into a 
solution containing the polymer and a solvent. After 
evaporation of the solvent, a thin membrane forms 
on the surface of the sensor. To obtain pinhole-free 
membranes, the dipping is repeated several times, 
interspersed with drying periods. Even though the 
eventual goal is more typically the production of a pla-
nar sensor structure, a Ag wire may be applied in the 
research phase to quickly evaluate a new membrane 
composition. The method is difficult to commercial-
ize because of the variability in coating thickness and 
uniformity. For further reading on dip coating, visit 
http://www.solgel.com/articles/Nov00/mennig.htm.
Dipping and spinning are also used in the fabrica-
tion of sol-gel layers (see Figure 8.2).
Polymer Dry Film Lamination The use of dry 
film lamination, such as the dry photoresist films 
explored  in Chapter 1, is introduced as a better 
approach for the mass manufacture of chemical and 
biological sensors than spin coating in Volume III, 
Example 1.1. Most resists in IC and MEMS fabrica-
tion are deposited as liquids, whereas resists used in 
printed wiring board manufacture are usually dry 
film resists that come in rolls (ranging from 2–60 in. 
wide and  125–1000 ft. long) and are laminated 
onto the substrate instead of being spin-coated on 
it. A typical dry film lamination setup is shown in 
Figure 1.33. The heat and pressure of the laminat-
ing rollers cause the dry film to soften and adapt to 
surface topologies. The resist is then exposed to a 
UV light source. The lamination approach can be 
extended to other polymer coatings as exemplified 
in the manufacture of the compact disc (CD)-based 
fluidic platform shown in Volume  III, Chapter 5. 
In the  manufacture of this CD, we use a layering 
approach, with different sheets of thin machined 
plastic CDs (polycarbonate-PC) laminated together 
using  pressure-sensitive adhesive layers (PSA-FLEX 
mount DFM 200 clear V-95). The PSA layers are as 
thin as 100 µm and are cut using a computer numer-
ical controlled (CNC) cutter-plotter (in Volume III, 
Figure 5.27, CNC  plotter, Graphtec CE-2000-60). 
The  use of PSA layers allows for channels as nar-
row  as 250 µm. When sandwiched between two 
plastic sheets, these channels in the PSA connect the 
larger CNC-machined reservoirs in the PC disks.
Polymer Spraying Polymer or plastic spray-coating 
techniques are the most widely used methods for 
applying organic coatings from the liquid, gas, or 
the solid phase. Spray coating of a liquid involves 
pressurization by compressed air or, in an airless 
method, pushing liquid mechanically through tiny 
orifices. Vapors are carried in an inert dry vapor car-
rier. In the case of a solid, a powdered plastic resin 
is melted and blown through a flame-shrouded 
nozzle. Such thermal spray coating involves heating 
a material, in powder or wire form, to a molten or 
semimolten state. The material is propelled using a 
stream of gas or compressed air to deposit it, creat-
ing a surface structure on a substrate. The coating 
material may consist of a single element but is often 
a composite with unique physical properties that are 
only achievable through the thermal spray process.
There are two main classes of powder coatings: 
thermosetting and thermoplastic coatings. In a 
thermosetting film, cross-linking occurs between 
the molecules in the powder during baking. This 
cross-linking turns the baked film into a single giant 
molecule that cannot melt or flow. In a thermoplas-
tic film, thermal energy makes the binder molecules 
mobile enough to become entangled; thus, a con-
tinuous film forms, and this film hardens on cool-
ing. Although a thermoplastic film can still melt or 
flow, it can do that only at elevated temperatures. 
In electrostatic spraying, a negatively charged plas-
tic powder is spray gunned onto grounded conduc-
tive parts (see Figure 8.5).2 Electrostatic spray is the 
primary technique used for thermoset powders. The 
particles of powder are given their electrical charge 
in the powder coating gun, and the target part is 

[Page 517]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   517
attached to a fixture that is grounded. The electri-
cally charged powder particles are attracted to the 
grounded part and build up on the surface until the 
part is covered with charged particles. At this point, 
the oncoming particles are repelled by the part, and 
the coating process stops. This provides for an even 
film thickness.
Thermoplastic and thermosetting coatings may 
also be formed by dipping a heated part into a con-
tainer of resin particles set in motion by a stream of 
low-pressure air (fluidized-solid bed). This method 
is only of use if an inert coating is desired, for exam-
ple, for biocompatibility, but not for heat-sensitive 
functionalized coatings. The fluidized bed is the 
original powder-coating technique. It is still the pri-
mary technique used for the application of thermo-
plastic powders.
Thermal spraying is ideally suited for large 
structures that otherwise could not be dipped in a 
polymer suspension. Unlike electrostatic powder 
coatings, nonconductive components can be coated, 
and unlike fluidized bed coatings, heat-sensitive 
materials (aircraft skins) can be sprayed. Polymer 
coatings can be repaired by heating (for remelting or 
curing) and by applying additional material to the 
desired location. Polymer coatings can be applied in 
high humidity and at temperatures below freezing. 
Certain polymers have excellent adhesion to metal-
lic surfaces as a result of interfacial bonding. Metals, 
ceramics, or other polymers can be incorporated into 
the polymer matrix during spraying to act as a fill.
Polymer Casting Cast polymer operations are 
operations where a gel coat resin is sprayed to a 
mold, after  which a casting resin is applied with-
out spraying. These are used in the manufacture of 
pools,  bathtubs, marble-look countertops, masks, 
and toys (Figure 8.6). Casting in bio-MEMS is often 
based on the application of a given amount of dis-
solved organic material on the surface of a sensor 
substrate and letting the solvent evaporate. A rim 
structure is fashioned around the substrate, pro-
viding a “flat beaker” for the solution. This method 
provides a more uniform and a more reproducible 
membrane than dip coating. Membranes in planar 
ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) are often made this 
way. Casting is also often used to obtain thicker 
photoresist layers than typically possible with spin 
coating (see also Chapter 1). Casting is the main 
technology used in soft lithography (see Chapter 2).
Polymer Doctor’s Blade or Knife Coating Doctor’s 
blade or knife coating relies on a coating being 
applied to a substrate that then passes through a slit 
between a knife and a support roller (Figure 8.7). The 
“doctor’s blade” refers to the scraping knife blade for 
the removal of excess substance from the moving 
surface being coated. The doctor’s blade is adjustable 
with a precisely controlled height, limiting the dis-
pensed material to a known thickness. This process 
can be used for high-viscosity coatings, and there are 
innumerable variants of this relatively simple pro-
cess, which is rugged but somewhat inaccurate. It 
is well known in many industries, including paper, 
FIGURE 8.5 Electrostatic spray gun from ITW Ransburg. 
(From http://www.itwransburg.com/products.html.)
FIGURE 8.6 Yoda, typical polymer casting application.

[Page 518]
518   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
plastic, and paint manufacturing. Doctor’s blade 
technology is a continuous fabrication method, 
which can also be used to apply all types of organic 
cocktails, for example, to make enzyme-based bio-
sensors or to deposit ceramics, in which case one 
also refers to tape casting and green tape technol-
ogy. Howatt was the first to obtain a patent to use 
the technique for “forming ceramic materials into 
flat plates, especially useful in the electric and radio 
fields.”3 This is still the principal application of tape 
casting today, although its use extends far beyond 
the field envisioned in 1952 (http://www.drblade.
com/history.htm). The ceramic application of doc-
tor blading is a thermal forming process well suited 
for fabrication of mesoscale devices (layers with a 
thickness between several micrometers and mil-
limeters) and is covered in Chapter 9 on thermal 
energy-based forming.
As a specific application of a doctor’s blade pro-
cess in bio-MEMS, consider the mass  production 
of amperometric glucose sensors discussed in 
Volume III, Chapter 1. In that chapter, as an illus-
tration of an informed choice of manufactur-
ing options, we find out that using a silicon batch 
approach, it is almost impossible to make a glucose 
sensor for less than $1 (or any disposable biosensor 
for that matter!). The current industrial process, and 
our conclusion, is that for mass-producing glucose 
sensor strips, the optimal choice is doctor’s blade on 
a continuous moving web, making a 10-cents cost 
per glucose sensor possible.
From this example of a glucose sensor strip, it 
appears that one of the major challenges in bio-
MEMS is the fabrication of affordable disposable 
biosensors. In the case of a glucose sensor strip, 
this may be accomplished using doctor’s blade  in 
a continuous process. An example of a generic 
approach for biosensor manufacture on large plastic 
sheets and eventually on a moving web is shown in 
Volume III, Figure 1.19. The process illustrated allows 
for the fabrication of a sensor array composed of sen-
sors that may otherwise have fabrication incompat-
ibilities. We call this futuristic bio-MEMS approach 
“beyond batch.”
Glow Discharge (Plasma) Polymerization Plasma 
polymerization is a type of plasma-enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition procedure (PECVD; see 
Chapter 7), in which gaseous precursor monomers, 
activated by the plasma, deposit on freely selectable 
substrates as highly cross-linked polymer layers. 
A polymerizable gas can, in principle, include any 
substance that can be brought into the gas phase at 
reduced pressure. The sine qua non for this process to 
take place is the presence in the gas phase of polymer-
producing atoms, such as carbon, silicon, or sulfur. 
These react with one another and with any surface 
groups to form a polymer film, the chemical struc-
ture of which is dependent on the process condi-
tions used. The monomer molecules in the plasma, 
for the most part, become fragmented into reactive 
segments, and remain only partially preserved in 
the chemical structure of the final product, which 
results in a highly cross-linked and disordered struc-
ture compared with a conventional polymer (Figure 
8.8). The degree of structural preservation and 
cross-linking gradients in the deposit are controlled 
FIGURE 8.7 Doctor blading or knife coating of organic 
materials on a moving substrate.

[Page 519]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   519
through  process parameters, such as gas pressure, 
working gas flow, and the applied electrical field. For 
example, it has been found that pulsing the plasma 
in the millisecond regime constitutes a very simple 
and unique method to control the film chemistry.4 
Unlike the more conventional continuous wave 
plasma deposition processes, pulsed plasma depo-
sition enables the polymerization of monomers 
containing labile groups such as amines, ethers, 
and anhydrides, to name but a few. By selecting the 
monomer type and the energy density per mono-
mer, known as the Yasuda parameter, the chemical 
composition and structure of the resulting thin film 
can be varied over a wide range.5
The so-obtained polymer coats can be used to 
further attach specific molecules by conventional 
wet chemistry techniques. One can also construct 
so-called gradient layers, i.e., with increasing degree 
of cross-linking over the film thickness.
Figure 8.9 illustrates the setup we used in our 
own  work on plasma polymerization of doped 
polymers. The apparatus consisted of a quartz tube 
reaction chamber; a gas-handling system to intro-
duce the carrier gas, monomer, and dopant into the 
system, as well as to remove the unreacted mate-
rial; and a power supply (operating at 27 MHz) to 
provide the radio-frequency (RF) energy necessary 
to create and maintain a plasma within the sys-
tem. Despite the complex chemistry of this pro-
cess, good conformal coatings often result. Guckel 
applied this technique to obtain deposition of 
poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) in layers more 
than 100 µm thick.6 In research at SRI International, 
we synthesized electroactive plasma polymers using 
I2 or N2O as dopants from the following monomers: 
thiophene, furan, aniline, benzaldehyde, benzene, 
indole, diphenylacetylene, and 1-methylpyrrole.
Monomer
Conventional polymer
Plasma polymer
FIGURE 8.8 Polymers deposited with plasma polymeriza-
tion. Comparison of the structures of plasma polymers 
and conventional polymers.
Toggle
valve
Needle
valve
Toggle
valve
Toggle
valve
Needle
valve
Needle
valve
Needle
valve
Trap
Pump
Dopant/monomer
Inlet
Monomer
Argon
Tuner
RF
supply
Rotometer
Rotometer
FIGURE 8.9 Schematic of plasma deposition system.

[Page 520]
520   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
In general, plasma-polymerized materials offer 
the following advantages:
 
◾The plasma-polymerized films are uniform, 
pinhole-free, chemically resistant, and mechan-
ically strong.
 
◾A thin to thick film (200 Å to >100 µm) can be 
formed in a flawless manner at ambient tem-
perature onto any substrate.
 
◾The organic films deposited by the plasma pro-
cess adhere strongly to the substrate.
 
◾The choice of monomers is unlimited; almost 
any organic compound convertible into vapor 
can be polymerized.
 
◾The plasma process (one-step process from a 
vapor source) is compatible with conventional 
CMOS technology.
 
◾Some functional groups can be introduced 
onto the surface of the organic film by subse-
quent glow discharge treatment in a reactive 
gas atmosphere.
 
◾Highly irregular surfaces can be coated and 
patterned by depositing a light-sensitive poly-
mer by plasma polymerization (e.g., polymer-
ized PMMA).
Applications from plasma polymer coatings include 
scratch-resistant coatings, corrosion protection, anti-
bonding, antisoiling coatings, barrier layers, and 
biocompatible coats for implants. For more details 
on plasma polymerization, see, for example, Yasuda7 
and Plasma Polymer Films edited by Biederman.8
Silk Screening or Screen Printing of Organics Silk 
screening or screen printing (also serigraphy) is an 
additive technique that can be used to create sharp-
edged organic coatings/images using a stencil. The 
method is reviewed in more detail in Chapter 9, 
where we discuss its application for the deposi-
tion of higher temperate ceramic coats. Silk screen-
ing is popular both in fine arts and in commercial 
printing, where it is used to print images on T-shirts 
(Figure 8.10), hats, CDs, DVDs, ceramics, glass, poly-
ethylene, polypropylene, paper, metals, and wood.
Screen printing presents a more cost-effective 
means of depositing a wide variety of films on 
planar substrates than does integrated circuit (IC) 
technology, especially when fabricating devices at 
relatively low production volumes. The technique 
constitutes one of several thick film or hybrid tech-
nologies used  for selective coating of flat surfaces 
(e.g., a ceramic substrate). The technology was origi-
nally developed for the production of miniature, 
robust, and, above all, cheap electronic circuits. The 
up-front investment in a thick film facility is low 
compared with that of IC manufacturing. For dis-
posable chemical sensors, recent industrial experi-
ence indicates that screen printing thick films is a 
viable alternative to Si thin film technologies.
For biosensor applications, thick film technology 
based on pastes that can be deposited at room tem-
perature is crucial. Special grades of polymer-based 
pastes (e.g., for carbon, Ag, and Ag/AgCl electrodes) are 
becoming commercially available for this purpose.9 
Polymer thick films with a thickness anywhere from 
5–50 µm can be screen printed on cheap polymer 
substrates. In the commercial planar electrochemi-
cal glucose sensor from MediSense/Abbott sensor, 
the Precision QID, shown in Volume I, Chapter 7, all 
films are silk-screened onto a PVC substrate.
In the research phase of new chemical sensors, 
pastes must be developed from their pure com-
ponents. Some examples follow. Pace et al.10 screen 
printed a PVC/ionophore layer for a pH sensor. 
Belford et al.11 investigated pH-sensitive glass mix-
tures and proceeded to screen print them on a 
multilayer metal conductor to make planar pH 
sensors. In Pace et al.,12 a thick film, multilayered 
oxygen sensor with screen-printed chemical mem-
FIGURE 8.10 Silk screening of T-shirts.

[Page 521]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   521
branes of PVA and silicone rubber is detailed (see 
also Karagounis et al.13). A thick film glucose 
sensor is presented by Lewandowski et al.14 and 
Lambrechts et al.15 The latter authors developed an 
enzyme-based thick film glucose sensor with RuO2 
electrodes. All  the above thick film sensors were 
fabricated on Al2O3 substrates. Weetall et al.16 present 
an extremely low-cost, silk-screened immunosen -
sor on cardboard. Cha et al.17 compare the perfor-
mance of thick film Au and Pt electrodes with 
conventional bulk electrodes.
When faced with adapting a biosensor membrane 
to an IC process versus adaptation to a thick film 
process, it now seems that, once the specialty inks 
are available, a thick film approach is easier, less 
expensive, and more accessible. For in vitro chemi-
cal sensors where small size is not as important, 
we expect more research to result in a switch from 
the overly ambitious IC approach to the more real-
istic thick film approaches as sketched above. In 
Volume  III, Chapter 1, we compare the pros and 
cons of thin and thick film technologies.
Important other driving forces for the develop-
ment of new low-temperature inks for silk screen-
ing come from the exciting market opportunity of 
organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), OLED flex-
ible displays, polymer transistors, and electronic 
paper. There are two types of OLED displays: the ones 
based on small molecule OLEDs and the polymer-
based ones. The small molecule OLEDs use organic 
emissive materials that do not contain long polymer 
chains. “Small” molecules often used include orga-
nometallic chelates, flourescent and phosphorescent 
dyes, and conjugated dendrimers. The production of 
small molecule devices and dispalys usually involves 
thin film deposition such as a separation in a vac-
uum. Small molecule OLEDs are more mature, but 
the polymer based OLEDs have the potential of 
being lower cost because of the applicability of screen 
printing, which enables high throughput of large 
area devices, such as large area displays. Lifetime 
improvement and encapsulation are progressing fast; 
thus, polymer OLEDs now have the potential of being 
very bright, extremely thin, low power, and low cost. 
There is the eventual possibility of producing OLED 
displays using roll to roll (R2R) manufacturing (see 
Volume III, Chapter  1), which would dramatically 
further reduce their manufacturing cost. The aim is 
also to produce organic thin film transistors (TFTs) 
using printing techniques, but there are a number 
of issues that still need to be resolved in this case. 
However, reduction in cost can already be achieved 
today by using hybrid-processing technologies, i.e., 
using low-cost printing and dispensing techniques 
wherever it is possible, whereas other processing 
steps remain “conventional,” such as photolithogra-
phy or vapor deposition processes.
In Figure 8.11 some typical thin film organic 
devices are shown. Using thin sheets of plastic—
similar to overhead transparencies—as the base, one 
can print the multiple layers of OLEDs or transistors 
with silk screening one layer at a time. The squeegee 
pushes a liquid plastic mixture over a stainless-steel 
mesh, and after the solvent evaporates, a new plastic 
feature remains.
With electronic paper, the ink is a liquid that can 
be printed onto nearly any surface. Within the liquid 
are suspended tiny microcapsules, each containing 
white and black particles (Figure 8.12). The relative 
movement of negatively charged black and positively 
charged white particles inside their  microcapsules 
is controlled by the direction of an applied voltage. 
In an electric field, the white particles move to one 
end of the microcapsule and make the surface of 
the electronic paper appear white at that spot. An 
opposite electric field pulls the white particles to 
the other end of the microcapsules, where they are 
obscured by the black particles, making the surface 
appear dark at that spot.18 To form an electronic ink 
display, the ink is screen printed onto a sheet of plas-
tic film that is laminated to a layer of circuitry. The 
circuitry forms a pattern of pixels that can then be 
controlled by a display driver. The microcapsules are 
suspended in a liquid “carrier medium,” allowing 
them to be printed using existing screen-printing 
processes onto virtually any surface, including glass, 
plastic, fabric, and even paper. Ultimately electronic 
ink will permit most any surface to become a dis-
play, bringing information out of the confines of tra-
ditional devices and into the world around us.
Applications of electronic ink include e-book 
readers capable of displaying digital versions of 
books and e-paper magazines, electronic pricing 
labels in retail shops, timetables at bus stations, and 

[Page 522]
522   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
electronic billboards. In February 2006, the Flemish 
daily De Tijd distributed an electronic version of the 
paper to select subscribers in a limited marketing 
study. This was the first recorded application of elec-
tronic ink to newspaper publishing.
FIGURE 8.11 Organic light-emitting diode (OLED). (a) In a 
typical organic light-emitting device, luminescent molecu-
lar excited states are generated in the electron transport 
and luminescent layer near its contact region with the hole 
transport layer. (b) OLED display; an organic passive matrix 
display on a substrate of polyethylene terephthalate, a 
lightweight plastic, will bend around a diameter of less than 
1 cm. The 1.8-mm-thick, 5 × 10-cm monochrome display con-
sists of 128 × 64 pixels, each measuring 400 × 500 µm, and is 
operated at conventional video brightness of 100 cd/m2. It 
was fabricated by Universal Display Corp. (Ewing, NJ), with a 
moisture barrier built into the plastic that prevents deg-
radation of the pixels (http://www.universaldisplay.com). 
(c) Organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs) are constructed of 
an organic or inorganic gate insulator and an organic semi-
conducting channel linking the source and drain.
FIGURE 8.12 How electronic ink works. (a) Operating 
principle of electronic ink. The relative movement of 
negatively charged black and positively charged white 
particles inside their microcapsules is controlled by the 
direction of the applied voltage. (b) A backplane thin-film 
transistor measured in situ under compressive stress. The 
transistor is bent to three different radii of curvature: 
green, 2.0 cm (0.19% strain); blue, 1.3 cm (0.29% strain); 
and red, 1.0 cm (0.38% strain). The thin-film transistor has 
identical characteristics when measured without bend-
ing (black curve) and at a radius of curvature of 2.0 cm; 
degradation is minimal even at 1.0 cm. Results were simi-
lar under tensile stress. (c) Text image shown on a bent 
display whose resolution is 96 dpi and which has a white-
state reflectance of 43% and a contrast ratio of 8.5:1. 
(From Chen, Y., J. Au, P. Kazlas, A. Ritenour, H. Gates, and 
M. McCreary. 2003. Electronic paper: Flexible active-matrix 
electronic ink display. Nature 423:136.18)

[Page 523]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   523
Langmuir-Blodgett Deposition and Self-Assembled 
Monolayers The Langmuir-Blodgett technique, 
invented by Irving Langmuir and Katharine Blodgett 
in 1935, allows the controlled deposition of mono-
molecular layers on a wide variety of substrates. This 
ultrathin film deposition technique is limited to 
materials that consist of amphilic long chain mole-
cules with a hydrophobic molecule at one end and a 
hydrophilic molecule at the other. In the Langmuir-
Blodgett process, a monolayer of film-forming mol -
ecules (stearic acid is a model molecule) on an 
aqueous surface is compressed into a compact float-
ing film and transferred to a solid substrate by pass-
ing a substrate through the water surface at a constant 
speed and film surface tension (Figure 8.13). Thus, 
layered films can be built up in thickness (up to 
100 layers) by consecutive dipping in the Langmuir 
trough. For example, phthalocyanine thin films sen-
sitive to oxidizing gases such as NO2 and biological 
materials sensitive to odors resulted via this meth od. 
Most of the difficulties with Langmuir-Blodgett films 
stem from the need to make the material pinhole-
free and to overcome the problem of their lack of 
mechanical, chemical, and thermal stability.
In the early 1980s at the Bell Labs, David L. Allara 
(now at Pennsylvania State University) and Ralph 
G. Nuzzo (now at University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign) discovered the self-assembly of disul-
fide and, soon thereafter, of alkanethiol monolayers 
(SAMs) on metal surfaces.19,20 SAM films, especially 
on Au, spontaneously assemble into stable and 
highly organized molecular layers, bonding with 
the sulfur atoms onto the gold and resulting in 
a new surface with properties determined by the 
alkane head group. The preferred crystal face for 
alkanethiolate SAM preparation on gold substrates 
is the (111) surface, which is obtained either by using 
single-crystal substrates or by evaporation of thin 
FIGURE 8.13 Langmuir-Blodgett film deposition: sequence of a deposition (a), schematic of apparatus (b), and photo of 
apparatus (c).

[Page 524]
524   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Au films on flat supports, typically glass or silicon 
(Figure 8.14). Several different solvents are usable 
at the low thiol concentrations (typically 1–2 mM) 
that are used in preparation of SAMs, but the most 
commonly used one is ethanol. It is important to 
minimize the water content in the solvent if the 
SAMs are to be used in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) 
experiments. Drying the solvent limits incorporation 
of water into the SAM structure, which reduces 
outgassing and increases the repeatability of UHV 
experiments. Even though a SAM forms very rapidly 
on a Au substrate, it is necessary to use adsorption 
times of 15 h or more to obtain well-ordered, defect-
free SAMs. Multilayers do not form, and adsorption 
times of 2–3 days are optimal in obtaining the 
highest-quality monolayers.
The tail group that provides the functionality 
of the SAM can be widely varied. CH3-terminated 
SAMs are commercially available, and other 
functional groups can be easily synthesized by 
any well-equipped chemical laboratory, providing 
almost infinite possibilities. In addition, chemical 
modification of the tail group is also possible after 
formation of the SAM, expanding the available 
range of functionalities even further. Examples 
of functionalities are −CH3, −OH, − (C=O)OCH3, 
−O(C=O)CH3, −O(C=O)CF3, −O(C=O)C6H5, −COOH, 
−OSO3H, and so on. SAMs on gold are generally 
stable and can withstand strong acids and bases; 
they are not destroyed by solvents and can withstand 
physiological environments.21
This method of building monolayers forms an 
important alternative to the Langmuir-Blodgett 
method. The use of monolayer electron beam resists, 
as discussed in Chapter 2, affords nanometer-scale 
lithography resolution. The chemical sensor indus-
try exploits monolayers of organics, for example, in 
immunosensors and to provide anchor points for 
subsequent organic molecules or membranes.
Patterning of Organic Materials
Introduction
In the previous sections, we summarized some of the 
different methods available to deposit organic thin 
layers. In what follows, we will encounter some of the 
same techniques and introduce some new ones as we 
look into the process of depositing small amounts 
of material in a well-defined, small spot on a sub-
strate, i.e., the patterning of organic films. Patterning 
of organic thin layers into discrete array elements 
has recently spawned a wide variety of applications. 
These range from sensor arrays for electronic noses 
and tongues to DNA and protein arrays.
Patterning through Photolithography
Patterning of Hydrogels, Gas-Permeable Membranes 
and Ion-Selective Electrodes Spinning, UV exposure, 
and development of resists are well-known, low-
cost, mass-production patterning procedures in 
photolithography for IC fabrication. Naturally, this 
approach became one of the first methods to be 
applied to the patterning of other organic materials. 
However, photosensitized organic materials such 
as hydrogels, gas-permeable membranes, and 
ion-selective electrodes (ISEs), e.g., to fabricate 
a biosensor array, are usually not commercially 
available. To cope with this problem, photosensitive 
materials from high-purity materials must be 
prepared. For example, to pattern a hydrogel, e.g., 
a water-soluble polymer like polyvinyl alcohol 
(PVA), a photosensitizer such as (NH4)2Cr2O7 must 
be added.15 After spin coating, the polymer film is 
FIGURE 8.14 Preparation of SAMs. The substrate, Au on 
Si, is immersed into an ethanol solution of the desired 
thiol. Initial adsorption is fast (seconds); then an organiza-
tion phase follows, which should be allowed to continue 
for >15 h for best results. An STM of a fully assembled 
SAM is also shown.

[Page 525]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   525
photochemically cross-linked by UV light. In the 
exposed regions, an insoluble hydrogel materializes. 
The development or removal of unexposed regions is 
carried out in warm water. An example of patterning 
a hydrogel actuator material inside a fluidic network 
through the use of photolithography is described 
by Liu et al.22 The actuator hydrogel, after in situ 
photopolymerization, responds to changes in local 
pH by changing its volume and thus provides a 
means for valving action in the fluidic network.23 
The in situ polymerization of these polymeric 
valves and  their  function in a fluidic network are 
demonstrated in Figure 8.15.22
An alternative approach to patterning organic 
materials without modifying the material through 
the addition of a photosensitizer is through lift-
off. Lift-off to lithographically pattern hard to etch 
 materials (e.g., Pt), or in general to pattern mate-
rials that are not photosensitive, was introduced 
in Chapter 1. At one time, a problem with lift-off 
for  patterning organic materials was the thickness 
required for the patterning photoresist layer. As dis-
cussed in Chapter 1, a typical resist layer used to mea-
sure only about 1 µm thick, whereas the thickness 
needed for the organic layers involved in chemi-
cal sensors frequently can reach up to 50–100 µm, 
demanding resist layers that are thicker. The many 
new thick resist technologies (e.g., SU-8) now avail-
able make this approach feasible today. However, a 
remaining problem with lift-off is that it can be used 
only with materials resistant to the solvent  necessary 
for the resist removal; therefore, this technology prob-
ably will be limited to specific cases.
Hydrogels, gas-permeable membranes, and ISEs 
are all relatively thick, from several micrometers to 
100 µm. Next we consider patterning of much thin-
ner organic layers, such as monolayers of DNA and 
proteins.
Very Large-Scale Immobilized Polymer Patterning 
and Synthesis Affymetrix’s very large-scale immo-
bilized polymer synthesis (VLSIPS) is illustrated in 
Figure 8.16. The technique patterns and synthesizes 
biopolymers at the same time.24 In light-directed oli-
gonucleotide synthesis for DNA arrays (GeneChips), 
a solid support (e.g., a 1.28 cm × 1.28 cm Si chip) is 
derivatized with a covalently linked aminosilanated 
layer and terminated with a photolabile protecting 
FIGURE 8.15 Patterning hydrogels. (a) Schematic showing the in-channel photo-polymerziation technique. (b) Sche-
matic of a 2D shut-off microvalve consisting of hydrogel “jackets” (50 µm thick) around three prefabricated SU-8 posts. 
(c) Micrograph of the hydrogel jackets blocking the regulated channel (pH 7) in their expanded state in a pH 12 solu-
tion (dyed). (d) Micrograph showing the contracted hydrogels allowing fluid to flow down the side branch. (Courtesy of 
Dr. D. Beebe, University of Madison, Wisconsin.22)

[Page 526]
526   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 8.16 Very large-scale immobilized polymer synthesis (VLSIPS). Light-directed oligonucleotide synthesis. (a) A 
solid support is derivatized with a covalent linker molecule terminated with a photolabile protecting group. Light is 
directed through a mask to deprotect and activate selected sites, and protected nucleotides couple to the activated sites. 
The process is repeated, activating different sets of sites and coupling different bases, allowing arbitrary DNA probes to 
be constructed at each site. (b) Schematic representation of the lamp, mask, and array. (From Fodor, P. A. S., J. L. Read, 
M. C. Pirrung, L. Sryer, A. T. Lu, and D. Solas. 1991. Light-directed,  spatially addressable parallel chemical synthesis. 
Science 251:767–73.24) (c) Finished GeneChip probe array with a fluorescent image of a hybridized probe array and details 
of an individual hybridized probe cell (24 µm).

[Page 527]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   527
group. The on-chip combinatorial synthesis proceeds 
by photolithographically deprotecting all array ele-
ments that are to receive a common nucleotide, cou-
pling that nucleotide by exposing the entire array to 
the appropriate phosphoramidite, and then after the 
oxidation and washing steps, repeating the proce-
dure for the next nucleotide. The in situ synthesis of 
oligonucleotides occurs in parallel, resulting in con-
secutive addition of A, C, G, and T nucleotides to the 
appropriate gene sequences on the array. To make an 
array of N-mers requires 4N cycles of deprotection 
and coupling, one for each of the four bases, times 
N base positions. This photolithographic method 
requires 4N masks, which are specific to the pat-
tern of sequences on the array but can be used to 
make many copies of the array. The masks add con-
siderable expense, and the procedure is best suited 
for generating large numbers of identical arrays. By 
going through 32 iterations of the oligonucleotide 
synthesis, 65,536 oligos containing eight units can 
be fabricated in about 1 day.
In Figure 8.17 we show how an Affymetrix oligo 
microarray can be used to establish the amount 
of messenger RNA (mRNA) in a sample. mRNA is 
extracted from a cell and is converted to complemen-
tary DNA (cDNA) using reverse transcriptase. After 
transcription, the cRNA is biotin-labeled and frag-
mented. This single-stranded and labeled RNA target 
is then put in contact with the GeneChip with mil-
lions of copies of different complementary probes. 
After hybridization, the chip is washed and stained, 
and the array is scanned and quantitated. Each gene 
is represented on the GeneChip using 16–20 (prefer-
ably nonoverlapping) 25-mers, and each oligonucle-
otide has a single-base mismatch partner for internal 
control of hybridization specificity.
The combinatorial approach described here to 
 fabricate DNA arrays can also be used for peptide syn-
thesis to create an assortment of peptides of almost 
any length. The approach is a generic and powerful 
method to create large numbers of compounds in a 
very small area in a reasonable amount of time.
Proteins Patterning with Lithography A wide range 
of proteins has been patterned with features in the 
micrometer range by making a surface locally hydro-
phobic or hydrophilic through lithography (see 
Chapter 2, “Very Thin Resist Layers”). Such patterns 
may be observed by a number of techniques includ-
ing fluorescence microscopy, atomic force micros-
copy (AFM), and the growth response of cultured 
cells.25 There are also efforts to produce nanopat-
terned protein arrays by using proteins that self- 
assemble into molecular lattices, such as the bacterial 
S protein. Douglas et al.26 used metal-decorated crys-
tals of the S proteins of Sulfolobus acidocaldarius as a 
FIGURE 8.17 How an oligo microarray works.

[Page 528]
528   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
protein mask to pattern hexagonal arrays of 10-nm-
diameter holes onto graphite surfaces. Figure 8.18 
demonstrates how the self-assembled protein lattice 
may be used for nanopatterned protein surfaces.
UV lithography, in some special cases, may also 
work directly for patterning thin protein layers as 
demonstrated in Example 8.1. In this example a pro-
tein grating was created by shining UV, in the pres-
ence of oxygen, through a grating photomask. Besides 
UV lithography, soft and hard x-rays, e-beam, and 
ion projection lithography can all be used for direct 
protein film structuring.
Digital Mirror Array Patterning With VLSIPS (see 
above), a DNA chip of 25-mers may require as many 
as 100 different masks, leading to a very high cost 
and a too-long fabrication time.
Singh-Gasson et al.27 came up with an elegant 
maskless fabrication alternative for light-directed 
oligonucleotide microarrays by using a digital 
micromirror array. Specifically, this group used 
the digital micromirror device (DMD) from Texas 
Instruments (http://www.dlp.com/dlp/default.asp), 
the fabrication of which is described in Chapter 7. 
This specific DMD consists of a 600 × 800 array of 
16-µm-wide micromirrors (the same type used in 
projection systems). The tiny mirrors are individu-
ally addressable and can be used to create any given 
pattern or image in a broad range of wavelengths. 
With a 1:1 imaging system, the DMD can be exploited 
to address 480,000 pixels on a 10 × 14-mm area. 
This maskless array synthesizer (MAS) or virtual 
mask array synthesizer is shown in Figure 8.19. An 
added benefit of this clever approach is that the 
active surface of the glass substrate can be mounted 
in a flow cell reaction chamber connected to a DNA 
synthesizer. Chemical coupling cycles follow light 
exposure, and these steps are repeated with different 
virtual masks to grow desired oligonucleotides in 
any desired pattern. It is obvious that the MAS can 
also be used for other array patterning/synthesis 
experiments.
Virtual masks were discussed in Chapter 1 under 
“Inexpensive Masks and Maskless Optical Projec-
tion Lithography for Research and Development.” 
A  maskless imaging method was also used by 
Bertsch et al.28 at the Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology (EPLF) in microstereolithography. This 
research group uses a computer-controlled liquid 
crystal display (LCD) as a dynamic pattern genera-
tor in microstereolithography (see further below).
Ink Jetting and Microspotting
Introduction Drop delivery systems present an 
alternative mechanical approach to pattern organic 
materials on a planar substrate. Although resolu-
tion is lower than with lithography methods, these 
mechanical methods are fast and less expensive.
Ink-Jet Printing Drop delivery in bio-MEMS is 
based on the same principles as commercial ink-jet 
printing. The ink-jet nozzle is connected to a reser-
voir filled with the chemical solution and placed 
above a computer-controlled x-y stage. Depending 
on the ink expulsion method, even temperature-
sensitive enzyme formulations can be delivered. The 
substrate to be coated is placed on the x-y stage, and 
under computer control, liquid drops (e.g., 50 µm 
in diameter) are expelled through the nozzle onto 
a well-defined place on the wafer (see Figure 8.20). 
FIGURE 8.18 Nanopatterning of surface chemistry using a self-assembled protein mask. (From Douglas, K., G. 
Deavaud, and N. A. Clark. 1992. Transfer of biologically derived nanometer scale patterns to smooth substrates. Science 
257:642–44.26)

[Page 529]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   529
Different nozzles may print different spots in par-
allel. Although these drop delivery systems are 
serial, they can be very fast, as evidenced by epoxy 
delivery stations in IC manufacturing lines.
The ink-jet mechanism in Figure 8.20 is thermal 
and is often called a bubble jet, with droplets as small 
as a few picoliters (2–4 pL).29 Some ink-jet printers 
can vary the drop size. Five years ago a typical drop 
size was 30–50 pL; today drop sizes of 2–4 pL are 
state of the art. This is comparable to the size dif-
ference between a softball and a ping pong ball. 
Smaller drops produce smoother-looking prints 
because they make smaller dots on the paper. Hewlett 
Packard’s (HP) thermal ink jet (TIJ) represents 
the state of the art in this arena. In the TIJ, tiny 
resistors are used to rapidly heat (1,000,000°C/s) a 
thin (0.1  µm)  layer  of liquid ink to about 340°C. 
A superheated vapor explosion vaporizes a tiny 
fraction of the ink to form an expanding bubble that 
ejects a drop of ink (and any trapped air) from the 
ink cartridge onto the paper or other substrate. It is 
noteworthy that the ink does not boil. The bubble 
collapse and break off draws fresh ink over the 
resistor. The bubble formation, expansion, break 
off, and refill (all very fast) are illustrated in Figure 
8.21a. The HP TIJ has all the active power electronics 
and orifice addressing integrated on the same Si chip 
with the drop generator as shown in Figure 8.21b. The 
orifices may be spaced at 300/in. in a single column 
for a 300-dpi printhead, or for a 600-dpi printhead, 
FIGURE 8.19 Schematic of the maskless array synthesizer (MAS). A UV light source is used to illuminate the digital micro-
mirror array. A set of reflective OFF/ON mirrors and a 1:1 imaging system with a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.08 form an 
image of the pattern on the digital micromirror array on the active surface of the glass substrate. The glass substrate is 
enclosed in a flow cell connected to a DNA synthesizer. (Courtesy of Dr. R. Green, NimbleGen Systems.)

[Page 530]
530   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
two offset columns of 300 orifices may be used. It is 
even possible to put 600 TIJ orifices/in. in a single 
column. Current piezo ink jets (see next paragraph) 
only have 90  orifices/in. The TIJ technology is a 
remarkable piece of engineering. To put this in 
perspective, engineers trying to develop a commer-
cial ion-sensitive field effect transistor (ISFET) 
have struggled for more than 30 years to integrate 
liquids with electronics with little success or market 
acceptance until very recently (see Volume I, 
Chapter 7 and Volume III, Chapter 10). Not only did 
HP succeed in integrating liquid with electronics, 
they were also able to find an effective method of 
repeatedly heat ing the liquid (ink). This way HP 
has also carved out a very lucrative business in 
disposable ink car tridges. Perhaps their efforts will 
also pay off in other fluidic areas, and it may even be 
worth reconsidering the ISFET using HP technology.
A piezoelectric ink-jet head is used for another 
type of ink-jet printing and consists of a small res-
ervoir with an inlet port and a nozzle at the other 
end. One wall of the reservoir consists of a thin 
diaphragm with an attached piezoelectric crystal. 
When voltage is applied to the crystal, it contracts 
laterally, thus deflecting the diaphragm and ejecting 
a small drop of fluid from the nozzle. The reservoir 
then refills via capillary action through the inlet. 
One, and only one, drop is ejected for each voltage 
pulse applied to the crystal, thus allowing complete 
control over when a drop is ejected. Such devices are 
inexpensive and can deliver drops with volumes of 
tens of picoliters at rates of thousands of drops per 
second. In conjunction with a computer-controlled 
x-y stepping stage to position the array with respect 
to the ink-jet nozzles, it is possible to deliver differ-
ent reagents to different spots on the array. Arrays of 
150,000 spots can be addressed in less than 1 min, 
with each spot receiving one drop of reagent. As 
pointed out above, thermal ink jets have a higher 
orifice density than piezoelectric printing. For more 
details on both types of ink-jet printing, visit http://
www.hp.com/oeminkjet/tij/about.htm.
FIGURE 8.20 Ink-jet deposition system.

[Page 531]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   531
Because a computer controls the pattern of 
reagents as an array is being made with ink jetting, it 
is as easy to make 10 arrays with different sequences 
as it is to make 10 identical arrays. This flexibility is 
perhaps the main advantage of the ink-jet approach. 
Achieving high density with the ink-jet approach 
requires one more trick. Two drops of liquid applied 
too closely together on a surface will tend to spread 
into each other and mix. For 40-pL drops, the mini-
mal center-to-center spacing is about 600 µm. This 
limits the array density achievable with the ink-jet 
method. One way around this is to engineer patterns 
in the surface chemistry of the array to produce spots 
of a relatively hydrophilic character surrounded by 
hydrophobic barriers. At the small length scales 
involved (approximately 100 µm), surface tension is 
the dominant force on a drop of liquid, and a hydro-
phobic surface will effectively prevent a drop from 
spreading out beyond the confines of the hydrophilic 
surface. There are several ways to engineer such a 
surface. Modern techniques use fluorinated alkyl 
silanes, which covalently couple to glass and present 
an extremely hydrophobic surface. They can be pat-
terned by masking the areas to remain hydrophilic, 
derivatizing the exposed surface with the appropri-
ate silane and then removing the mask by dissolving 
FIGURE 8.21 HP’s thermal ink-jet (TIJ) technology. (a) Bubble formation, expansion, collapse, and refill. (b) Integrated 
power electronics and orifice addressing.

[Page 532]
532   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
it with various organic solvents. The mask itself can 
be formed by a photolithographic process wherein 
the array is covered with a thin, uniform layer of 
photoresist, which is then exposed to light through 
a photographic negative to define the array. The 
photoresist is developed, leaving behind a pattern of 
protective photoresist to act as a mask. Alternatively, 
a “Whitesides” rubber stamp can be used to apply 
either the protective mask or the hydrophobic silane 
itself. Any of these methods will easily produce 100-
µm-diameter hydrophilic wells separated by 40-µm 
hydrophobic barriers, or 5,000 array sites/cm2. Ink-
jet technology has been used to prepare microarrays 
of single cDNA at a density of 10,000 spots/cm2.
On a somewhat larger scale, epoxy-delivery sys-
tems used in the IC industry similarly deliver drops 
in a serial fashion on specific spots on a substrate. 
A typical commercial drop-dispensing system (e.g., 
the IVEK Digispense 2000) delivers 0.20–0.50 µl in 
a drop and has a cycle time per dispense of 1 s. A 
vision system verifies substrate position and accu-
rate dispense location to within ±25 µm of a speci-
fied location.
Mechanical Microspotting Mechanically microspot-
ting, as developed by Brown et al. (Stanford Uni-
versity), is simpler than ink-jet printing. In this 
approach, a popular and inexpensive method for 
making DNA arrays, a prepared DNA sample (e.g., 
cDNA or a PCR product) is loaded into a spot-
ting pin by capillary action, and a small volume is 
transferred to a solid surface by physical contact 
between the pin and the solid substrate (see Figure 
8.22). After a first spotting cycle, the pin is washed, 
and a second sample is loaded and deposited to an 
adjacent address. Robotic control systems and mul-
tiplexed printheads allow automated microarray 
 fabrication. This very flexible mechanical drop deliv-
ery technique takes a small amount of liquid from 
a 96- (or 384-) well plate and places a tiny (1 nL) 
drop onto a microscope slide. Because the machine 
is fully automated, it requires little extra work to 
make additional slides. One can typically make 
120 slides at a time. The microspotted microarrays 
currently manufactured contain as much as 10,000 
groups of cDNA in an area of 3.6 cm2.
As sketched in Figure 8.23, a cDNA array as fabri-
cated with the equipment shown in Figure 8.22 may 
be used to establish the relative amount of messen-
ger DNA expression in a biological sample (see also 
Volume III, Chapter 2). For example, we might want 
to compare the gene expression levels for two cell 
populations (e.g., from tumor and normal cells) on a 
single microarray. For that application, both sample 
(tumor cell) and control DNA (normal cell) are used 
as targets. One first extracts mRNA from both sample 
and control and converts the mRNA to cDNA using 
reverse transcriptase. In a subsequent step, the cDNA 
is amplified using PCR. DNA probe molecules are 
then deposited onto the glass slide substrate. Finally, 
target DNA from tumor and healthy cells are fluores-
cently tagged (Cy3, Cy5; see Volume I, Chapter 7), 
and an equal amount of each is added to the cDNA 
probe array. Depending whether there is a match 
between target and probe DNA, hybridization does 
or does not take place. If no hybridization occurs, no 
color results. If the sample (red) DNA hybridizes and 
the control does not, a red color results, and if only 
control (green) DNA hybridizes, a green color results. 
If both hybridize equally, a yellow color results. The 
color intensity measured in a fluorescence reader 
reflects the abundance of the mRNA in the sample. 
The assumption in this experiment is that cellular 
mRNA levels directly reflect gene expression.
In Table 8.1 we compare the procedure for mea-
suring mRNA as depicted in Figure 8.23, where we 
use a spotted cDNA array, with the one in Figure 
8.17, where we use a lithographically synthesized 
oligo array.
In Figure 8.24, we compare three arraying meth-
ods: lithography, microspotting, and ink jetting. 
FIGURE 8.22 Spotted arrays of cDNA on 50 glass slides.

[Page 533]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   533
FIGURE 8.23 Example of spotted cDNA microarray analysis: experimental procedure (a) and microarray image (b).
TABLE 8.1 Spotted cDNA Array versus Synthesized Oligo Array
Microarray: Spotted
DNA Chips: Synthesized
Probes
Probes (0.6–2.4 kb) are PCR-amplified full-
length cDNA sequences
Probes are 20–25 deoxyoligonucleotides
Manufacture
Spotted by “robo-arms” on nonporous, solid 
support
Synthesized on glass by solid-phase DNA synthesis 
coupled with selectively masked light protection and 
deprotection (photolithography)
Number of spots
About 10,000 “spots” on a microscope glass 
slide. Maximum 24,000 features per array
Commercial GeneChips have about 300,000 probes on 
1.28 × 1.28 cm surface; experimental versions exceed 
1,000,000 probes per array
Quality of spots
Variability in spot quality from slide to slide
High quality with little variability between slides
Gene 
representation
Each gene represented by its purified PCR 
product
Each gene represented multiply using 16–20 
(preferably nonoverlapping) 25-mers
Internal control
Simultaneous analysis of two samples (treated 
vs. untreated cells) provides internal control
Each oligonucleotide has single-base mismatch partner 
for internal control of hybridization specificity 
Gene expression 
amount
Relative
Absolute
Cost/flexibility
More flexible and cheaper, homemade
More expensive yet less flexible

[Page 534]
534   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
One disadvantage of microspotting and ink jetting 
compared with VLSIPS is that each sample must be 
synthesized, purified, and stored before microarray 
fabrication.
Some good web sites for further information 
on arraying technology are Stanford University’s 
Brown’s Lab Guide to Microarraying at http://cmgm.
stanford.edu/pbrown/mguide and BASF’s Leming 
Shi’s http://www.gene-chips.com.
Microcontact 
Printing Micro- 
or 
nanocontact 
printing with a polydimethylsiloxane stamp was 
reviewed in detail in Chapter 2. In this approach, a 
Si master is created using a high-resolution lithog-
raphy technique (e.g., e-beam). Curing an elas-
tomeric prepolymer on this master subsequently 
forms an elastomeric stamp. The resulting stamp 
can be inked, for example, with thiols that can be 
subsequently transferred to a solid support, forming 
highly localized structured monolayers (see Figure 
2.53). Scanning tunneling microscope (STM) stud-
ies of the transferred SAMs reveal an achievable 
monolayer order indistinguishable from that found 
for SAMs prepared from solution. The technique has 
been used, for example, to build an antibody grat-
ing on a Si wafer by inking the rubber stamp with 
an antibody solution.30 The antibody grating alone 
produces insignificant diffraction, but on immu-
nocapture of cells, the optical phase change pro-
duces diffraction. This is an alternative method to 
make an immunograting than the one described in 
Example 8.1.
Conductive Polymer Patterning Polymers that can 
be electropolymerized may also be deposited and 
patterned by first patterning a thin film metal elec-
trode in a desired pattern on the substrate. In the late 
1980s, this author patterned conductive polymers 
such as polypyrrole and polyaniline with lithogra-
phy techniques. In one example, arrays of conduc-
tive polymer posts were formed on a conductive 
substrate. Increased ion access to individual con-
ductive polymer posts as compared with access to 
a uniform film of the same polymer leads to higher 
electrochemical reversibility, which might find 
applications in faster polymer battery electrodes, 
electrochromic devices, enzyme-based biosensors, 
and microelectronic or molecular electronic devices. 
Figure 8.25 depicts the procedure for fabricating 3D 
arrays of electronically conductive polymers and an 
SEM micrograph of the resulting patterned conduc-
tive polymer posts.31,32
FIGURE 8.24 The three main arraying methods: lithography (a), microspotting (b), and ink-jetting (c).

[Page 535]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   535
Table 8.2 summarizes some of the most popular 
membrane deposition and patterning techniques.15 
At first glance, photolithography seems very promis-
ing, but the chemistry is complex and few results have 
been obtained to date, the most important exceptions 
being the i-STAT Abbott Point of Care blood electrolyte 
and blood gas sensors (http://www.abbottpointofcare.
com/) and the Affymetrix DNA arrays (http://www.
affymetrix.com). More array developers today are 
opting for microspotting, ink-jet printing, and screen 
printing as the safest and least expensive approach.
Photochemical Forming
Introduction
In photochemical forming the energy at the work 
piece is provided by photons. A prominent example 
is photolithography, where  negative-tone photore-
sists are cross-linked by photons of the right energy 
(Chapters 1 and 2). Traditional photolithography 
techniques result in projected shapes. A photoresist 
structure can take on any shape in the x-y plane and 
possess some limited height (in the z-direction), but 
FIGURE 8.25 Micropatterning of conductive polymers. (a) Process sequence. (b) SEM micrograph of conductive polymer 
submicrometer electrode array (polyaniline doped with tosylate).
TABLE 8.2 Deposition and Patterning Techniques for Planar Chemical Membranes
Typical Use
Thickness
Range (μm)
Cost
Uniformity
Reproducibility
Patterning
Dip coating
Wire ISEs
0.1–50 
Low
Poor
Poor
No
Casting
Planar ISEs
0.1–>100
Low
Moderate
Moderate
No
Photolithography
Planar sensors 
(PVA,PHEMA)
1–10 µm
Moderate
Good
Good
Yes
Lift-off
Immunosensors
0.1–3 µm
Moderate
Moderate
Good
Yes
Plasma etching
PVC, Teflon
1–10 µm
High
Good
Good
Yes
Ink-jet printing
Universal
1–5 µm
Moderate
Poor
Moderate
Yes
Screen printing
Universal
5–50 µm
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Yes
Source: Lambrechts, M., and W. Sansen. 1992. Biosensors: microelectrical devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics Publishing. With 
permission.15

[Page 536]
536   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
they remain projected shapes that are not truly 3D 
because the method does not lend much control over 
the resist sidewalls along the z-axis; such structures 
are sometimes referred to as 2 1/2D. In miniaturiza -
tion science, truly 3D lithography is the subject of 
increased research. Here we review methods of 
photochemical form ing of truly micro- and even 
nano-3D shapes, including stereolithography or 
microphotoforming and its newest embodiments 
such as two-photon polymerization and parallel 
stereolithography. We start this section with a brief 
summary of rapid prototyping techniques. In rapid 
prototyping, additive layering or 3D polymerization 
techniques have long played an important role for 
quickly making a nonfunctional mock-up of a real 
component. Recently improved versions of those 
methods have also became promising candidates for 
micro- and nanomanufacturing. It is also important 
to notice that the term rapid prototyping is less 
and less the right word to use. Indeed quite often 
these additive or 3D poly merization manufacturing 
processes are leading more and more to final func-
tional products rather than nonfunctional proto-
types. We classify free-photoforming additive as 
either  chemical or thermal, depending on the 
primacy of the chemical reaction or the heat 
application. Thus, low-temperature polymer photo-
forming is covered in this chapter, whereas the 
higher-temperature laser-assisted chemical vapor 
deposition process is covered in Chapter 9.
Rapid Prototyping
The past 20 years witnessed the emergence of a set 
of new manufacturing techniques with parts made 
on a layer-by-layer basis or by 3D polymerization. 
With these technologies, manufacturing time for 
even the most complex parts is measured in hours 
instead of days or weeks. Hence these technologies 
are called rapid prototyping (RP). RP, based on layered 
manufacturing (LM), and direct 3D polymeriza-
tion in two-photon lithography where no layering is 
needed form a set of manufacturing techniques by 
which a solid physical model of a structure is made 
directly from 3D computer-aided design (CAD) 
model data, without any special tooling. The CAD 
data may be generated from 3D CAD modelers, 
computer  tomo graphy (CT),* and magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) scans or model data created by 
3D digitizing systems. Although there is no limit to 
the prototype’s complexity, its size is limited by the 
size of the manufacturing bed. The same data used 
for the rapid prototype creation can be used to go 
into production, eliminating all types of sources of 
human errors.
Besides 3D modeling, RP needs specific fluids, 
powders, wires, or laminates, as well as a machine 
tool that builds the desired 3D prototypes using dif-
ferent physical principles such as lasers, laminators, 
and 3D printers. This type of fabrication is referred 
to as additive manufacturing versus the subtractive 
manufacturing of milling and turning. Some very 
new RP methods combine additive and subtractive 
techniques. For example, the laser sintering/mill-
ing hybrid machine, the LUMEX 25C, developed 
by Matsuura Machinery Corporation, successfully 
combines freeform manufacturing and high-speed 
milling (see the photo in the heading of Chapter 9 
on thermal energy-based forming).
The first commercial RP method appeared 
on the market in 1987 from 3D Systems (http://
www.3dsystems.com) and was based on stere oli-
thography (SL) where liquid polymers are solidi fied 
when exposed to UV light. Stereolithography remains 
the best known RP system and is widely used in 
automotive and aerospace industries to fabricate parts 
from basic design for “show and tell” before the parts 
are produced. As listed in Table 8.3, there are many 
different RP methods available that offer varying 
degree of accuracy, speed, product size (see Table 
8.3, inset), as well as a large choice of materials. Two-
photon lithography, the newest RP technique that 
does not rely on layering the part under construction, 
is dealt with separately below and is not listed in 
Table 8.3. In all RP methods listed in Table 8.3, a 
designer, using CAD software, exports a model of 
the intended product to a standardized portable file 
format for 3D objects, such as the stereolithography 
* Computer tomography (CT) is a powerful nondestructive evaluation 
(NDE) technique for producing 2D and 3D cross-sectional images 
of an object from flat x-ray images. Characteristics of the internal 
structure of an object (such as dimensions, shape, internal defects, 
and density) are readily available from CT images.

[Page 537]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   537
software 
(http://stl-software.qarchive.org) 
that 
interfaces with the RP machines, analyzes the surface 
vectors (boundary) of the model, and “slices” the 
part into many thin layers. Stereolithography files 
describe only the surface geometry of a 3D object 
with out any representation of color, texture, or other 
common CAD model attributes. RP machines make 
parts by producing one of these layers at a time and 
eventually building up a complex, 3D object. As 
mentioned earlier, in two-photon lithography there 
is no need for this layering step.
Stereolithography (SL) is a photoforming-based 
RP process, and its application to MEMS and NEMS, 
as well as its newest embodiments such as two-
photon polymerization and parallel stereolithogra-
phy, is detailed below. Selective laser sintering (SLS) 
TABLE 8.3 Rapid Prototyping Techniques
• SL: 
Stereolithography (see below for details).
• SLS: 
Selective laser sintering laser beam melts the layer of metal powder to create solid objects (see Chapter 9).
• 3DP:  In 3D printing layers of ceramic (plaster) powder are glued to form objects. 3DP uses ink-jet printer technology 
(e.g., the Z402c from the Z Corporation) to print fine patterns of glue onto a smooth bed of plaster powder (so 
smooth it looks like paper). The bed is lowered, and a roller spreads a very fine layer (0.004′′) over it to print a 
new layer.
• LOM:  Sheets of material (paper, plastic), either precut or on a roll, are glued (laminated) together and laser cut in the 
laminated object manufacture process.
• FDM:  In fused deposition modeling each cross-section is produced by melting a plastic filament (ABS) that solidifies 
on cooling. The FDM (e.g., the Stratasys FDM 1650) builds layers by extruding a hot, viscous strand of ABS 
plastic through a very fine nozzle,like squeezing toothpaste out of a tube. The fine strands (0.012′′) stick 
together as they cool.

[Page 538]
538   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
is a thermal additive technique expanded on in 
Chapter 9. A brief explanation of how the other RP 
techniques listed in Table 8.3 work follows.
Ink-jet printing, discussed earlier, is essentially 
a 2D method; an important new direction in RP is 
the concept of 3D printing. In one approach to 3D 
printing (3DP), layers of ceramic powder (plaster) 
are glued/bound to form objects. 3DP uses ink-jet 
printer technology (e.g., from the Z Corporation; 
http://www.zcorp.com) to print fine patterns of glue 
onto a smooth bed of plaster powder (so smooth it 
looks like paper). In a first step the printer covers the 
bed with a 1/8th inch (3.18 mm) layer of a  powder as 
support so that the parts when finished rest on this 
base for easy removal. The bed is then lowered, and 
a roller spreads a next very fine layer (0.004′′) over 
it to print a first layer (Figure 8.26). Z Corporation 
first introduced high-resolution, 24-color, 3DP 
(HD3DP™) in 2005 (600 dpi). The printer accurately 
and precisely deposits colored binder in the desired 
areas. The binder solidifies the powder in that cross-
section of the model, leaving the rest of the pow-
der dry for recycling. The 3D printers control the 
printhead movement while positioning the head 
extremely close to the powder, reducing inaccura-
cies related to fanning of the binder spray.
Sheets of material (e.g., paper, plastic, ceramic, com-
posite), either precut or on a roll, are glued (laminated) 
together and laser cut in the laminated object manufac-
ture (LOM) process. The laminated part is constructed 
on a platform with vertical incremental movement. 
Above the platform, a heated roller heats and com-
presses each new sheet to the top of the construct. A 
laser scans the upper surface of the laminated stack 
to cut the very top layer. Scrap pieces of the laminate 
remain on the platform as the part is built. The scrap 
material is diced by the laser into cross-hatched squares 
that serve as support for the part under construction. 
The product then comes out as a rectangular block of 
laminated material containing the prototype and the 
scrap cubes. The scrap, support material—resulting 
from the cross-hatch cut by the laser—is easily sepa-
rated from the prototype part. LOM is a relatively high-
speed process (Figure 8.27), and parts can be used 
immediately after the process because no postcuring 
is required. Also, no additional support structure is 
required because the part is supported on its own.
The fused deposition modeling (FDM) technol-
ogy was developed by S. Scott Crump in the late 
FIGURE 8.26 A 3D-printer by Z Corporation that creates models from plaster powder (http://www.zcorp.com).
FIGURE 8.27 LOM process.

[Page 539]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   539
1980s and was commercialized in 1990. The FDM 
technology is marketed commercially by Strata- 
sys Inc. (http://www.stratasys.com/selectapart.html). 
Stratasys-patented technology builds solid models 
by melting a continuously supplied plastic wire (see 
Figure 8.28). The supplied wire typically is acrylo-
nitrile butadiene styrene (ABS, a thermoplastic) 
with a 0.012-in. diameter and is extruded as a hot, 
viscous strand through a fine nozzle (like squeez-
ing toothpaste out of a tube). A computer controls 
the nozzle movement along the x- and y-axes, and 
each cross-section of the prototype is produced by 
melting a plastic filament (ABS) that solidifies on 
cooling. After one layer is done, the stage is moved 
downward, and another layer of deposition starts. 
The newest FDM models feature two nozzles; one 
carries the construction material and the other a 
support wax that can easily be removed afterward, 
allowing construction of more complex parts. 
Marketed under the name WaterWorks by Stratasys, 
this soluble support material is dissolved in a heated 
sodium hydroxide solution with the assistance of 
ultrasonic agitation.
The FDM method is environmentally friendly but 
has a somewhat restricted accuracy because of the 
nozzle size, which needs to accommodate a viscous 
material. Also, few types of materials can be incor-
porated in FDM.
Stereolithography/
Microphotoforming Process
Introduction
The application of rapid prototyping (RP) techniques 
to MEMS and NEMS requires higher accuracy than 
what is normally achievable with commercial RP 
equipment. From the RP techniques listed in Table 
8.3, laminated object manufacturing (LOM), fused 
deposition modeling (FDM), and selective laser 
sintering (SLN) all must be excluded as microfabri-
cation candidates on that basis. Only stereolithog-
raphy has the potential to achieve the fabrication 
tolerances required to qualify as a MEMS or NEMS 
tool. In this section we explore the basic principles 
underlying stereolithography and detail the latest 
enhancements that have made it an attractive high-
resolution micro- and nanofabrication method.
Basic Principles Underlying Stereolithography 
and Microstereolithography
In stereolithography, light exposure solidifies a spe-
cial liquid resin into a desired 3D shape. Besides 
pro ducing industrial 3D mockups (see above under 
RP),  micromachinists are exploring this same 
technology for the production of functional micro- 
and nano machines. Some basic concepts illustrating 
stereolithography are shown in Figure 8.29. A 
liquid resin is kept either in the free surface mode 
(see Figure  8.29b) or in the fixed surface mode 
(see Figure 8.29c). The latter has a resin container 
with a transparent window plate for exposure. The 
solidification happens at the stable window/resin 
interface. An elevator is pulled up over the thickness 
of one additional layer above the window for each 
new exposure (Figure 8.30). In the case of free sur-
face, solidification occurs at the resin/air interface, 
and more care needs to be taken to avoid waves or a 
slant of the liquid surface. Micro stereolithography, 
derived from conventional stereolithography, was 
Plastic
Filament
Support
ﬁlament
Heated head,   moving in x,y
Nozzles
Stage, moving vertically
FIGURE 8.28 FDM machine; models are made from mol-
ten ABS plastic (http://www.stratasys.com).

[Page 540]
540   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
introduced by Ikuta et al.33 in 1993. Whereas in 
conventional stereolithography the laser spot size 
and layer thickness are both in the 100-µm range, in 
microstereolithography, a UV laser beam is focused 
to a 1–2-µm spot size to solidify material in a thin 
layer of 1–10 µm. The monomers used in RP and 
microstereolithography are both UV-curable sys tems, 
but the viscosity in the latter case is much lower (e.g., 
6 cPs vs. 2000 cPs). In microstereolithography the 
viscosity should be as low as possible for optimal flat 
layer formation because high surface tension hinders 
both efficient crevice filling and flat surface formation 
in the microscale. Another difference resides in the 
fact that in microstereolithography the solidified 
polymer is light enough so that it does not require 
a support as is required for the heavier pieces made 
in RP. In Table 8.4 we sum marize this comparison 
between RP and micro stereolithography.
Ikuta’s group named their scanning microstereo-
lithography “integrated harden polymer stereolitho-
graphy” or the “IH process.” The original IH process 
used single-photon polymerization to develop a pho-
to-curable polymer with an UV laser beam. A glass 
slide was placed above the layer being cured, and rais-
ing the glass slide small distances above the previously 
solidified layer generated an extremely thin layer (fixed 
surface method mode; see Figure 8.29c and Figure 
8.30). The IH process resolution in Ikuta’s lab was 
5 µm in 1992, and, through the various enhancements 
discussed below, is better than 100 nm at present.34
The two major types of stereolithography are 
scanning stereolithography and projection stereo-
lithography. The scanning stereolithography parts 
are constructed in a point-by-point and line-by-line 
Position the elevator 
near the window
Scan the beam 
along the ﬁrst layer
Finish the ﬁrst layer
Pull up the elevator 
for thickness of one layer
Repeat these operations 
to make the object shape
FIGURE 8.30 Stereolithography forming process with the 
fixed surface method.
TABLE 8.4 Comparison of Rapid Prototyping and Microstereolithography
Rapid Prototyping
Microstereolithography
Need for a support
Yes
No
Layer thickness
Hundreds of micrometers
Several micrometers to tens of micrometers
Spot size
Hundreds of micrometers
Micrometer or submicrometer
Type of monomers
UV curable
UV and visible light curable
Viscosity of monomer system
High
Low
FIGURE 8.29 (a) Stereolithography or photoforming. Free surface method (b) and fixed surface method (c).

[Page 541]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   541
fashion, with the sliced shapes written directly from 
a computerized design of the cross-sectional shapes 
by a beam in the liquid (Figure 8.30). Projection 
stereolithography is a parallel fabrication process 
that enables sets of truly 3D solid structures made 
of a UV polymer by exposing the polymer with a 
set of 2D cross-sectional shapes (masks) of the final 
structures. These 2D shapes are either a set of real 
photomasks used to subsequently expose the work 
(Figure 8.31), or they involve a dynamic mask pro-
jection system instead of a physical mask. We will 
compare two types of dynamic mask projection sys-
tems for their merit in microstereolithography: a liq-
uid crystal display (LCD) and a digital micromirror 
display (TI’s DMD chip). As we saw in Chapter 1, the 
DMD chip is also used in maskless lithography (see 
Chapter 1).
Scanning Microstereolithography, 
Parallel Microstereolithography and 
Two-Photon Polymerization
Most of the microstereolithography practiced today 
is based on the scanning laser beam approach intro-
duced by Ikuta et al.33 from Nagoya University 
(Japan) in 1992. The scanning method has the 
advantage of point-by-point controllability, thereby 
avoiding unevenness of solidification, which leads 
to nonuniform shrinking of the work piece. When 
applying the scanning technique, a laser beam (e.g., 
a He-Cd laser) is used to solidify one microscopic 
polymer area at a time to arrive at complicated 3D 
shapes by stacking thin films of hardened polymer 
layer upon layer. Process control in this case simply 
is directed from a CAD system containing the “slice 
data.” The laser beam is focused down to a spot size 
of a few micrometers into the polymer through a 
glass window (Figure 8.30).
Ikuta et al. used an x-y stage to move the work 
piece rather than galvanometric mirrors to deflect 
the laser beam, and this led to a smaller focus spot. 
They attached the glass window to the z-stage for 
precise layer thickness control. The position accu-
racy for the laser beam spot (5-µm diameter in the 
early days) reached 1 µm in the z-axis and 0.25 µm 
in the x- and y-directions. Takagi et al.36 obtained 
an 8-µm resolution with their photoforming setup, 
and Ikuta et al.33,35 reported a minimum solidifica-
tion unit size of 5 × 5 × 3 µm and a maximum size 
of fabricated structures of 10 × 10 × 10 mm. As we 
will learn, this technique has undergone several 
improvements since these early days.
In scanning microstereolithography, no physical 
contact occurs between tools and works, and a very 
large number of layers can be achieved (e.g., 1000 
layers) with typical machining times ranging from 
30 min to 1 h. High-aspect ratio and very complex 
shapes, including curved surfaces, can be made with 
this type of desktop microfabrication method. The 
objects realized this way used to feature a medium-
range accuracy of 3–5 µm.
Professor Ikuta’s group and other researchers have 
introduced various IH process enhancements, includ-
ing a “mass IH process,” a “hybrid IH process,” a “super 
IH process,” and finally the “two-photon IH process.”
Given the serial nature of the IH process, fabri-
cation speed is a concern, and in 1996 Ikuta et al. 
introduced a mass IH process. In the mass IH pro-
cess, multiple parts are produced in parallel, using 
multiple scanning fiberoptic beams.37 An array of 
five single-mode optical fibers (4-µm core diameter) 
was used to demonstrate this concept. The mass IH 
process needs to be further developed using optical 
fiber arrays and by improving the resolution.
In a hybrid IH process other non-IH microcom-
ponents are introduced in the IH structure. As an 
example of a hybrid IH process, consider Takagi 
et al.’s work36,38 wherein a combination of IH with 
FIGURE 8.31 Exposure with photomask set (a) and 
exposure with a scanning beam (b). [From Ikuta, K., and 
K. Hirowatari. 1993. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro 
mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL: 
IEEE;33 and Ikuta, K., K. Hirowatari, and T. Ogata. 1994. 
IEEE international workshop on micro electro mechanical 
systems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan: IEEE.35]

[Page 542]
542   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
more traditional Si micromachined substrates is 
introduced. In Figure 8.32, a schematic for a pho-
toformed plastic clamp anchored to a Si substrate is 
represented. The photoformed plastic clamp mea-
sures about 2 mm long and 2 mm high and is 250 
µm thick. The Si substrate is bulk micromachined to 
hold a working fluid reservoir and a heater element 
to actuate the polymer clamp. On heating the work-
ing fluid in the micromachined chamber, the thin 
Si membrane cover bulges out and opens the clamp. 
Cooling down closes the clamp.
The original IH process and the mass IH process 
both involve laser scanning and layer preparation. 
Two major drawbacks associated with this layer-
by-layer approach are the limited depth resolution 
(limited by the thickness of the stacked layers) and 
the viscosity of the liquid UV-curable monomers 
(limited form filling and deformation of solidified 
structures in the microdomain). In 1997, Ikuta and 
his team upgraded the IH and mass IH process to the 
“super IH process.” 39 The enabling technology for 
this new process was “deep site pin-point solidifica-
tion” of a UV polymer. Unlike the typical rapid pro-
totyping (RP) stereolithography process, the polymer 
in this super IH process is cured below the polymer/
air surface where the UV beam is focused. The entire 
structure is cured into a single body by moving the 
laser focus, and the curing occurs not only at the liq-
uid surface but also at arbitrary locations inside the 
liquid resin. A shallow focus lens is used [low depth 
of focus (DOF) and large numerical aperture (NA) 
lens] such that the beam’s energy is small enough 
not to cure polymer outside of its focal point. A 3D 
microstructure is made by scanning the focused 
laser beam in 3D space into liquid UV monomers, 
enabling 3D fabrication without any support or sac-
rificial layers. Because no layer preparation steps are 
involved, viscosity and surface tension influences 
are minimized. The properties of the UV-curable 
monomer system are precisely tuned to ensure that 
polymerization only happens in the focal point of 
the laser beam. The UV monomer system used in 
the super IH process is a mixture of urethane acry-
late oligomers, monomers, and photoinitiators. 
Microparts with freely moving parts can be made 
this way—no assembly is necessary—allowing for a 
more advanced type of MEMS device. The resolution 
of the super IH process is less than 1 µm.
Summarizing, the super IH process has several 
advantages compared with the layer-by-layer method, 
such as 1) higher resolution, 2) movable 3D micro-
structures can be fabricated without supporting or 
sacrificial layer, and 3) the influence of viscosity or 
surface tension can be ignored during fabrication.
In 1997, “nanostereolithography” based on two-
photon absorption was implemented.40,41 As we 
learned in Chapter 2, in the section on quantum 
lithography, the use of linear absorption of laser light 
for cross-linking a monomer limits the resolution 
roughly to the wavelength of the laser. Moreover, 
deep penetration of the light into the resin is difficult 
because of the strong photon absorption; therefore, 
unless very tight focusing of the laser is used as in 
super IH (see above), the process must be carried 
out thin layer by thin layer (see Figure 8.30). Using 
two-photon excitation, one can penetrate deeper 
into the bulk of the resin and enhance the resolution 
even further than with super IH. It has been dem-
onstrated that quantum lithography with entangled 
N-photon states beats the Rayleigh diffraction limit 
by a factor of N, and in two-photon lithography 
the resolution is thus improved by a factor of two 
(as if one used a classical source with wavelength 
λ/2).42,43 When high-intensity light shines on a 
material, the probability for two-photon simultane-
ous absorption is proportional to the square of the 
field intensity, and thus is greatest at the center of a 
Gaussian laser spot. Subwavelength structures can 
FIGURE 8.32 Thermally driven microclamping tool. The 
clamping tool is made by photoforming, and the silicon 
substrate is by silicon bulk micromachining (see text for 
dimensions). [From Takagi, T., and N. Nakajima. 1994. IEEE 
international workshop on micro electro mechanical sys-
tems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan: IEEE. With permission.38]

[Page 543]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   543
be produced because the absorption profile for the 
two-photon process is narrower than the beam pro-
file. Using a high-NA (e.g., 0.85) lens, the laser spot 
can be made less than 1 µm in diameter, and signifi-
cantly narrower structures can be obtained because 
a certain threshold of intensity must be reached to 
initiate polymerization. With a femtosecond laser 
beam, tightly focused into a resin, photo-induced 
reactions such as polymerization occur only in the 
close vicinity of the focal point, allowing the fabri-
cation of subwavelength 3D polymer structures by 
directly writing 3D patterns. Importantly, because 
the energy required to initiate polymerization is 
twice that of the incoming radiation, it is possible 
to excite deep into the monomer as the material is 
transparent to one-photon excitation, whereas at 
the focus, where the intensity is high, two-photon 
excitation occurs. The 3D resolution has reached 
140 nm in the two-photon IH process.
In two-photon stereolithography, one often works 
with epoxy resins and urethane acrylates. Several 
two-photon photoinitiators with very large two-
photon absorption cross-sections to be added to 
the base polymers have been developed.44 In these 
photoinitiator molecules, the photon energy that is 
absorbed is emitted as photons of a higher energy 
(up-converted fluorescence). These IH processes can 
be widely used for making polymeric microdevices. 
Some examples of 3D two-photon lithography were 
shown in Figure 2.37 (see also the inset in the head-
ing of this chapter). Two-photon 3D lithography has 
also been used to make photonic crystals.
Microstereolithography is not limited to poly-
mers: micro- or even nanoceramic and metallic pow-
ders can be mixed with the photosensitive resin in 
microstereolithography of ceramics45 and metals.46
Projection Microstereolithography
In projection microstereolithography, a reduced-
size image of complicated patterns is reproduced 
onto a photoresist. Similar to photolithography, an 
image is transferred to the liquid photopolymer by 
irradiating UV light through a patterned mask. The 
photomask approach, which solidifies a whole layer 
at the time, is significantly faster than the point-
by-point technique but requires a large number of 
expensive photomasks. In dynamic mask projection 
microstereolithography, a dynamic mask generator 
is used instead of a real mask. We compare two types 
of dynamic mask projection systems: a liquid crys-
tal display (LCD) and a digital micromirror display 
(DMD).
Bertsch et al.28 at the Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology (EPLF) pioneered an interesting variation 
on the photomask approach, which, given the many 
layers involved, is often impractical. This research 
group uses a computer-controlled LCD as a dynamic 
pattern generator. A light beam passes through the 
LCD, and a beam reducer focuses it on the surface of 
a polymerizable medium. Selective polymerization 
takes place in the irradiated areas corresponding to 
the transparent pixels of the LCD. Between the irra-
diation steps, a shutter blocks the beam, and a new 
layer of fresh resin (about 5 µm thick) spreads over 
the object under construction. Complex objects, 
with a resolution better than 5 µm in the x-, y-, and 
z-directions, as illustrated in Figure 8.33, have been 
made this way.47 The same research group pioneered 
the combination of planar UV/LIGA lithography 
(e.g., using SU-8) with microstereolithography—to 
add nonvertical structures with curved and conical 
surfaces in a postprocessing step onto planar struc-
tures without the need of microassembly.48 The sur-
faces of the parts made by microstereolithography 
are smooth enough to enable conformal electroplat-
ing to make a metal mold from the obtained 3D 
microobject. Polymer replication, of course, remains 
limited to convex and nonreentrant structures (see 
Chapter 10).
A comparison of the resolution between conven-
tional stereolithography and small-spot and layer-
by-layer microstereolithography was presented by 
Bertsch et al.49 in Rapid Prototyping Journal. To fur-
ther improve the lithography—3D photoforming in 
this case—it is necessary to better understand the 
shape of a “solidified cell,” which depends on both 
the characteristics of the beam and the resin.
In 2005, Sun et al. introduced another dynamic 
projection microstereolithography approach using 
TI’s DMD chip as the mask generator (Figure 
8.34).50 The authors point out that the LCD tech-
nique from Bertsch et al. has some serious disad-
vantages compared with their higher-resolution 
DMD approach.

[Page 544]
544   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
An LCD display not only features larger pixels and 
a lower filling factor (pixels vs. space between) than 
a DMD display, but it also has a slower switching 
speed (∼20 ms), and the low optical density of the 
refractive elements in the off cycle makes for poor 
contrast. Moreover, the LCD is inserted between 
four glass plates that are opaque to UV light, restrict-
ing its use to visible light where fewer resins are 
available. Sun et al. made 3D structures with a 
 smallest feature size of 0.6 µm.
Summarizing, microphotoforming offers several 
advantages over more classical photolithography-
based micromachining processes:
 
1. The turnaround from CAD to prototype takes 
only 1 h or less.
 
2. Photoforming is an additive process accommo-
dating virtually any shape.
 
3. It is a fully automatic process.
 
4. It requires a small capital investment (less than 
$30,000).
 
5. There is no need for a clean room.
This direct-write lithography technique might 
well represent an alternative to LIGA in cases where 
3D shape versatility outweighs accuracy. As with the 
LIGA technique, the plastic shapes made by stereo-
lithography may be used as a cast for electroplating 
metals or for other materials that can be molded 
into the polymer structures.
Electrochemical Forming Processes
Introduction
Both subtractive and additive electrochemical  pro-
cesses are of extraordinary importance in mini-
aturization science. Subtractive electrochemical 
techniques were reviewed in Chapter 4; here we 
review additive/forming electrochemical techniques. 
Electrochemical forming includes electroless and 
electrodeposition, and we analyze pros and cons 
of both. We add information on electrodeposition 
through masks, working with instant masks in 
electrochemical fabrication (EFAB) and maskless 
metal deposition methods. Today, there is a strong 
push in the IC industry and in micromachining toward 
dry processing, and deep dry-etching de velopments 
are particularly swift. Electrochemical machining, 
on the other hand, despite its many uses, is often 
still considered a “black art” and “dirty,” with lack 
of cleanliness and creation of waste particles making 
it an unacceptable technique. In reality, besides its 
major technological advantages, electrochemistry 
offers several intrinsic advantages, such as low capital 
equipment, high deposition and etch rates, and 
relatively simple operation. In the sections below, 
we learn that there are many cases in which only wet 
FIGURE 8.33 Examples of objects made by microstereo-
lithography. SEM photos of microcups (80 layers × 5 µm, 
external diameter is 200 µm) (a); Porsche (673 layers × 
5 µm, the diameter of a wheel is 400 µm) (b); microspring 
(1000 layers × 5 µm, external diameter is 500 µm) (c).

[Page 545]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   545
chemical and electrochemical processes are feasible; 
for example, line-of-sight deposition techniques 
cannot readily be used on curved or irregular surfaces 
or to plate into via holes or blind vias. CVD often leaves 
voids when metallizing (e.g., tungsten) in a high-
aspect-ratio structure, whereas with electrodeposition 
such voids can be avoided completely. Multilayer 
PCBs with through holes connecting the individual 
metal layers would not be possible without electroless 
or electrochemical technology. As long as a solution 
can wet and fill a cavity to be plated, a metal pattern 
can be generated precisely, replicating the mold 
down to angstrom dimensions. In Table 8.5, many 
applications of electrochemistry are reviewed, and 
Digital
microdisplay
device
UV beam
Z
Elevator
Projection
lens
UV curable resin
Beam
delivery
CAD 
FIGURE 8.34 A dynamic projection microstereolithography approach using TI’s DMD chip as the mask generator. (From 
Sun, C., N. Fang, D. M. Wu, and X. Zhang. 2005. Projection micro-stereolithography using digital micro-mirror dynamic 
mask. Sensors Actuators A 121:113–20.50)
TABLE 8.5 Situations for which an Aqueous Electrochemical or Chemical Technique Is the Only Means to 
Obtain the Desired Result
• Uniform plating on irregular surfaces
• Leveling of rough surfaces
• Plating of via holes and blind vias
• Formation of alloys of metastable phases
• Compositionally modulated structures
• Amorphous metal films
• Maskless, high-speed, selective deposition of metals and alloys
• Most faithful reproduction of features of polymeric masks
• Smallest dimension features with highest height-to-width aspect ratio (highest packing density of conductors)
• Metal deposits with incorporated particles (e.g., diamond, WC, TiC, Al2O3, Teflon, oil)
• Wear-resistant surfaces
• Corrosion-resistant surfaces
• Uniform thickness nonporous anodic films
• Anodic films with porous structure
• Very uniform, thick, pore-free, polymer films on irregular surfaces
• Very uniform thickness, glazed, and devitrified glass surfaces
• Shaping of almost any metal or semiconductor and electromachining without introducing stress
• Electropolishing of metal surfaces to mirror bright finishes
Source: Based on Romankiw, L. T., and T. A. Palumbo. 1987. Proceedings: symposium on electrodeposition technology, theory, and 
practice. San Diego, CA51; and Romankiw, L. T. 1984. Electrochemical technology in electronics today and its future: 
a review. Oberflache-Surface 25:238–47.52

[Page 546]
546   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
in Table 8.6, we define several situations in which an 
aqueous chemical or electrochemical technique may 
be the only means by which a desired property or 
quality of a deposit can be achieved.
Electroless Metal Deposition
Underlying Principles
To continuously build thick deposits by chemi-
cal means without applying a voltage and without 
consuming the substrate, i.e., electroless plating, it 
is essential that a sustainable oxidation reaction be 
used instead of the dissolution of the substrate itself 
as in the case of immersion plating. In an immersion 
plating bath, the electrons for the metal deposition 
are supplied by the base metal, and effectively the 
base metal is the reducing agent. As the base metal 
donates electrons to the metal being plated, the base 
metal itself is oxidized and goes into solution, which 
is why this is also called a replacement reaction. The 
key characteristics of the immersion plating bath is 
that it is self-limiting, which means that once the 
base metal, e.g., copper, in the case of a printed cir-
cuit board (PCB), is covered with the new metal, 
the plating ceases. This results in a very thin, dense, 
nonporous coating, which is very economical, from 
a bath that is extremely stable. In an “electroless” 
plating bath, on the other hand, the electrons are 
donated by a reducing agent that is already in the 
bath. In Figure 8.35, the difference between immer-
sion plating and electroless deposition is illustrated 
by comparing deposit thickness versus time; immer-
sion plating is self-limiting, but electroless plating 
is not.53 In an electroless copper bath, the formal-
dehyde is the reducing agent. In electroless Ni, it is 
either hypophosphite or dimethyl amine borane. 
TABLE 8.6 Electrochemical Applications in the IC 
Industry and Micromachining
Photocircuit boards
• Single and multilayer epoxy boards
• Flexible circuit boards
• Electrophoretically glazed steel boards
Contacts and connectors
• Beam leads
• Contacts (pins and sockets)
• Reed switches, etc.
Cabinets and enclosures
• Corrosion protective surfaces
• Electromagnetic shielding
• Decorative purposes (anodization, electrophoretic 
painting)
Auxiliary equipment used in device fabrication
• Paste-screening masks
• Metal evaporation masks
• X-ray lithography masks
• Diamond saws and cutting tools
Active elements
• IC chips
• Magnetic recording heads
• Recording surfaces
• Displays
• Wear-resistant surfaces
Chip carriers and packages
• Chip in tape packages
• Surface mount boards
• Dual in-line packages
• Pin-grid array packages
• Multilayer ceramic packages
• Hybrid packages
Source: Based on Romankiw, L. T., and T. A. Palumbo. 1987. Pro-
ceedings: symposium on electrodeposition technology, 
theory, and practice. San Diego, CA51; and Romankiw, L. T. 
1984. Electrochemical technology in electronics today and 
its future: a review. Oberflache-Surface 25:238–47.52
FIGURE 8.35 Thickness versus time comparison between 
electroless and immersion deposition. [Based Mallory, 
G. O., and J. B. Hadju, eds. 1990. Electroless plating: 
fundamentals and applications. Orlando, FL: American 
Electroplaters and Surface Finishers Society (AESF). With 
permission.53]

[Page 547]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   547
The reduction of Ni ions (Reaction 8.1) is fed elec-
trons by an oxidation reaction such as that of hypo-
phosphite (Reaction 8.2), resulting in an overall 
reaction for Ni deposition given by Reaction 8.3.
Reduction:
 
Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni 
Reaction 8.1
Oxidation:
 
H2PO2
− + H2O + 2e− → H2PO3
− + 2H+ + 2e−
 
Reaction 8.2
Overall reaction:
 
Ni2+ + H2PO2
− + H2O → Ni + H2PO3
− + 2H+
 
Reaction 8.3
Reaction 8.1 continues (in principle) until all the 
hypophosphite in solution is consumed (Reaction 
8.2). In immersion deposition, Reaction 8.1 stops 
as soon as the whole substrate surface is covered 
with Ni metal and there is no further dissolution of 
un covered substrate possible. In parallel to Reaction 
8.1, more or less severe hydrogen reduction goes on:
 
2H+ + 2e− → H2 
Reaction 8.4
Copious hydrogen evolution can upset the quality 
of the depositing metal film and should be avoided. 
The hydrogen evolution rate is not directly related to 
that of the metal deposition and mainly originates 
from the reductant molecules. Stabilizers (i.e., cata-
lytic poisons) are needed in electroless deposition 
baths because the solutions are thermodynamically 
unstable; deposition might start spontaneously onto 
the container walls. Substances that poison hydro-
genation* catalysts such as thiourea, Pb2+, and mer-
captobenzothiazole function as stabilizers in such 
electroless baths. Besides stabilizers, the metal salt, 
and a reducing agent, electroless solutions may con-
tain other additives such as complexing agents, buf-
fers, and accelerators. Complexing agents exert a 
buffering action and prevent the pH from decreasing 
too fast. They also prevent the precipitation of metal 
salts and reduce the concentration of free metal ions. 
Buffers keep the deposition reaction in the desired 
pH range. Accelerators, also termed exaltants, increase 
* Hydrogenation is a class of chemical reactions that result in an addi-
tion of hydrogen, usually to unsaturated organic compounds.
the rate of deposition to an acceptable level without 
causing bath instability. These exaltants are anions, 
such as CN–, thought to function by making the 
anodic oxidation process easier. In electroless copper, 
for example, compounds derived from imidazole, 
pyrimidine, and pyridine can increase the deposi-
tion rate to 40 µm/h. The electroless deposition must 
occur initially and exclusively on the surface of an 
active substrate and subsequently continue to deposit 
on the initial deposit through the catalytic action of 
the deposit itself. Because the deposit catalyzes the 
reduction reaction, the term autocatalytic is often used 
to describe the plating  process. Electroless plating is an 
inexpensive technique enabling plating of conductors 
and nonconductors alike (plastics such as ABS, poly-
propylene, Teflon, and polycarbonate are plated in 
huge quantities). A catalyzing procedure is necessary 
for electroless deposition on nonactive surfaces such 
as plastics and ceramics. The most common method 
for  sensitizing those surfaces is by dipping into SnCl2/
HCl or immersion in PdCl2/HCl.53 This chemical 
treatment produces sites that provide a chemical path 
for the initiation of the plating process.
Metal alloys such as nickel-phosphorus, nickel-
boron, cobalt-phosphorus, cobalt-boron, nickel-tung-
sten, copper-tin-boron, and palladium-nickel can be 
produced by codeposition. In the case of Ni depos-
its, with or without phosphorus and boron incor-
porated, different electroless solutions are used to 
obtain optimum hardness, effective corrosion pro-
tection, or optimum magnetic properties. Recent 
experimental results show that composite mate-
rial also can be produced by codeposition. Finely 
divided, solid particulate material is added and dis-
persed in the plating bath. Electroless Ni with alu-
mina particles, diamond, silicon carbide, and PTFE 
have reached the commercial market. Table 8.7 pres-
ents a list of electroless plating baths.53
Methods to determine the electroless deposition 
rate can be split into two categories: electrochemi-
cal and nonelectrochemical. Electrochemical tech-
niques include Tafel extrapolation, DC polarization, 
AC impedance, and anodic stripping. Nonelectro-
chemical methods include weight gain, optical 
absorption, resistance probe, and acoustic. For more 
details on each of these techniques, see Ohno55 and 
references therein.

[Page 548]
548   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Electroless Plating in the IC Industry
The IC industry applies electroless metal deposition 
for a wide variety of applications, some of which are 
incorporated in Tables 8.5 and 8.6. In Figure 8.36, 
we single out the schematic for the electroless Cu 
deposition of a buried conductor as an illustrative 
example of an IC application. The fabrication of this 
buried conductor illustrates many of the processes 
we have studied so far; lithographic patterning of a 
dielectric material (Figure 8.36a), pattern transfer by 
anisotropic dry etching of a groove in the dielectric 
substrate (Figure 8.36b), evaporative deposition of an 
Al seed layer (Figure 8.36c), seed layer patterning with 
lift-off (Figure 8.36d), trench filling with electroless 
copper (Figure 8.36e), and spin-on glass dielectric 
layer deposition for planarization (Figure 8.36f).
Electroless Plating in Microfabrication
In micromachining applications, electroless depo-
sition is used for the same purposes as in the IC 
TABLE 8.7 Typical Electroless Plating Baths
Component
Concentration (per L)
Application/Remark
pH
Temp (°C)
Au
1.44 g KAu(CN)2, 6.5 g KCN, 8 g NaOH, 10.4 g KBH4
Plate beam leads on silicon 
ICs, ohmic contacts on n-GaAs
13.3
70
Co-P
30 g CoSO4⋅7H2O, 20 g NaH2PO2⋅H2O, 80 g 
Na3citrate⋅2H2O, 60 g NH4Cl, 60 g NH4OH
Magnetic properties
9.0
80
Cu
10 g CuSO4⋅5H2O, 50 g Rochelle salt, 10 g NaOH, 25 
mL conc. HCHO (37%)
Printed circuit boards
13.4
25
Ni-Co
3 g NiSO4⋅6H2O, 30 g CoSO4⋅7H2O, 30 g 
Na2malate⋅1/2H2O, 180 g Na3citrate⋅2H2O, 50 g 
NaH2PO2⋅H2O
10
30
Ni-P
30 g NiCl2⋅6 H2O, 10 g NaH2PO2⋅H2O, 30 g glycine
Corrosion and wear resistance 
on steel
3.8
95
Pd
5 g PdCl2, 20 g Na2EDTA, 30 g Na2CO3, 100 mL NH4OH 
(28% NH3), 0.0006 g thiourea, 0.3 g hydrazine
Plating rate is 0.26 µm/min
80
Pt
10 g Na2Pt(OH)6, 5 g NaOH, 10 g ethylamine, 1 g 
hydrazine hydrate (added now and then to 
maintain this concentration)
Plating rate is 12.7 µm/h
35
Source: Based on Mallory, G. O., and J. B. Hadju, eds. 1990. Electroless plating: fundamentals and applications. Orlando, FL: American 
Electroplaters and Surface Finishers Society (AESF)53; and Romankiw, L. T. 1976. Etching for pattern definition. Pennington, NJ: The 
Electrochemical Society.54
Resist
(b)
(d)
(f)
SOG
Al
Resist
(a)
(c)
(e)
Resist
Cu
Al
Dielectric ﬁlm
FIGURE 8.36 Schematic of a buried Cu conductor process. (a) Photoresist pattern over a dielectric. (b) Pattern transfer by 
anisotropic dry etching. (c) Deposition of a thin aluminum seed layer. (d) Seed metal patterning with lift-off. (e) Trench 
filling with electroless copper. (f) SOG dielectric layer for planarization.

[Page 549]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   549
industry, as well as to make higher-aspect-ratio 
structural microelements from a wide variety of 
metals, metal alloys, and even from composite 
materials. These applications often include polymer 
molds and introduce new challenges in terms of 
uniformity of plating rates and removal of the metal 
form from the master photoresist mold. Electroless 
plating may be elected above electrodeposition 
due to the simplicity of the process because no 
special plating base (electrode) is needed. This repre-
sents a major simplification for combining LIGA 
and pseudo-LIGA structures with active CMOS 
electronics, where a plating base could short out 
the active electronics. In addition, electroless Ni 
exhibits less stress than electrodeposited Ni, a fact 
of considerable importance in most mechanical 
structures. The major concern is the temperature 
of the electroless plating processes, which is often 
considerably higher than for electrochemical 
processes. Few studies of electroless plating in LIGA 
molds have been reported.56
We add two interesting MEMS applications of 
electroless plating: electroless plating of beveled 
structures and electroless plating using microfluidic 
structures. Usually, electroless plating is an isotropic 
process with no means to control the profile of plated 
features. However, van der Putten et al.57,58 were able 
to induce anisotropy in the plating process by tak-
ing advantage of the increased poisoning effect a 
stabilizer has at the edges of any given pattern (see 
Figure 8.37a). Because the edges of a given pattern 
experience additional deposition from nonlinear 
diffusion, mass transport to these edges is enhanced 
compared with material supply to the bulk of a sub-
strate. As a result, the surface concentration of the 
adsorbed stabilizer (Pb2+) is higher at these edges. By 
choosing the proper Pb2+ concentration, the edges 
can be selectively poisoned: bevels can be grown 
with an angle, α, which is a function of the stabi-
lizer concentration in the solution (see Figure 8.37b). 
More important, van der Putten’s bevel-plating tech-
nique eliminates the commonly observed lateral 
overgrowth of resist patterns, and it might have 
broader applications in the area of micromachining. 
The technique is less controllable than Maciossek’s 
maskless electrodeposition, discussed further below, 
but does not require a patterned plating base.59
Whitesides et al. introduced a means of deposit-
ing and patterning metal electrodes inside prefab-
ricated channels by flowing plating and etching 
solutions as shown in Figure 8.38. Under condi-
tions of laminar flow, reactions, including electro-
less plating, can take place at the interface between 
two or more liquids flowing side by side down a 
channel. In the example in Figure 8.38, the fabri-
cation of a three-electrode system is demonstrated. 
Two gold electrodes are formed by etching a pre-
viously deposited gold strip. The silver reference 
electrode is formed using a two-phase laminar flow 
arrangement.60
Electrodeposition
Underlying Principles
Electroplating, we saw in Volume I, Chapter 7, takes 
place in an electrolytic cell. The reactions  involve 
current flow under an imposed bias. As an example, 
consider the deposition of Ni from NiCl2 in a KCl 
solution with a graphite anode (not readily attacked 
by Cl2) and a Au cathode (inert surface for Ni 
deposition). With the cathode sufficiently negative 
and the anode sufficiently positive with respect 
to the solution, Ni deposits on the cathode and 
Cl2 evolves at the anode. The process differs from 
electroless Ni deposition in that the anodic and 
cathodic processes occur on separate electrodes and 
that the reduction is affected by the imposed bias 
rather than a chemical reductant. Important process 
parameters are pH, current density, temperature, 
agitation, and solution composition. The amount 
of hydrogen evolving and competing with metal 
deposition depends on the pH, the temperature, 
and the current density. Important causes of defects 
in electrodeposited metallic microstructures are the 
appearance of hydrogen bubbles, and these three 
parameters need very precise control. Besides typical 
impurities, such as airborne dust or dissolved anode 
material, the main impurities are metal hydroxide 
formed at increased pH values in the cathode 
vicinity and organic decomposition products from 
the wetting agent. The latter two can be avoided to 
some degree by monitoring and controlling the pH 
and by adsorption of the organic decomposition 
products on activated carbon.

[Page 550]
550   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Electrodeposition in ICs, MEMS, and NEMS
Through-Mask Electroplating
Overview In a typical electrodeposition through 
a polymer mask in IC applications, metal conduc-
tors must be deposited on a dielectric substrate. 
The dielectric is usually made conductive first by 
sputtering a thin adhesion metal layer (e.g., Ti, Cr) 
and then a conductive seed layer (e.g., Au, Pt, Cu, 
Ni, and NiFe). The thickness of the thin refractory 
metal adhesion layer may be as small as 50–100 Å, 
whereas the thickness of the conducting seed layer 
can range from 150–300 Å.61 The key requirement 
for the seed layer is that it is electrically continu-
ous and offers low sheet resistance. After forming a 
pattern in a spin-coated polymer by UV exposure, 
e-beam, or x-ray radiation and developing away the 
exposed resist, electrical contact is made to the seed 
layer, and electrodeposition in the resist mold is car-
ried out. The use of a solvent-containing develop-
ment agent ensures a substrate surface free of grease 
and ready for plating. The metal layer growing on 
the substrate fills the gaps in the resist configuration, 
thus forming a complementary metal structure. 
Pollutants may cause hydrogen bubbles to cling to 
the resist structures, resulting in pores in the metal 
deposit; thus, the bath must be kept clean, for exam-
ple, by circulating through a membrane filter with 
0.3-µm pore openings.56
FIGURE 8.37 Electroless micromachining: bevel plating. (a) Examples of bevel-plated nickel structures. (b) Method to 
make bevel-plated devices. (From van der Putten, A. M. T., and J. W. G. de Bakker. 1993. Anisotropic deposition of elec-
troless nickel-bevel plating. J Electrochem Soc 140:2229–35. With permission.57)

[Page 551]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   551
Plating through-mask technology is successfully 
used in volume production of beam leads and bumps 
on IC wafers, fabrication of thin film magnetic heads, 
fabrication of PCBs, x-ray lithography mask grat-
ings, and diffraction gratings. Electrodeposition in 
general has been used extensively in the electronics 
industry in many stages of the manufacturing pro-
cess, from the device stage, chip carriers, and PCB to 
corrosion protection and electromagnetic shielding 
of the electronic enclosures (see Tables 8.5 and 8.6). 
Processes include electrodeposition and electroless 
deposition of copper, nickel, tin, tin-lead alloys, and 
precious metals such as gold, gold alloys, palladium, 
and palladium alloys, as well as NiFe, CoP, NiCoP, 
and other magnetic alloys.51
Whereas PCBs use electroless or electroplated Cu, 
contacts and connectors use electroplated Au and 
Au  alloys or alternatively low-cost precious metal 
substitutes such as Pd, PdNi, PdAg, NiP, NiAs, and 
NiB with a thin gold overcoat. Separable, low-force, 
low-voltage contact applications require a contact fin-
ish whose resistance is stable for the projected contact 
life and which has sufficient wear resistance to with-
stand the projected number of insertions. The surface 
of one of the two mating parts is usually pure soft 
gold, whereas the other is a hard gold alloy. In less-
critical applications, tin and tin-lead alloys are used 
as contact materials. Connecting chips with chip 
carriers or packages also often involves Au contacts. 
Gold does not adhere directly to silicon dioxide or 
silicon nitride, and Ti is typically used as an adhesion 
layer. Because Au and Ti form intermetallics, a Pt bar-
rier is usually deposited between  titanium and gold.
Copper Electroplating for Thin Film Read-Write 
Heads In one of many pioneering IBM MEMS 
efforts, Romankiw used plating through-mask 
technology to make thin film read-write heads as 
shown in Figure 8.39.62 The development of batch-
produced, thin film heads is an excellent example of 
how micromachining has been gainfully practiced 
in industry—with a definite, practical, well-specified 
application in mind and using the machining tools 
best suited for the problem.
Read-write heads, which initially were horseshoe 
magnets hand wound with insulated copper wire, are 
of utmost importance in magnetic storage. The fab-
rication of traditional ferrite heads reached its limit 
more than 20 years ago, and its further extension 
was hard to imagine. IBM’s objective was to build 
the next-generation read/write heads using batch 
fabrication and lithography techniques as much as 
possible. To develop a multiturn head as shown in 
Figure 8.39a, it was necessary to develop a technol-
ogy that would handle dimensions between those 
of PCBs and semiconductor devices. Plating of cop-
per conductors through thick resist masks (Figure 
FIGURE 8.38 The formation of a three-electrode system 
within a channel as shown by optical micrographs. Using a 
three-phase laminar flow system, two gold electrodes are 
formed by etching a previously deposited gold strip, and 
using a two-phase laminar flow system, a silver reference 
electrode is fabricated. (Courtesy of Dr. G. Whitesides, 
Harvard University.)

[Page 552]
552   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
8.39b) and of thin films of nickel-iron alloys of 80:20 
nominal composition (Permalloy) (Figure 8.39c) 
made these thin film heads possible. The copper 
coils in Figure 8.39b carry considerable current and 
have to be at least 2–3 µm thick and nearly square 
in cross-section. The more turns in a given length, 
the higher the writing field at the pole tip gap and 
the higher the read back signal. The head in Figure 
8.39c has eight turns; the 3380-K IBM head has 32 
turns (Figure 8.39a). The Permalloy plating in the 
Photo resist mask
on copper seed layer
Electroplated copper coil
after resist removal
(b)
Coil
Coil
Disk
Troat height
Air bearing
Disk
Gap
Read/write thin ﬁlm head
Upper pole
Lower pole
Yoke
Yoke
length
Read/write gap
(a)
Back
closure
Insulation
Permalloy
A
A
Permalloy
Copper
winding
Si substrate
(c)
FIGURE 8.39 Thin film read-write head. (a) Schematic of a multiturn (32) thin film read-write head with inset of pole tip 
structure on the air-bearing surface. (b) Resist mold and electrodeposited copper coil after resist removal. (c) Schematic 
cross-section of an eight-turn thin film head. (Romankiw, L. T., I. M. Croll, and M. Hatzakis. 1970. Batch-fabricated thin-
film magnetic recording heads. IEEE Trans Magn 6:597–601.62)

[Page 553]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   553
thin film head is particularly challenging. Because 
of the very high sensitivity of composition to agita-
tion of the plating solution, a plating cell had to be 
developed that assured uniform agitation over the 
entire part. This was achieved by a specially shaped 
paddle, which moves at a predetermined frequency 
with a precisely defined separation from the surface 
being plated. With the right choice of conditions, it 
was eventually possible to achieve both thickness 
and composition uniformity better than ±5%.63 As 
a dielectric, hard-baked AZ photoresist was used, 
greatly simplifying the fabrication process. As a sub-
strate, Si was used in the early days; today, Al2O3TiC 
is used.
Without these new micromachined thin film 
heads, the large increases in the areal densities* of 
magnetic media in the past few years would not have 
been possible. According to the data storage market 
research firm Peripheral Research Inc., market demand 
for thin film heads was projected to grow nearly 75% 
from 913 million units in 1998 to more than 1.5 bil-
lion units by 2001. This feat makes it probably the 
most successful micromachined device to date.
As the need for still more memory capacity 
increased, thin film inductive heads were replaced 
by newer technologies such as magnetoresistive 
(MR) heads (introduced in 1991 by IBM) and giant 
magnetoresistive (GMR) heads (introduced in 1997; 
see Volume III, Chapter 1). In MR heads, the read-
back function is now performed by an MR sensor. 
The inductive portion of the head is used only for 
the write portion of the data-recording operation.64 
* Areal density is used as a primary technology growth rate indica-
tor for the memory storage industry. Areal density is defined as the 
product of the linear bits per inch (BPI) measured along the length 
of the tracks around a disk, multiplied by the number of tracks per 
inch (TPI) measured radially on the disk. The results are expressed 
in units of Mbit per square inch (Mbit/in.2). Current high-end 2.5-in. 
drives record at areal densities of about 1.5 Gbit per square inch 
(Gbit/in.2). Prototype drives with densities as high as 10 Gbit/in.2 
have been constructed, allowing for capacities of more than 20 GB 
on a single 2.5-in. platter for notebook drives. Areal density (and, 
therefore, drive capacity) has been doubling approximately every 
2–3 years, and production disk drives are likely to reach areal densi-
ties of 10 Gbit/in.2 before the end of 2001. A drive built with this 
technology will be capable of storing more than 10 GB of data on a 
single 2.5-in. platter, allowing 20- or 30-GB drives to be constructed 
that fit in the palm of your hand. The primary challenge in achieving 
higher densities is manufacturing drive heads and disks to operate at 
closer tolerances, which clearly is an area in which MEMS could have 
an impact.
In Volume III, Chapter 10, we learn that it is pro-
jected that read-write heads still will represent 
around 51% of the total MEMS market in 2009. 
Whereas traditional application of read-write heads 
in PCs will grow only moderately, the read-write 
head market is experiencing a renaissance in con-
sumer electronics as hard disks are entering music 
players (e.g., in every iPod), smart phones (Samsung 
introduced the first cell phone with HDD in 2004), 
as well as digital video cameras, set top players, and 
DVD recorders. Of course, even further down the 
road we can envision all HDDs may be replaced by 
flash memory that can support today already up to 
8-GB disk space, which is 5600 times more than a 
1.44-MB floppy disk (see Volume III, Chapter 10)!
Copper Electroplating in Printed Circuit Boards 
A PCB is made of layers, typically 2–10, that inter-
connect components via copper pathways. The main 
PCB in a system is called a system board or mother-
board, whereas smaller ones that plug into the slots 
in the main board are called boards or cards. A typi-
cal multilayer PCB (which constitutes most of the 
PCBs used to implement complex circuitry) consists 
of a sandwich of conducting and insulating layers. 
Today’s PCBs may consist of as many as five to six 
layers of metals and dielectrics. In Figure 8.40, a typi-
cal six-layer PCB is illustrated. By having the signals 
running on the inside of the board, more compo-
nents can be more tightly integrated on the board 
to give a more compact design. PCB fabrication uses 
either an all electroless copper process or a combi-
nation of electroless and electroplating processes. 
The continuing effort to make active devices smaller 
and faster, to minimize the length of connecting 
wire, and to make them narrower and thicker (with 
smaller spaces between) necessitates more layers 
per board and smaller diameter holes with a larger 
ratio of hole length to diameter. A hole length-to-
diameter ratio of 10:1 is routine and 20:1 is feasible. 
Without electrochemical copper plating technology, 
such a degree of integration would not have been 
possible.
Single and Dual Damascene Processes Copper 
wiring on IC chips was introduced by IBM in 
September 1997 with the “damascene process.”65 

[Page 554]
554   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The expertise with copper plating at IBM dates back 
to the late 1960s at Watson, when Romankiw suc-
ceeded in electroplating narrow wires of copper 
onto thin film read-write heads for memory, using 
a masking method that deposited the copper only 
in circuit patterns where it was needed (see above). 
Copper wires conduct electricity with about 40% less 
resistance than traditional aluminum wires, leading 
to faster microprocessors. Copper wires are also less 
prone to electromigration that ultimately induces 
wiring failure. Called damascene in reference to the 
metallurgists in Damascus who produced the finest 
polished swords in medieval times, the technique 
was initially used to form “vias” linking separate 
layers of wiring in chips. In the original damascene 
patterning, the pattern of vias was first formed by 
etching a silicon dioxide or other insulator layer. The 
metal was deposited second, and the excess metal 
was removed by polishing. Electrodeposition was 
selected as the metal deposition method of choice 
despite the fact that some people thought the cop-
per patterns would be filled with bubbles, or that 
the process was too “dirty.” It turned out to have 
a faster rate of deposition, and the evenness of the 
copper film was better than in the case of electro-
less deposition. Also, copper CVD, an early favorite 
option, ran into other severe problems. To polish the 
copper at an acceptable rate while controlling corro-
sion, erosion, and other defects in the patterns, IBM 
pioneered a special chemical-mechanical process 
(CMP) that proved critical to the copper technology. 
The latter process is detailed in Chapter 1. The dam-
ascene process can also be applied to other good via 
and interconnect materials such as Al.
In Figure 8.41 we compare through-mask copper 
plating with the damascene process. Through-mask 
plating (Figure 8.41a) uses a masking material on 
top of the seed layer. Electroplating occurs only on 
those areas of the seed layer that are not covered by 
the mask. The masking material and the surround-
ing seed layer are subsequently removed. Dama -
scene plating (Figure 8.41b), in contrast, involves 
deposition of the seed layer over a patterned mate-
rial, which, in the case of interconnect structures, 
is the insulator, a functional part of the device that 
remains in place. The plated metal covers the entire 
surface, and excess metal must be removed by CMP.
Damascene electroplating it turned out is ide-
ally suited for the fabrication of complex intercon-
nect structures because it enables inlaying of metal 
in via holes and overlying lines at the same time 
in a process called dual damascene, as illustrated in 
Figure 8.42. In a dual-damascene structure as shown 
here, only a single metal deposition step is used to 
simultaneously form the main metal lines and the 
metal in the vias. That is, both trenches and vias 
are formed in a single dielectric layer. The vias and 
trenches are defined using two lithography steps. 
Trenches are typically etched to a depth of 4000–
5000 Å, and the vias are typically 5000–7000 Å 
deep. After the via and trench recesses are etched, 
the via is filled in the same metal-deposition step 
that fills the trench. After filling, the excess metal 
that is deposited outside the trench is removed by 
a CMP process, and a planar structure with metal 
inlays is achieved. The process starts with deposit-
ing a thin layer (~250 Å) of silicon nitride (Si3N4) 
on the silicon surface and between layers of a low 
Top layer
Core
Core
Core
Prepreg
Prepreg
Mid-layer 1
Mid-layer 2
Bottom layer
Internal plane 1 (GND)
Internal plane 2 (VCC)
FIGURE 8.40 A typical six-layer printed circuit board. VCC stands for the positive supply voltage applied to the collectors 
of a transistor circuit. A “prepreg” is an epoxy-coated glass fabric.

[Page 555]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   555
Masking
material
Seed layer
Seed layer
Substrate
Substrate
Plated copper
Plated copper
(a) Plated copper
(b) Copper damascene process
FIGURE 8.41 (a) Standard copper plating: seed layer deposited, mask layer deposited and patterned, copper plated up, 
mask layer removed, and seed layer etched away. (b) Damascene process used to obtain highly planar surfaces: dielectric 
layer (insulator) deposited and patterned, seed layer deposited, copper plated, and surface polished with CMP.
Etch stop
(SiN)
Low k
dieletric
Si
Via
(a)
(b)
Plated Cu
via and pad
(e)
Seed layer
Barrier
(d)
(c)
Contact pad
via
FIGURE 8.42 Dual-damascene process: process steps for a via and a line. (a) Insulator, low k dielectric deposition. (b) Via 
definition. (c) Line/contact pad definition. (d) Barrier and seed layer deposition. (e) Plating and CMP.

[Page 556]
556   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
k dielectric, using CVD. The Si3N4 serves as an etch 
stop layer during via and trench formation. To over-
come copper’s tendency to diffuse in silicon, a metal 
diffusion barrier (e.g., Ta or TaN), preventing atoms 
from migrating out of a copper wire into surround-
ing chip material, is deposited next. Then follows a 
thin layer of copper deposited via CVD as a precur-
sor to the subsequent electrodeposition of copper 
in both vias and trenches. The term “dual” refers 
to the formation of second channels, vias, within 
trenches. Further, it is compatible with the require-
ment for a barrier layer between the seed layer and 
the insulator.
As in conventional patterning, the damascene pro-
cess is repeated many times to form the alternating 
layers of wires and vias that form the complete wir-
ing system of a silicon chip. In Figure 8.43, an exam-
ple copper dual-damascene structure is shown.
Anodization Anodization is an oxidation pro-
cess performed in an electrolytic cell. The material 
to be anodized becomes the anode (+), whereas 
a noble metal is the cathode (–). Depending on 
the solubility of the anodic reaction products, 
an insoluble layer (e.g., an oxide, perhaps TiO2) 
results, or in the case of a soluble reaction prod-
uct, the electrode etches. The process can be either 
global or local through a masked area. If the pri-
mary oxidizing agent is water, the resulting oxides 
generally are porous, whereas organic electrolytes 
may lead to very dense oxides, providing excellent 
passivation.66 Good oxides have been produced 
this way on W, Al, and Ta. In Volume I, Chapter 
4, in the section on thermal oxidation, we learned 
that anodic oxidation of Si has not led to a com-
mercially acceptable process, mainly because the 
interface state density at the SiO2/Si interface is 
prohibitively high for IC applications. As a sacri-
ficial layer, anodic SiO2 plays a role in microma-
chining and leads to uniquely structured films that 
cannot be obtained by chemical means. For exam-
ple, anodization of Si in a highly concentrated HF 
solution (excellent etchant for the anodic oxidation 
product SiO2) leads to porous Si and very high-as-
pect-ratio pores, with diameters ranging from 20 Å 
to several micrometers. The growth rate and degree 
of porosity of the Si can be controlled by the cur-
rent density (see Chapter 4). Similarly porous alu-
minum oxide films can be prepared by anodization 
of aluminum foils.67
Through an appropriate choice of electrolyte, films 
other than oxides can be produced by anodization. 
For example, sulfide and selenide layers can be pro-
duced by anodization of Cd and Zn electrodes, and 
polymerization of redox polymers can be induced 
from solutions containing the monomers.
Conclusions on Electroless and Electroplating through 
Polymer Masks Electrochemistry through polymer 
masks represents one of the most powerful tech-
niques available for formation of very high-density 
patterns and circuits with extremely large height-to-
width ratios. Most other methods, such as chemi-
cal isotropic etching, sputter etching, ion milling, 
and reactive ion etching, cannot be used to produce 
metal patterns with better than 1:1 height-to-width 
aspect ratios. To understand this contrasting behav-
ior, we must look into the fundamental nature of 
the different approaches. In nonelectrochemical 
technologies, a polymeric or inorganic mask is 
used to cover the existing metal, whereas either a 
chemical solution or an active gas phase removes 
the metal from the open areas. Hence the limitation 
in the height-to-width aspect ratio, the maximum 
circuit density, and the fidelity of reproduction of 
the features are caused by shadowing, which is the 
mechanism by which the patterning takes place. 
In contrast, with electrochemical techniques, one 
FIGURE 8.43 Dual damascene copper. Note planarity of 
structure. (Courtesy of Motorola Inc.)

[Page 557]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   557
obtains the exact replication of the recesses in the 
mask.52 Thus, electrodeposition reproduces the fin-
est features of the mask with the greatest fidelity. 
This is not surprising, considering that, in plating, 
metal ions discharge from solution present inside 
the mold. In so doing, the metal displaces the solu-
tion from the mold atom by atom, conforming to 
the smallest features that exist in the mold.51 A com-
parison of conventional subtractive etching with 
electrochemical additive processes was presented as 
early as 1973 by Romankiw et al.61 For the fabrica-
tion of highly miniaturized magnetic bubble mem-
ory devices, this IBM group showed clearly that the 
additive plating process is superior to dry etching-
based techniques.
Figure 8.44 features a list of choices for material 
deposition using electrochemical and electroless 
techniques.68 The first metal LIGA structures (see 
Chapter 10) con sisted of nickel, copper, or gold 
electrodeposited from suitable electrolytes.69 Nickel-
cobalt and nickel-iron alloys were also experimented 
with. A nickel-cobalt electrolyte for deposition 
of the correspond ing alloys has been developed 
especially for the generation of microstructures with 
increased hardness (400 Vickers at 30% cobalt) and 
elastic limit.70 The nickel-iron alloys permit tuning 
of magnetic and thermal properties of the crafted 
structures.70,71 From Figure  8.44 it is obvious that 
many more materials could be  combined with 
through-mask metal deposition.
Instant Masking in Electrochemical Fabrication 
In stant masking is a selective electroplating tech-
nique similar in some ways to through-mask plat-
ing. However, through-mask plating involves up 
to 10 separate steps, multiple pieces of equipment, 
multiple liquids, and is time consuming and dif-
ficult to automate. Obviously it is not a technique 
that is very suitable for automatically building com-
plex 3D microdevices consisting of hundreds of 
layers or more. On the other hand, instant mask-
ing operates much more like printing, in which 
prefabricated plates transfer ink onto a substrate. In 
instant masking, instead of inks, one deposits mate-
rials electrochemically.
Instant masking is the enabling technology of 
electrochemical fabrication (EFAB), a solid, free-
form fabrication technology that creates complex, 
miniature 3D metal structures impossible or 
impractical to manufacture using other MEMS 
technologies, such as electrical discharge ma -
chining (EDM), laser machining, or silicon micro-
machining.72 The automated EFAB process creates 
metal structures by electroplating multiple, inde-
pendently patterned layers. The process is similar 
in concept to rapid prototyping (RP) techniques, 
such as stereolithography (SL), in that multiple 
patterned layers are stacked to build structures. 
However, unlike stereolithography, EFAB is a batch 
process suitable for volume production of fully 
functional devices, not just models and prototypes. 
Metal deposition
With current
Pulse
Aqueous
Organic
Aqueous
DC
Catalytic
Exchange
Electroless
Electro-
phoretic
Au, Cu, Cr
special
Ni-Fe
alloys
Anodic
oxidation of
Al, Ti
Anodic
oxidation of
Al, Ti
Al
Si
Ta
Ti
Ni, Cu, Au
Zn, Ag, Fe
Cu- alloys
Ni- alloys
Ni- P
Ni- B
Cu
Ni- PTFE
Nl- TiN
Ni-
diamond
Au
Au
Ni
Ni
Cu
Zn
Ceramics
Polymers
with
intrinsic
conductivity
FIGURE 8.44 Processes and materials for through-mask metal deposition. (From Ehrfeld, W. 1994. Notes from handouts. 
Banff, Canada. With permission.68)

[Page 558]
558   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Furthermore, EFAB provides greater accuracy than 
stereolithography. The EFAB process was invented at 
the University of Southern California with funding 
from the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency and is commercialized by MEMGen Corp., a 
company founded in August 1999 (MEMGen Corp. 
changed its name to Microfabrica in 2003; http://
www.microfabrica.com).
The three major fabrication steps in EFAB that are 
repeated are 1) the instant masking and selective 
electroplating, 2) blanket deposition, and 3) pla-
narization. The manufacturing process starts with 
a substrate and grows devices layer by layer. Each 
thin layer, perhaps 5 µm thick, consists of a struc-
tural material (e.g., Ni) and a sacrificial material 
(e.g., Cu) as shown in the example in Figure 8.45. 
Microdevices are built by stacking many of these 
layers (as many as desired). To fabricate a multilayer 
device, the geometries of the layer cross-sections 
are automatically determined based on the desired 
3D geometry, and a set of instant masks is gener-
ated that includes all the unique cross-sections of 
the device. The device under construction, com-
posed of structural material, is imbedded within 
the sacrificial material, which, like a scaffold, sup-
ports it during fabrication and is later removed. 
Additional materials can be deposited over entire 
layers without constraint. Such geometrical free-
dom makes possible monolithically fabricated 
assemblies of discrete, interconnected, and rotating 
parts and eliminates the need for subsequent bond-
ing or assembly steps.
The instant mask consists of an insulator pattern, 
made, for example, by patterning a resist layer on 
an anode plate using photolithography. A series of 
such masks, each representing a thin cross-section 
through the part being built, is fabricated in a sepa-
rate process before the formation of the part. Instant 
masking then patterns a substrate by pressing this 
insulator pattern on the anode against the cathode 
substrate (e.g., Ni), and the assembly is immersed 
in an electrochemical bath (e.g., a Ni bath). Elec-
troplating from the nickel salt solution between 
anode and cathode only deposits metal (Ni) between 
the insulator parts on the anode. The result is a layer 
that has been rapidly deposited and patterned in 
a single step. After the nickel plating, the mask is 
removed, and the substrate with its nickel pattern 
is copper plated, filling in areas left by the insulator. 
The two materials are then polished flat, providing 
a smooth layer for the next mask. The process can 
be repeated indefinitely, which creates the potential 
for defining arbitrarily complex shapes. Once the 
final plating has taken place, the sacrificial copper 
is removed by chemical etching, leaving a 3D nickel 
structure.
The complete process flow is shown in Figure 
8.46. In Figure 8.46a, the first material is patterned 
onto a substrate, producing a patterned layer. In 
Figure 8.46b, the second material has been blanket 
deposited over the first material so that it contacts 
the substrate in those regions not covered with the 
first material. Then, as shown in Figure 8.46c, the 
entire two-material layer is planarized to achieve 
precise thickness and flatness. After repetition of 
this process for all layers, the embedded multilayer 
structure shown in Figure 8.46d is etched to yield 
the desired device as shown in Figure 8.46e.
FIGURE 8.45 EFAB layer example. This 5-µm-thick layer consists of a structural material (e.g., Ni) and a sacrificial (sup-
port) material (e.g., Cu). (http://www.isi.edu/efab.)

[Page 559]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   559
The instant masking process is fast, which makes 
it possible to fabricate devices with a dozen or more 
completed layers in 1 day.
The precision EFAB technology allows miniature 
and microdevices to be generated from 3D 
computer-aided design (CAD) data. The system uses 
data from any standard CAD package to determine 
device cross-sections. These cross-sections are 
then used to fabricate the instant masks that are 
then used to rapidly create the devices. EFAB is a 
precision manufacturing technology that can be 
used to form structures from any metal or alloy 
that can be electrodeposited. The only constraint 
is that the accompanying sacrificial metal can 
be selectively etched after the layers are formed. 
EFAB, depending on the lithography used to make 
the instant masks, can produce parts with feature 
sizes less than 0.001 in. and tolerances better than 
0.0001 in. Such precision is difficult to obtain 
with mechanical precision machining technology. 
Like a machine tool, the EFAB process is suitable 
for a wide range of applications (see example 
microchain in Figure 8.47). Applications include 
radiofrequency (RF) elec tronic components such 
as high-Q inductors and transmission lines, optical 
components, microfluidic networks, and mold 
tooling for plastic devices.
Maskless Plating
Microjet 
Plating 
and 
Laser-Enhanced 
Jet 
Plating Through-mask electrochemical deposi-
tion, although a very important MEMS technique, is 
costly and requires extra steps, and several electro-
chemical deposition techniques have been proposed 
that obviate the need for masks.
One of the simpler approaches to avoid using 
masks in electrodeposition uses impinging microjets 
of electrolyte. This increases the mass transport 
greatly, and plating selectivity is achieved by virtue 
of the fact that the jet serves as the current path. The 
smallest spot size of the area being plated is usually 
limited to twice the diameter of the jet, which can be 
operated, if filtering the solution carefully, without 
too frequent plugging. The nozzle orifice diameter 
may be anywhere from 1 mm to as little as ∼0.01 mm 
in diameter. The lower limit depends strongly on the 
FIGURE 8.46 The EFAB process. (a) First material is pat-
terned onto a substrate, producing a patterned layer. 
(b) Second material is blanket deposited over the first 
material. (c) The entire two-material layer is planarized. 
(d) Repetition of the process steps (a)–(c). (d) Embedded 
multilayer structure. (e) Sacrificial material is etched to 
yield the desired device as shown.
FIGURE 8.47 A small household ant lies over a 12-layer 
microchain with independently movable links, fabricated 
in nickel in a single process without the need for assembly. 
The chain is about ∼100 μm high (about the thickness of a 
sheet of paper; http://www.isi.edu/efab/Resources).

[Page 560]
560   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
degree of filtration of the solution. Micromachining 
of nozzles will further impact obtainable microjet-
plating resolution in the future.
The setup in Figure 4.15 for laser-enhanced jet 
etching can also be used for faster plating. The local 
heating of the substrate by the laser (up to 150°C) 
results in highly increased deposition. Using this 
technique, plating enhancement of up to 1000 times 
has been obtained with gold. Plating spots and lines 
as small as 2 µm wide have been observed. Laser 
enhancement also works with electroless deposi-
tion. Current densities of up to 15 A/cm2 and cop-
per plating rates of 50 µm/s have been obtained. For 
more background on jet plating and laser-enhanced 
jet plating, refer to the review by Romankiw et al. 
and references therein.51
Pulse plating, introduced in Chapter 10 in the 
context of plating in LIGA molds, represents only 
one of many emerging electrochemical plating 
techniques considered for microfabrication. For more 
background on techniques such as laser-enhanced 
plating, jet plating, laser-enhanced jet plating, and 
ultrasonically enhanced plating, refer to the review 
of Romankiw et al.51 and references therein.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition Truly 3D 
microstructures can be formed using localized elec-
trochemical deposition. The tip of a sharp electrode 
placed in a plating solution is brought near the 
substrate where deposition occurs when applying 
a potential between the tip and the substrate. The 
electric field is confined to the area beneath the tip, 
and the spatial resolution is determined by the size 
of the electrode. Deposition rates of Ni are as high 
as 6 µm/s, two orders of magnitude higher than in 
conventional electroplating.73 The tip of a scanning 
electrochemical microscope (SECM) can be used for 
both local etching and deposition with high resolu-
tion in the x-, y-, and z-dimensions, basically form-
ing a high-resolution electrochemical machining 
setup (Figure 4.16).
Slanted and Curved Plated Metal Shapes As a 
final example of maskless electrodeposition, we con-
sider the work by Maciossek, who relies on overplating 
of a patterned plating base to create a variety of novel 
slanted and curved metallic microstructures.59 The 
angle of the deposited wedge shapes is adjustable 
in a range from 0–45°. Besides linearly increasing 
structure profiles, a sinusoidal or parabolic surface 
can also be generated. The angles of the deposited 
wedges depend on the distance between and the 
width of a set of parallel metallic strips on the 
plating substrate as illustrated in Figure 8.48A. At 
the start of the plating process, only a central metal 
strip is biased, and during the isotropic growing 
process, the outlying metal strips are contacted 
one at a time by the electrodepositing metal. When 
the contact has been made, electrodeposition will 
occur also in this area, whereas further deposition 
in the original contact area (the central strip) 
results in a higher deposit on that first electrode. 
This innovative 3D fabrication process enlarges the 
MEMS arsenal of tools. The Maciossek method may 
be used to fabricate slanted and curved absorber 
patterns for x-ray masks (see Chapters 2 and 10). 
Two example Maciossek structures are shown in 
Figure 8.48B.
Three-dimensional metal structures on a sub-
strate may also be produced by electrodeposition 
through a suitably prepared gelatin layer in a pro-
cess similar to photolithography. Angus et al.74 
exposed a layer of gelatin on a Cu surface through a 
gray mask. Cross-linking of the gelatin occurs in the 
exposed areas, and unexposed material is washed 
away in a water/isopropanol solution. Thickness 
of the hardened gelatin layer, and hence the rate 
of diffusion of depositing metal ions through it, 
depends on the exposure dose. Metal electrode-
position through the developed gelatin layer film 
occurs more rapidly at the less exposed sites, thus 
generating a 3D metal structure on the substrate 
with a thickness and configuration governed by the 
exposure time, the mask thickness, and the deposi-
tion time.75 As the mask is permeable to the plating 
solution, we treat this technique here as a “mask-
less” technology.
Example 8.1: Protein Patterning
Microlithographic techniques can be applied 
successfully to the field of protein patterning. 
In this first example, we show how clever use 
of lithography may help solve the problem 

[Page 561]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   561
of nonspecific protein adsorption competing 
for detection sites in immunosensors. Proteins 
bind with considerable avidity to a wide 
range of surfaces, and a reference surface in 
an immunosensor should adsorb all the same 
proteins except for the protein of interest. The 
best way to avoid nonspecific binding effects in 
immunosensors is to make the reference surface 
as similar to the sensing surface as possible, i.e., 
a reference substrate, subject to all the same 
Top view
Plating base “islands”
Cross-section
(a) Patterned plating base
Contact
Contact
Contact
Contact
Plating base
Plating base
Plating base
Plating base
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Insulation layer
Insulation layer
Insulation layer
(b) Growing microcomponents
Resist
Resist
Electrolyte
Electrodeposition
Electrodeposition
Electrodeposition
Electrodeposition
(c) Microcomponents
(A)
(B)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.48 (A) Maciossek plating schematic: exposing the patterned plating base (Aa) to a plating solution, the iso-
tropic growing process starts at the contact area and extends until the neighboring plating base islands are contacted. 
(Ab) Once contacted, electrodeposition also occurs in this area, whereas further deposition in the former contact area 
results in a higher structure there. On continuing the electroplating process, consecutive outlying “island” electrodes 
are reached, and electroplating starts later so that wedge-shaped microcomponents are formed (Ac). (B) Electroplated 
profiles show a very smooth and bright surface. The perpendicular sidewalls are made by a thick surrounding resist. (Ba) 
Gold microstructure, 18 µm height; (Bb) electroplated gold with two electrical contacts.

[Page 562]
562   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
nonspecific protein binding phenomena as the 
sensor surface itself, except for the antigen-
antibody of interest. This way, measuring 
differentially enables the best possible correc-
tion for nonspecific binding. An interesting way 
of implementing this idea is to create an optical 
grating pattern, with the antigen-antibody 
coupling providing the grating structure. This 
can be realized, for example, based on the loss 
of antigenicity on UV radiation of thin layers 
of antigen as observed by Panitz and Giaver.76 
Panitz and Giaver found that the antigenic sites 
on proteins display sensitivity to UV radiation 
in air and that a small dose of UV radiation can 
destroy the antigenicity of antigens (Figure 
8.49). One presumes that the UV light breaks 
up chemical bonds in the adsorbed protein 
layer and simultaneously produces ozone. The 
broken bonds are targets for the highly reactive 
ozone, resulting in the progressive oxidation of 
the protein layer. The protein can be completely 
removed from the surface by too long an 
irradiation (e.g., 10 min). With a short radiation 
time the optical density does not change, but 
antibodies will no longer bind to the antigenetic 
sites. This scheme was put to use in the fabrica-
tion of an elegant biograting for immunosensing 
as shown in Figure 8.50.77 By using a photomask 
grating and inactivating alternating bands of 
antibodies, a biological diffraction grating is 
created. In this device, the antigen-antibody 
coupling itself constitutes the grating structure, 
causing diffraction only if the target antigen is 
present. A CD-type He-Ne laser beam diffracts 
from the grating with an intensity related to the 
antigen concentration. The above grating device 
comes close to embodying an ideal relative 
reference because the radiated protein bands 
are almost identical to the active surface except 
for being incapable of reacting with the target 
complementary protein.78
It is easy to imagine arrays with several 
different enzymes, antibodies, or DNA probes 
immobilized precisely onto a transducer surface 
as a diagnostic panel for clinical diagnosis, high-
throughput drug screening, or for environ-
mental monitoring.79
Example 8.2: The Nanogen Chip
A 
schematic 
representation 
of 
an 
open 
electrophoretic DNA hybridization chip from 
Nanogen is shown in Figure 8.51a. In this chip 
DNA, which is negatively charged at most 
pHs, is collected at biased electrodes through 
electrophoresis. An array of 25 metal electrodes 
with a diameter of 80 µm is pictured. Arrays of 
UV
O3
O3
O3
Protected
region
lgG
Incubation with
speciﬁc antibody
UV irradiation of
adsorbed protein
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.49 UV radiation of antigens leads to bands of 
“live/dead” protein. (a) Preadsorbed layer of antigen is 
briefly exposed, in air, to an intense UV source, resulting in 
the production of ozone (O3). The combination of UV dam-
age and ozone results in partial oxidation of the adsorbed 
protein. The area of protein shielded from the irradiation 
is not oxidized. (b) Following this treatment the protein-
coated substrate is incubated with antiserum specific to the 
adsorbed antigen. The partially oxidized protein layer is no 
longer antigenic, and IgG molecules are able to bind only 
to the previously shielded portion of the antigen layer. 
(Clementi, E., G. Corongiu, M. H. Sarma, and R. H. Sarma, 
eds. 1985. Structure and motion: membranes, nucleic acids, 
and proteins. Guilderland, NY: Adenine Press.76)
FIGURE 8.50 Idetek, Inc. immunosensor based on biological grating (Editorial. 1993. Biograting. Res Dev 51; Courtesy of 
Mark Platshon, Idetek, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA.77)

[Page 563]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   563
100 (80-µm diameter), 400 (50-µm diameter), 
and 10,000 (30-µm diameter) elements have 
been made as well.80 Each of the metal elec-
trode sites (microlocations) is a discrete, insu-
lated, and addressable working electrode 
forming part of an electrochemical cell. An 
outer group of counter electrodes provides 
encompassing electric fields for concentrating 
DNA from the bulk sample solution to specific 
working electrodes. In Figure 8.51a, there are 
four such outer electrodes with a diameter of 
160 µm. The microlocations are all electrically 
connected via the overlying electrolyte solution 
and protected with a permeation layer hydrogel 
(e.g., agarose or polyacrylamide) (Figure 8.51b). 
The permeation layer is a 1–10-µm hydrogel 
layer deposited by spin coating and permits 
water and ion flow, provides a matrix to attach 
molecules such as DNA, RNA, or proteins, and 
separates those sensitive biomacromolecules 
from the potentially damaging electrochemical 
reactions that occur on the active Pt electrodes 
(current levels >100 nA and voltages >1.2 V 
are possible with such hydrogel layers without 
damaging the biomacromolecules). Attachment 
of molecules to the permeation layer such as 
DNA probes can be achieved, for example, by 
impregnating the permeation layer with affinity 
binding substances such as avidin or streptavidin 
for subsequent attachment of biotinylated DNA 
or RNA probes.
Net negatively charged molecules such as 
DNA and RNA are moved to positively biased 
microlocations, whereas they are repelled from 
negatively biased ones by electrophoresis. For 
the electric field to be high enough throughout 
the solution for electrophoresis to take place, the 
solution must be desalted. Only low conductivity 
buffers may be used. The positive microlocations 
may concentrate target DNA sequences in a 
Pt counter
electrodes
(a)
(b)
Permeation
layer
Pt
Si3N4
Si3N4
over Pt
Si3N4
SiO2
DNA
Pt
Si substrate
FIGURE 8.51 Nanogen DNA chip. (a) Electrode array region of the chip. The central 1 × 1-mm test site array region 
consists of four large (160-µm diameter) corner electrodes and 25 central 80-µm electrodes. Pt, exposed Pt test sites; 
Si3N4, dielectric; Si3N4 over Pt, and Pt insulated by Si3N4. (b) Cross-section of an electrode test site. Location of section is 
indicated by lines extending from (a). Pt, Si3N4, Pt insulated by Si3N4; SiO2, dielectric layer; Si substrate, wafer material; 
permeation layer, agarose layer containing streptavidin; DNA, biotinylated oligonucleotides bound to streptavidin.

[Page 564]
564   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
very short time (because they reach those sites 
through  electrophoresis rather than by diffu-
sion), and if this location has complementary 
DNA capture probes, hybridization of the target 
DNA can occur. The concentrating effect on the 
positive microlocations facilitates the hybrid-
ization as a result of the law of mass action 
(hybridization in seconds rather than hours). 
Details of DC current and voltage level, solution 
conductivity, and buffer species for hybridiza-
tion can be found in Edman et al.81 This directed 
electrophoretic transport and addressing pro-
cess can be carried out simultaneously at test 
sites that have different capture sites. Detection 
of successful hybridization can be accomplished 
using fluorescent probes and a color, charge-
coupled detector (CCD). By reversing the 
polarity at a microlocation after hybridization, 
nonspecific sample DNA and unhybridized 
probes may be selectively removed. The electric 
field can be adjusted just so to affect selective 
dehybridization of the DNA sequences from the 
attached complementary probe. This is called 
electronic stringency control. Discrimination 
between single base pair mismatches in DNA 
has been demonstrated this way;82 for example, 
Gilles et al. developed a rapid assay for single-
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a gene impli-
cated in increased susceptibility to infection in 
pediatric patients.83
The power of this open-chip approach was 
further demonstrated by separating Escherichia 
coli from a mixture containing blood cells by 
means of dielectrophoresis, lyzing the isolated 
bacteria by a series of high-voltage pulses, and 
proteolytic digestion with proteinase K—all 
on the same chip. The microlocations on the 
Nanogen chip can be powered with DC and 
AC.84 Even more exciting is the demonstration of 
amplification and detection of multiple targets 
in this same open format [multiplex strand dis-
placement amplification (SDA)]. SDA is an iso-
thermal (60°C) DNA amplification method. In a 
regular multiplex amplification in solution, non-
specific interactions between different primer 
sets reduce the amplification efficiency. Elec-
tronic anchoring of sets of amplification primers 
in distinct areas reduces their interaction, and sets 
of distinct zones of amplification that only share 
reagents and enzymes are generated, increasing 
the efficiency of the multiplex amplification 
reactions. Isothermal SDA, which uses the 
combined effects of a restriction endonuclease 
and DNA polymerase, asynchronously amplifies 
DNA exponentially and was shown to be ideal 
for use on the open electrophoresis chip.85
Questions
 8.1: Describe two methods to make DNA arrays 
using a virtual mask approach.
 8.2: Briefly sketch the sol-gel technique. Why is this 
technique so important for nanotechnology?
 8.3: Compare Langmuir-Blodgett deposition with 
self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). 
 8.4: Sketch the dual damascene process. Where is 
it used?
 8.5: Outline the EFAB process. Where is it used?
 8.6: Why is DNA hybridization so much faster in 
an electronic DNA (Nanogen) than in a pas-
sive hybrydization chip?
 8.7: Describe how you could make beveled metal 
structures using both electroless plating and 
electroplating.
 8.8: Describe briefly different types of rapid pro-
totyping (RP) and discuss how they can be 
scaled down. Which RP technique is of most 
interest to micromachinists? 
 8.9: Compare three major arraying methods for 
making DNA and protein arrays. 
 8.10: Detail the difference between scanning micros-
tereolithography, parallel microstereolithog-
raphy, and two-photon stereolithography.
References
 
1. Rath, K. 2005. Novel materials from solgel chemistry. Science 
Technol Rev, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, May 
13, 2005.
 
2. Licari, J. J. 1970. Plastic coatings for electronics. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
 
3. Howatt, G. N. 1952. Method of producing high-dielectric high-
insulation ceramic plates. US Patent 2582993.
 
4. Jenkins, A. T. A., J. Hu, Y. Z. Wang, S. Schiller, R. Förch, 
and W. Knoll. 2000. Pulsed plasma deposited maleic anhy-
dride thin films as supports for lipid bilayers. Langmuir 
16:6381–84.
 
5. Bauer, M., T. Schwarz-Selinger, H. Kang, and A. v. Keudell. 
2005. Control of the plasma chemistry of a pulsed induc-
tively coupled methane plasma. Plasma Sources Science 
Technol 14:543–48.

[Page 565]
Chemical, Photochemical, and Electrochemical Forming Techniques   565
 
6. Guckel, H., J. Uglow, M. Lin, D. Denton, J. Tobin, K. Euch, 
and M. Juda. 1988. Plasma polymerization of methyl-
methacrylate: a photoresist for 3-D applications. Technical 
digest: 1988 solid state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton 
Head Island, SC.
 
7. Vossen, J. L., and W. Kern, eds. 1978. Thin film processes. 
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
 
8. Biederman, H., ed. 2004. Plasma polymer films. London: 
Imperial College Press.
 
9. Acheson. 1991. Brochure. Scheemda, the Netherlands: 
Acheson Coloiden BV.
 10. Pace, S. J., and M. A. Jensen. 1986. Second international 
meeting on chemical sensors. Bordeaux, France.
 11. Belford, R. E., A. E. Owen, and R. G. Kelly. 1987. Thick-film 
hybrid pH sensors. Sensors Actuators 11:387–98.
 12. Pace, S. J., P. P. Zarzycki, R. T. McKeever, and L. Pelosi. 1985. 
A thick-film multi-layered oxygen sensor. Third international 
conference on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers 
’85). Philadelphia.
 13. Karagounis, V., L. Lun, and C. Liu. 1986. A thick-film mul-
tiple component cathode three-electrode oxygen sensor. 
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng BME-33:108–12.
 14. Lewandowski, J. J., P. S. Malchesky, M. Zborowski, and Y. 
Nose. 1987. Proceedings: ninth annual conference of the IEEE 
engineering in medicine and biology society. Boston.
 15. Lambrechts, M., and W. Sansen. 1992. Biosensors: microelec-
trical devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics Publishing.
 16. Weetall, H. H., and T. Hotaling. 1987. A simple, inexpen-
sive, disposable electrochemical sensor for clinical and 
immuno-assay. Biosensors 3:57–63.
 17. Cha, C. S., M. J. Shao, and C. C. Liu. 1990. Electrochemical 
behavior of microfabricated thick-film electrodes. Sensors 
Actuators B B2:277–81.
 18. Chen, Y., J. Au, P. Kazlas, A. Ritenour, H. Gates, and M. 
McCreary. 2003. Electronic paper: flexible active-matrix 
electronic ink display. Nature 423:136.
 19. Allara, D. L., and R. G. Nuzzo. 1985. Spontaneously 
organized molecular assemblies; II. Quantitative infrared 
spectroscopic determination of equilibrium structures of 
solution adsorbed n-alkanoic acids on an oxidized alumi-
num surface. Langmuir 1:52–66.
 20. Allara, D. L., and R. G. Nuzzo. 1985. Spontaneously 
 organized molecular assemblies; I. formation, dynam-
ics, and physical properties of n-alkanoic acids adsorbed 
from solution on an oxidized aluminum surface. Langmuir 
1:45–52.
 21. Delamarche, E., B. Michel, H. A. Biebuyck, and C. Gerber. 
1996. Golden interfaces: the surface of self-assembled 
monolayers. Adv Mater 8:719–29.
 22. Liu, R. H., Q. Yu, J. M. Bauer, B.-H. Jo, J. S. Moore, and D. 
J. Beebe. 2000. Micro total analysis systems 2000: proceedings, 
µTAS 2000 symposium. Eds. A. van den Berg, W. Olthuis, 
and P. Bergveld. Enschede, the Netherlands: Kluwer.
 23. Zubritsky, E. 2000. Microscale muscles. Anal Chem 
August:517–18.
 24. Fodor, P. A. S., J. L. Read, M. C. Pirrung, L. Sryer, A. T. Lu, 
and D. Solas. 1991. Light-directed, spatially addressable 
parallel chemical synthesis. Science 251:767–73.
 25. Britland, S. T., G. R. Moores, P. Clark, and P. Connolly. 
1990. Patterning and cell adhesion and movement on arti-
ficial substrate: a simple method. J Anat 170:235–36.
 26. Douglas, K., G. Deavaud, and N. A. Clark. 1992. Transfer 
of biologically derived nanometer scale patterns to smooth 
substrates. Science 257:642–44.
 27. Singh-Gasson, S., R. D. Green, Y. Yue, C. Nelson, F. Blattner, 
M. R. Sussman, and F. Cerrina. 1999. Maskless fabrication 
of light-directed oligonucleotide micromirrors using a digi-
tal micromirror array. Nat Biotechnol 17:974–78.
 28. Bertsch, A., J. Y. Jézéquel, and J. C. André. 1997. Study of 
the spatial resolution of a new 3D microfabrication pro-
cess: the microstereophotolithography using a dynamic 
mask-generator technique. Photochem Photobiol A: Chem 
107:275–81.
 29. Okamoto, T., T. Suzuki, and N. Yamamoto. 2000. Microarray 
fabrication with covalent attachment of DNA using bubble 
jet technology. Nat Biotechnol 18:438–41. 
 30. St. John, P. M., R. Davis, N. Cady, J. Czajka, C. A. Batt, and 
H. G. Craighead. 1998. Diffraction-based cell detection 
using a microcontact printed antibody grating. Anal Chem 
70:1108–11.
 31. Madou, M., and T. Otagawa. 1992. Tetrasulfonated metal 
phthalocyanine doped electrically conducting electrochromic 
poly(dithiophene) polymers. US Patent 5,151,224.
 32. Otagawa, T., and M. Madou. 1991. Permanently doped 
polyaniline and method thereof. US Patent 5,002,700, 
Osaka Gas Company.
 33. Ikuta, K., and K. Hirowatari. 1993. Proceedings: IEEE micro 
electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL.
 34. Ehmann, K. F., D. Bourell, M. L. Culpepper, T. J. Hodgson, 
T. R. Kurfess, M. Madou, K. Rajurkar, and R. DeVor, eds. 
2007. Micromanufacturing: international research and develop-
ment. New York: Springer.
 35. Ikuta, K., K. Hirowatari, and T. Ogata. 1994. IEEE interna-
tional workshop on micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS 
’94). Oiso, Japan: IEEE.
 36. Takagi, T., and N. Nakajima. 1993. Proceedings: IEEE micro elec-
tro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL: IEEE.
 37. Ikuta, K., T. Ogata, M. Tsubio, and S. Kojima. 1996. 
Development of mass productive micro stereo lithography. 
Proceedings of IEEE International workshop on micro electro 
mechanical systems. MEMS ’96. San Diego, CA.
 38. Takagi, T., and N. Nakajima. 1994. IEEE international work-
shop on micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, 
Japan.
 39. Ikuta, K., S. Maruo, and S. Kojima. 1998. New micro ste-
reo lithography for freely movable 3-D micro structure – 
Super IH process with submicron resolution. Proceedings of 
the 11th IEEE Workshop on micro electro mechanical systems 
(MEMS’98). Heidelberg, Germany.
 40. Maruo, S., and S. Kawata. 1997. Two-photo-absorbed pho-
topolymerization for three-dimensional microfabrication. 
Proceedings of the IEEE micro electro mechanical systems work-
shop (MEMS ‘97). Nagoya, Japan.
 41. Maruo, S., and S. Kawata. 1998. Two-photon-absorbed 
near-infrared photopolymerization for three-dimensional 
microfabrication. JMEMS 7:411–15.
 42. Angelo, M. D., M. V. Chekhova, and Y. H. Shih. 2001. Two-
photon diffraction and quantum lithography. Phys Rev Lett 
87:013602.
 43. Boto, A. N., P. Kok, D. S. Abrams, S. L. Braunstein, C. P. 
Williams, and J. P. Dowling. 2000. Quantum interferomet-
ric optical lithography: exploiting entanglement to beat the 
diffraction limit. Phys Rev Lett 85:2733–36.
 44. Prasad, P. N. 2004. Nanophotonics. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-
Interscience.
 45. Zhang, X., X. N. Jiang, and C. Sun. 1999. Micro-stereo 
lithography of polymeric and ceramic microstructures. 
Sensors Actuators A A77:149–56.

[Page 566]
566   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 46. Taylor, C. S., P. Cherkas, H. Hampton, J. J. Frantzen, B. O. 
Shah, W. B. Tiffany, L. Nanis, P. Booker, A. Salahieh, and R. 
Hansen. 1994. A spatial forming—a three dimensional print-
ing process. Proceedings of IEEE MEMS ‘94. Oiso, Japan.
 47. Beluze, L., A. Bertsch, and P. Renaud. 1999. Symposium on 
design, test, and microfabrication of MEMS and MOEMS. Paris.
 48. Bertsch, A., H. Lorenz, and P. Renaud. 1999. 3D microfab-
rication by combining microstereolithography and thick 
resist UV lithography. Sensors Actuators A 73:14–23.
 49. Bertsch, A., P. Bernhard, C. Vogt, and P. Renaud. 2001. Rapid 
prototyping of small size objects. Rapid Prototyping J 6:259–66.
 50. Sun, C., N. Fang, D. M. Wu, and X. Zhang. 2005. Projection 
micro-stereolithography 
using 
digital 
micro-mirror 
dynamic mask. Sensors Actuators A 121:113–20.
 51. Romankiw, L. T., and T. A. Palumbo. 1987. Electrodeposition 
in the electronic industry. Proceedings: symposium on elec-
trodeposition technology, theory, and practice. San Diego, CA.
 52. Romankiw, L. T. 1984. Electrochemical technology in elec-
tronics today and its future: a review. Oberflache-Surface 
25:238–47.
 53. Mallory, G. O., and J. B. Hadju, eds. 1990. Electroless plat-
ing: fundamentals and applications. Orlando, FL: American 
Electroplaters and Surface Finishers Society (AESF).
 54. Romankiw, L. T. 1976. Pattern generation in metal films 
using wet chemical techniques: a review. Proceedings of the 
Symposium on Etching for Pattern Definition. Ed. H. G. Hughes, 
and M. Rand. Pennington, NJ: The Electrochemical Society.
 55. Ohno, I. 1988. Electroless deposition of metals and alloys. 
172nd Meeting of The Electrochemical Society, Honolulu, 
HI. ECS Proceedings, Vol. 88-12. Eds. M. Paunovic, and I. 
Ohno. Pennington, NJ: ECS.
 56. Harsch, S., W. Ehrfeld, and A. Maner. 1988. Untersuchungen 
zur herstellung von mikrostrukturen grosser strukturhöhe durch 
galvanoformung im nickelsilfamatelektrolyten. KfK, Report No. 
4455. Karlsruhe, Germany. Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe.
 57. van der Putten, A. M. T., and J. W. G. de Bakker. 1993. 
Anisotropic deposition of electroless nickel-bevel plating. 
J Electrochem Soc 140:2229–35.
 58. van der Putten, A. M. T., and J. W. G. de Bakker. 1993. 
Geometrical effects in the electroless metallization of fine 
metal patterns. J Electrochem Soc 140:2221–28.
 59. Maciossek, A. 1996. SPIE: micromachining and microfabrica-
tion process technology II. Austin, TX: SPIE.
 60. Kenis, P. J. A., R. F. Ismagilov, and G. M. Whitesides. 1999. 
Microfabrication inside capillaries using multiphase lami-
nar flow patterning. Science 285:83–85.
 61. Romankiw, L. T., S. Krongelb, E. E. Castellani, J. Powers, A. 
Pfeiffer, and B. Stoeber. 1973. Additive electroplating 
technique for fabrication of magnetic devices. Proceedings 
of the inter national conference on magnetics, ICM-73., Vol. 6, 
pp. 104–111.
 62. Romankiw, L. T., I. M. Croll, and M. Hatzakis. 1970. Batch-
fabricated thin-film magnetic recording heads. IEEE Trans 
Magn 6:597–601.
 63. Romankiw, L. T. 1989. Proceedings: symposium on magnetic 
materials, processes, and devices. Hollywood, FL.
 64. Andricacos, P. C., and N. Robertson. 1998. Future direc-
tions in electroplated materials for thin-film recording 
heads. IBM J Res Dev 42:671.
 65. Editorial. 1997. Back to the future: copper comes of age. IBM 
Res 35.
 66. Madou, M. J., W. P. Gomes, F. Fransen, and F. Cardon. 
1982. Anodic oxidation of p-type silicon in methanol as 
compared to glycol. J Electrochem Soc 129:2749–52.
 67. Miller, C. J., and M. Majda. 1986. Microporous aluminium 
oxide films at electrodes. Part II: studies of electron trans-
port in the Al2O3 matrix derivated by adsorption of poly 
(4-vinylpyridine). J Electroanal Chem 207:49–72.
 68. Ehrfeld, W. 1994. LIGA at IMM. Notes from handouts. 
Banff, Canada.
 69. Maner, A., S. Harsch, and W. Ehrfeldg. 1988. Mass produc-
tion of microdevices with extreme aspect ratios by electro-
forming. Plating Surface Finishing March: 60–65.
 70. Harsch, S., D. Munchmeyer, and H. Reinecke. 1991. 
Proceedings: 78th AESF annual technical conference (SUR/FIN 
’91). Toronto.
 71. Thomes, A., W. Stark, H. Goller, and H. Liebscher. 1992. 
Erste ergebnisse zur galvanoformung von LIGA mikrostruk-
turen aus eisen-nickel legierungel. Symp. Mikroelektrochemie 
Friedrichsroda. Germany.
 72. Cohen, A., G. Zhang, F. Tseng, U. Frodis, F. Mansfeld, and P. 
Will. 1999. EFAB: rapid, low-cost desktop micromachining 
of high aspect ratio true 3-D MEMS. Proceedings of the 12th 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems workshop. Orlando, FL, 
January 1999, p. 244.
 73. Madden, J. D., and I. W. Hunter. 1996. Three-dimensional 
microfabrication by localized electrochemical deposition. J 
Microelectromechan Syst 5:24–32.
 74. Angus, J. C., U. Landau, S. H. Liao, and M. C. Wang. 
1986. Controlled electroplating through gelatin films. J 
Electrochem Soc 133:1152–60.
 75. Bard, A. J. 1994. Integrated chemical systems. New York: 
Wiley.
 76. Clementi, E., G. Corongiu, M. H. Sarma, and R. H. Sarma, 
eds. 1985. Structure and motion: membranes, nucleic acids, 
and proteins. Guilderland, NY: Adenine Press.
 77. Editorial. 1993. Biograting. Res Dev 51.
 78. Madou, M. J., and J. Joseph. 1993. Immunosensors with 
commercial potential. Immunomethods 3:134–52.
 79. Connolly, P., G. R. Moores, W. Monaghan, J. Shen, S. 
Britland, and P. Clark. 1992. Microelectronic and nano-
electronic interfacing techniques for biological systems. 
Sensors Actuators B B6:113–21.
 80. Heller, M. J., A. H. Forster, and E. Tu. 2000. Active micro-
electronic chip devices which utilize controlled electro-
phoretic fields for multiplex DNA hybridization and other 
genomic applications. Electrophoresis 21:157–64.
 81. Edman, C. F., D. E. Raymond, D. J. Wu, E. Tu, R. G. 
Sosnowski, W. F. Butler, M. Nerenberg, and M. J. Heller. 
Electric field directed nucleic acid hybridization on micro-
chips. Nucleic Acid Res 25:4907–14.
 82. Heller, M. J. 1996. An active microelectronic device for 
multiplex DNA analysis. IEEE Eng Med Biol 15: 100–04.
 83. Gilles, P. N., D. J. Wu, C. B. Foster, P. J. Dillon, and S. J. 
Chanock. 1999. Single nucleotide polymorphic discrimi-
nation by an electronic dot blot assay on semiconductor 
microchips. Nat Biotechnol 17:365–70.
 84. Cheng, J., E. L. Sheldon, L. Wu, A. Uribe, L. O. Gerrue, J. 
Carrino, M. J. Heller, and J. P. O’Connell. 1998. Preparation 
and hybridization analysis of DNA/RNA from E. coli 
on microfabricated bioelectronic chips. Nat Biotechnol 
16:501–46.
 85. Westin, L., X. Xu, C. Miller, L. Wang, C. F. Edman, and M. 
Nerenberg. 2000. Anchored multiplex amplification on a 
microelectronic chip array. Nat Biotechnol 18:190–204.
 86. Kawata, S., H.-B. Sun, T. Tanaka, and K. Takada, 2001. 
Finer features for functional microdevices. Nature 412: 
697–698.

[Page 567]
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Spray Pyrolysis
Screen Printing/Silk Screening
Doctor’s Blade or Tape Casting
Plasma Spray Deposition
Plasmas and Nanoparticles
Laser and Electron Beam 
Deposition
Questions
References
9
Thermal Energy-Based 
Forming Techniques—
Thermoforming
567
A metal laser sintering/milling hybrid machine, the LUMEX 25C, developed 
by Matsuura Machinery Corporation in Japan, successfully combines freeform 
 manufacturing and high-speed milling. The integration of laser sintering of 
metallic powder and high-speed cutting eliminates the finish machining opera-
tions (http://www.matsuura.co.jp).
A four-jet lathe burner for glass blowing. This type of burner is usually mounted 
on a movable carriage attached to a glassblower’s lathe.

[Page 568]
Introduction
Thermal forming (or thermoforming) is a method 
where thermal energy provided by a heat source 
“transforms” a material’s structure and/or shape. 
Structural material changes occur, for example, 
during crystallization, sintering, alloying, anneal-
ing, decomposition, and pyrolizing. Shaping in 
thermoforming may be free form, such as in glass 
blowing and in selective laser sintering (SLS) (see 
inset in the heading of this chapter). The latter 
thermoforming method is a rapid prototyping 
(RP) technique for solid parts, made by solidifying 
powder-like materials layer by layer through expo-
sure of the surface of a powder bed to a laser beam. 
However, thermoforming may also involve a step 
that combines heat and pressure to conform to a 
final shape in a mold, such as in vacuum forming, 
a method for thermally shaping a flat plastic sheet 
into a three-dimensional (3D) shape by heating the 
sheet and withdrawing the air between the sheet 
and the mold.
Thermal and chemical forming techniques are 
often intertwined because heat (and catalysts) 
usually aids a chemical reaction. The relative con -
tribution of thermal to chemical in a given process 
may range from 100% thermal to 100% chemical but 
falls often somewhere in between. Crystallization 
(see Volume I, Chapter 4), alloying, and sintering, 
for example, do not involve a chemical reaction and 
could be viewed as purely thermal forming tech -
niques, but annealing, decomposition, and pyroli-
zing all typically involve both heat and a chemical 
reaction. The predo minantly thermal techniques 
detailed in this chapter are spray pyrolysis, silk 
screening of ceramics, tape casting, plasma spraying, 
laser and electron beam deposition, and selective 
laser sintering (SLS). Spray pyroly sis is a simple form 
of chemical vapor deposi tion (CVD) and, together 
with sol-gel, a chemical forming technique that was 
covered in Chapter 8, a contender for nanoparticle 
manufacturing. Silk-screening and tape casting 
technology constitute two important thermal forming 
processes often referred to as hybrid manufacturing 
methodo logies. Tape casting is also known as doctor 
blading or knife coating, and the process is well known 
under  these  names in many industries, including 
paper, plastic, and paint manufacturing. Laser 
and electron beam deposition can be subtractive 
or additive, and these two options are typically 
available in the same laser or electron beam reactor. 
SLS is a rapid prototyping technique (RP) (see also 
Chapter 8, Table 8.3) method for solid parts, made 
by solidifying powder-like materials layer by layer 
through exposure of the surface of a powder bed 
to a laser beam. The method might also integrate 
high-speed computer numerical controlled cutting, 
effectively combining an additive and a subtractive 
manufacturing technique, in which case RP and real 
manufacturing are both options.
Spray Pyrolysis
Introduction
In spray pyrolysis, a precursor reagent dissolved in 
a carrier liquid is sprayed through a nozzle or set 
of nozzles to form an aerosol, and the droplets in 
the aerosol experience thermal decomposition, i.e., 
pyrolysis in a hot zone. In the case of film forma-
tion, the hot zone is simply a hot substrate surface, 
and in the case of particle formation, the hot zone 
may be a furnace. Spray pyrolysis is also known as 
aerosol decomposition synthesis, in which a droplet-to-
solid particle conversion takes place.
The production of droplets and their dispersion 
into a gas environment is called atomization. There 
are a number of different kinds of atomizers in 
use, as listed in Table 9.1. The atomization vari-
ables listed here are droplet size, which determines 
the size of the final solid particle, the atomization 
rate, which affects the scalability of the process, 
and the droplet velocity, which affects the resi-
dence time of the droplets in the hot zone. One 
other important parameter, not listed, is the drop-
let size dispersion, which relates to the homogene-
ity of the product.
Spray pyrolysis is a gas-phase synthesis method 
and constitutes a form of chemical vapor deposi-
tion (CVD) without the expensive vacuum reactors. 
During CVD, as we saw in Chapter Seven, the con-
stituents of a vapor phase, often diluted with an inert 
carrier gas, react at a hot surface (typically higher 
than 300°C) to deposit a solid thin film. The CVD 
568   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 569]
technologies mostly evolved around the integrated 
circuit (IC) industry. However, spray pyrolysis, the 
simplest form of CVD, has never been a contender 
in that arena. Rather, it is a viable technology for 
large-area films in solar cells and window panes 
and, more recently, for the production of nanopo-
wders. Nanoparticle synthesis is a burgeoning field 
with a broad range of applications. The “holy grail” 
of research in this field is the ability to generate par-
ticles with controlled and narrow size distribution 
and adequate throughput; thus, the particle size 
can be tailored as required by the application. In 
spray pyrolysis when used for nanoparticle synthe-
sis rather than film formation, an organic precursor 
(liquid or gas) is forced through an orifice at high 
pressure and burned in a furnace. The resulting ash 
is air classified to recover the nanoparticles (typi-
cally metal oxides).
How Does It Work?
As mentioned above, spray pyrolysis produces films 
or powders. A simple spray pyrolysis setup for film 
deposition is shown in Figure 9.1.2 Metallic salt 
solutions are sprayed onto a hot substrate where 
droplets experience thermal decomposition. Spray 
pyrolysis tends to work best for ceramics [inorganic, 
nonmetallic materials that are typically crystalline 
in  nature and are compounds formed between 
metallic and nonmetallic elements, such as alumi-
num and oxygen (alumina-Al2O3)]. All spraying 
processes display the same significant variables: the 
substrate temperature, ambient temperature, chemi-
cal composition of the carrier gas and/or environ-
ment, carrier gas flow rate, nozzle-to-substrate 
distance, droplet radius, solution concentration, solu-
tion flow rate, and—for continuous processes—
substrate motion.2 Because individual droplets 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   569
TABLE 9.1 Characteristics of Atomizers Typically Used in Spray Pyrolysis 
Atomizer
Droplet Size 
(µm) 
Atomization Rate 
(cm3/min)
Droplet Velocity 
(m/s)
Pressure
10–100
3–no limit
5–20
Nebulizer
0.1–2
0.5–5
0.2–0.4
Ultrasonic
1–100
<2
0.2–0.4
Electrostatic
0.1–10
Source:  Messing, G. L., S.-C. Zhang, and G. V. Jayanthi. 1993. Ceramic powder synthesis 
by spray pyrolysis. J Am Cer Soc 76:2707–26.1
FIGURE 9.1 (a) Atomizer and aerosol. (b) Spray pyrolysis setup. (Mooney, J. B., and S. B. Radding. 1982. Spray pyrolysis 
processing. Ann Rev Mater Sci 12:81–101. Courtesy of Jack Mooney, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA.2)

[Page 570]
evaporate and react quickly, grain sizes can be very 
small (e.g., as small as 0.1 µm). The small grains 
pose a disadvantage for most semiconductor appli-
ca tions but not necessarily for sensor applications; 
for example, in SnO2-based gas sensors (Taguchi 
sensor; see Example 9.1) where sensitivity resides in 
the intergranular contacts (necks).
In Figure 9.2 we detail the possible scenarios of 
how droplets laden with solid-particle precursors 
arrive at a hot substrate as the temperature of the 
substrate is ramped up. If the temperature is too low, 
the droplets splash onto substrate and decompose 
there (Figure 9.2a). At somewhat higher temper-
ature, the solvent evaporates and dry precipitate 
hits the substrate and decomposes (Figure 9.2b). 
At higher substrate temperatures, the solvent 
evaporates and the precipitate melts and vaporizes 
without decomposition and vapor diffuses to the 
substrate (Figure 9.2c). At yet higher temperatures, 
the precursor decomposes to make solid particles 
before they reach the substrate (Figure 9.2d).
At a fixed substrate temperature, smaller drop-
lets may vaporize before hitting the substrate, and 
because droplets decrease in size as they approach 
the substrate, the concentration gradient within the 
approaching droplet keeps on changing. If the sur-
face concentration of the solute exceeds the solubil-
ity limit, precipitation occurs at the surface of the 
particles, and hollow spheres result, increasing the 
film roughness.
Spray pyrolysis is a simple, inexpensive, high-
throughput technique used to produce several 
compound semiconductors with utility in various 
devices, such as solar cells, gas sensors, antireflec-
tion coatings, and ion selective electrodes.3 The 
technique does not require high-quality targets or 
substrates and does not need a UHV system. The 
process produces relatively thick films, is difficult to 
control, and is not compatible with IC processing. It 
also tends to form hollow particles (see above) and 
consumes lots of solvent.
In case spray pyrolysis is used to make a powder 
instead of a film, a setup as shown in Figure 9.3 may 
be used. In this apparatus, the precursor solution is 
atomized into a diffusion dryer, then a thermolysis, 
570   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Substrate
Solid
particles
Vapor
Precipitate
Droplet
Increasing substrate temperature
FIGURE 9.2 Steps involved in the decomposition of the 
dissolved precursors as the temperature of the substrate is 
ramped up. Steps a to d are explained in the text.
FIGURE 9.3 The diffusion dryer is used to dry and remove water vapor from the aerosol generated by the atomizer. 
Thermolysis of the precipitate particle at higher temperature to form a microporous particle occurs in the thermolysis 
furnace and sintering of the microporous particle to form a dense particle in the sintering furnace. The setup is also 
equipped with a differential mobility particle sizer (DMPS). (From Messing, G. L., S.-C. Zhang, and G. V. Jayanthi. 1993. 
Ceramic powder synthesis by spray pyrolysis. J Am Cer Soc 76:2707–26.1)

[Page 571]
and finally a sintering furnace. In this series of reac-
tors, the aerosol droplets undergo evaporation and 
solute condensation within the droplet, by drying, 
thermolysis of the precipitate particle at higher 
temperature to form a microporous particle, and 
sintering of the microporous particle to form a dense 
particle. The setup is also equipped with a differen-
tial mobility particle sizer (DMPS). Depending on 
the droplet size and solution concentration, particles 
sized from some submicrometers to some hundreds 
of micrometers are available by spray pyrolysis.
The stages the aerosol droplets go through are 
sketched in Figure 9.4.
During evaporation of solvent from the drop-
let surface, there is diffusion of solvent vapor away 
from the droplet (Dv), change in droplet temperature, 
diffusion of solute toward the center of the droplet 
(DS), and change in droplet size (R). Precipitation/
drying involves volume precipitation or surface pre-
cipitation of the solute, followed by the evapora-
tion of the solvent through the nanoporous crust. 
If the solute concentration at the center of the drop 
is less than the equilibrium saturation of the solute 
at the droplet temperature, then precipitation occurs 
only in that part of the drop where the concentra-
tion is higher than the equilibrium saturation, i.e., 
surface precipitation (see also Figure 9.5).
It is one of the unique characteristics of spray 
pyrolysis that chemical reactions occur within 
micrometer to submicrometer-sized liquid droplets, 
microcapsule chemical reactors so to speak. Besides 
controlling the precipitation in these microreactors 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   571
FIGURE 9.4 Droplet evolution in spray pyrolysis. Thermal decomposition or pyrolysis—forms a nanoporous structure 
and finally sintering—involves the adhesion/solidification of the crystallites. (From Messing, G. L., S.-C. Zhang, and 
G. V. Jayanthi. 1993. Ceramic powder synthesis by spray pyrolysis. J Am Cer Soc 76:2707–26.1)
FIGURE 9.5 Droplet pyrolysis with and without chemical reaction.

[Page 572]
by simple evaporation, precipitation can also be 
induced by a chemical reaction, as illustrated in 
Figure 9.5. Reaction schemes relied on to induce pre-
cipitation might involve gelation, hydrolyzation, gas 
evolution, reacting with a reactive atmosphere, and 
so on. We encountered another example of micro-
capsule reactions in Volume I, Chapter 6 where we 
describe droplet manipulation fluidic platform. In 
this case, the droplet microreactors are injected in a 
nonmixing fluid.
Salt-Assisted Spray Pyrolysis
Spray pyrolysis, like sol-gel (see Chapter 8), is 
a contender for making nanoparticles, used for 
chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP), magnetic 
recording 
tapes, 
sunscreens, 
and 
automotive 
catalysts. Spray pyrolysis is an attractive method 
for preparing uni form  size and composition of 
nanoparticles because of its high production rate, 
continuous unit operation, and simple apparatus. 
However, with conventional spray pyrolysis the 
production of submicrometer particles faces some 
challenges. The concept derives from the principle 
of one particle from one droplet; thus, very fine 
droplets are needed to produce nanoparticles. 
The atomizers most commonly used to generate 
droplets tend to produce average droplet diameters 
in the range of several micrometers. For a droplet to 
dry from a typical initial diameter of 5 µm into a 
solid particle with a diameter of 0.1 µm, the initial 
volume fraction of dissolved involatile solute must 
be less than 0.0008%. In practice, these low solution 
concentrations lead to a low particle generation rate 
and make it difficult to maintain a high purity of the 
final particle product. Conven tional spray pyrolysis 
produces particles that have multiple nanosized 
crystallites, but these crystallite aggregates are 
virtually inseparable because of the formation of a 
3D network within each drop. The salt-assisted spray 
pyrolysis (SASP) developed by Dr. K. Okuyama from 
the Hiroshima University overcomes these limitations 
associated with conventional spray pyrolysis.4 In the 
SASP method, salts such as NaNO3, KNO3, LiNO3, 
and KCl are added to the spray precursor solution 
where the salt promotes nuclea tion  and prevents 
nanoparticles from agglomerating. As a result, 
uniform-sized nanoparticles are produced. The 
diameters of nanoparticles produced by the SASP 
method range from several nanometers to several tens 
of nanometers. These sizes are about one-thirtieth 
to one-eightieth those of fine particles produced by 
traditional spray pyrolysis. Size distribution of SASP 
particles appears to be independent of their parent 
solution droplets; moreover, the SASP process is 
less energy consuming because it runs at lower 
temperatures.
In Figure 9.6 SASP is compared with traditional 
spray pyrolysis (SP).
Flame Spray Pyrolysis
Flame spray synthesis has been established as a state-
of-the-art method for the production of high-purity 
mixed metal oxides for a vast range of applications 
in catalysis, optics, and electronics (Figure 9.7). It is 
primarily useful for making oxi des. In flame spray 
pyrolysis, one directly sprays a liquid precursor into 
a flame, and particle synthesis occurs within the 
flame by a combustion reaction. This allows for the 
use of low-vapor-pressure precursors. Products are 
affected by the flame configuration, process tem-
perature, oxidant composition, and additives. With 
metalorganic precursors, flame spray pyrolysis con-
stitutes a commercial approach for the manufacture 
of silica and titania powders. Using heavy residual 
oils as precursor, carbon black is produced (mil-
lions of metric tons per year). The production of 
TiO2 powder from the flame spray pyrolysis of TiCl4 
(the chloride process) accounts for ~60% of TiO2 
production (Dupont is the world’s largest  producer 
with about ∼22% of global production). The TiO2 
572   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 9.6 Comparison of SASP with traditional SP.

[Page 573]
powder made this way is the least expensive sub-
micrometer powder available (see bottom right in 
Figure 9.7). Because of its high index of refraction, 
it is an ideal opaque dye for paper, paint, pigment, 
food, and cosmetics. In the chloride process, an 
electric field can be used to control particle size in 
the flame.5 The flame is held between two plates, 
with one plate connected to a DC source and the 
other grounded as sketched in Figure 9.8. A flame 
filled with newly formed TiO2 particles creates both 
positive and negative ions. As a result, these charged 
particles that otherwise would have collided with 
each other and grown to form larger particles are 
prevented to do so by the presence of the electri-
cal field. The strength of the E field determines the 
velocity of the ions and essentially the size of the 
product particles. This method allows very precise 
control of the size (within 1 nm) and aggregate 
structure and crystallinity.
Pros of this method are its large capacity, proven 
technique, and high purity of products. Cons include 
the fact that, unless electrical fields are applied, 
agglomerates form, and it features a wide particle 
size distribution.
Electrospray Pyrolysis
Electrospraying is capable of atomizing a liquid 
into ultrafine droplets and offers yet another option 
for converting conventional spray pyrolysis into a 
nanoparticle production means. In this method, 
the meniscus of a conducting solution supported at 
the end of a capillary tube becomes conical when 
charged to a high-enough voltage (several kV) with 
respect to a counter electrode. When the electrostatic 
force becomes stronger than the surface tension of 
the liquid, the solution exits the capillary as a highly 
charged jet of fluid. As the solvent evaporates from 
the droplets, particles form and are deposited onto 
a heated collector. The droplets are stably formed by 
the continuous breakup of a jet extending from this 
liquid cone (Figure 9.9).
Electrospray (ES) pyrolysis can produce mono-
disperse droplets/particles over a wide size range, 
from a few nanometers to hundreds of micro meters, 
depending on liquid flow rate, applied voltage, and 
liquid electric conductivity. Especially in the small 
size range, the capability of producing monodis-
perse particles with relative ease is un matched by 
any other aerosol generation scheme. Zinc sulfide 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   573
FIGURE 9.7 Flame spray pyrolysis. Using heavy residual oils as precursor, carbon black is produced using flame spray 
pyrolysis (millions of metric tons per year). The white powder is TiO2.
TiCl4 + O2 + CH4
Ground
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + +
E
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + +
E
FIGURE 9.8 Electrical field control of particle size in flame 
spray pyrolysis of TiO2 nanoparticles.

[Page 574]
particles 20–40 nm in diameter were  prepared by 
electrically driven spray pyrolysis from solutions 
of ethyl alcohol with zinc nitrate [Zn(NO3)2] and 
thiourea [SC(NH2)2] at concentrations from 0.0025–
0.2 M and electrical conductivities between 10−4 and 
10−1 Sm−1.6
A crucial drawback that has hampered wider ES 
pyrolysis applications is the low flow rate at which 
the cone-jet mode is established. Multiplexing the 
spray source, that is, operating several ESs in parallel 
is a possible way to address this problem. Deng et al.7 
demonstrated the microfabrication and testing of 
a compact multiplexed system of ESs as an array 
of nozzles etched in silicon, with a density of 250 
sources/cm2 (see Figure 9.10).
It is projected that this arrayed ES technology, 
once optimized, will be applied in various fields, 
including the synthesis of biological nanoparticles 
and biomedical coatings for controlled/targeted 
drug delivery, the synthesis of nanoparticle ceram-
ics, superconductors, quantum dots, and thin films.
The ES method has also had a dramatic tech-
nological impact in the field of analytical chem-
istry. Electrospray ionization (ESI) is a tech nique 
used in mass spectrometry to produce ions. It is 
especially useful in producing ions from macro-
molecules because it overcomes the propensity of 
these molecules to fragment when ionized. The 
development of ESI for the analysis of biological 
macromolecules was rewarded with the attribution 
of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry to John Bennett 
Fenn in 2002. In the same electro-spraying set-up 
of Figure 9.9 and 9.10, higher molecular weight 
solutions enable one to produce continuous fibers 
instead of beads. At low viscosity, the columbic 
force dominates the elastic force, leading to a rapid 
breakup of the polymer jet. However, increased 
viscoelasticity engendered by chain entanglements 
does not allow the breakup of the jet, resulting in 
continuous fibers in the so-called electrospinning 
process. The electrospinning process is indeed 
a simple, versatile, and widely used method of 
producing all types of polymer nanofibers.8–14 As in 
the case of particle spraying, pyrolysis may further 
convert the polymer nanofiber precursor to a final 
desirable product (e.g., carbon nano fibers through 
the carbonization process, i.e., the high temperature 
heating in the absence of oxygen; see also C-MEMS 
in Volume III, Chapter 5). 
Among the precursors used in the synthesis 
of carbon nanofibers by electrospinning, poly-
acrylonite (PAN)/N,N-dimethylformamide  (DMF) 
solution is the most commonly employed. Carbon 
nanofibers with diameters in the range of 80–750 nm 
are typically obtained from this solution by elec-
trospinning. Our team has fabricated carbon nano-
fibers by electrospinning SU-8 (an epoxy-based 
negative photoresist) as the polymer precursor and 
subsequent pyrolysis of that precursor.15 We have 
shown that the electrospun material retains its 
photoresist properties and that it can be directly 
574   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 9.9 Droplet formation in the electrospray 
technique.
FIGURE 9.10 Electrospray from an array of nozzles etched 
in silicon, with a density of 250 sources/cm2. (From Deng, 
W., J. F. Klemic, X. Li, M. A. Reed, and A. Gomez. 2006. 
Increase of electrospray throughput using multiplexed 
microfabricated sources for the scalable generation of 
monodisperse droplets. Aerosol Sci 37:696–714.7)

[Page 575]
patterned in a wide variety of patterns by lithography 
before pyrolysis. The pyrolysis of SU-8 nanofibers 
to produce carbon nanofibers will enhance the 
C-MEMS toolbox considerably and allow for the 
facile integration of high-surface-area fibers with 
other photoresist derived carbon structures. This 
not only will allow for the making of interesting 
photopatternable carbon composites but also will 
enable the fabrication of multiscale hierarchal 
assemblies such as fractal-like electrodes where a high 
external surface area is coupled with a minimized 
internal resistance, which is a feature of great utility, 
in batteries and fuel cells.16 The biocompatibility of 
SU-8-derived carbon17 provides further motivation 
for the development of multiscale hierarchal scaffolds 
for tissue engineering and in vivo biosensors.
Example 9.1: Spray Pyrolysis 
Application: Taguchi Gas Sensor
The use of a ceramic cylindrical tube in a 
classical Taguchi sensor (Figure 9.11) maximizes 
the utilization of heater power; thus, most of 
the power is used to heat the gas-sensitive tin 
oxide (SnO2). A tin oxide paste is applied by 
dip coating the outside ceramic body to cover 
the thick film resistance measuring electrodes 
and is then sintered at high temperature. The 
resistance of tin oxide at high temperature gives 
a measure for the amount of reducing gases in 
the contacting atmosphere. Sintering stabilizes 
the intergranular contacts (necks) where the 
sensitivity of the gas sensor resides.18 The design 
shown in Figure 9.11 is not suited for mass 
production because it involves excessive hand 
labor. The problems with the thick film structure 
mainly reside in the areas of reproducibility: 
compressing and sintering a powder, the 
deposition of the catalyst, and the use of binders 
and other ceramics (e.g., for filtering). Application 
of IC techniques could improve the state of the 
art dramatically if a thin semiconductor oxide 
film (e.g., tin oxide) with the same sensitivity as 
the traditional thick sintered film could be made. 
Micromachined heater elements, as shown in 
Figure 9.12, improve the reproducibility and the 
absolute power budget needed to bring the 
sensor to the required temperature. Thermal 
efficiency and low power budget are obtained 
by thermally isolating the heater element on a 
thin, suspended membrane. Whereas low power 
budget sensors have proven feasible, it has been 
more difficult to make a compatible thin film as 
sensitive as the ceramic-type, thick film devices. 
When making thin films with physical vapor 
deposition (PVD) methods, the films have a lower 
surface area and buried intergranular contacts 
(see Figure 9.13). The buried intergranular 
contacts cannot be reached by the contacting gas 
as easily as in the powder case, making not only 
for lower sensitivity but also slower responding 
gas sensors. The slower response of the thin film 
sensors is because oxygen diffusion in the grain 
boundaries between compacted grains involves 
long time constants. When the grain boundaries 
are blocked on purpose, the sensor reacts faster 
but displays even less sensitivity.18
Using silk screening of thick films (see fol-
lowing section) on a thin membrane would seem 
to provide the solution—a low-energy heater 
combined with a fast and sensitive thick tin oxide 
film. Unfor tunately, during our attempts to 
deposit thick films this way, usually the thin Si 
membrane broke as a result of the pushing action 
of the squeegee (see Figure 9.14).19 Spray pyrolysis 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   575
FIGURE 9.11 Classical Taguchi gas sensor.
FIGURE 9.12 Heater element.

[Page 576]
provides the possible answer here because its 
deposition does not involve mechanical pressure 
on the silicon membrane. Fast-responding, 
planar Taguchi SnO2 gas sensors were made 
by spraying, with oxygen as the carrier gas, 
an organic solution of (CH3COO)2SnCl2 in ethyl 
acetate onto quartz, glass, and Al2O3 ceramic 
substrates, heated to 300°C.3 This result carries 
significance; other micromachining attempts 
based on thin PVD SnO2 film fail to reach the 
sensitivity attained with the classical thick films 
and sintered SnO2 films. Spray pyrolysis, with its 
very small grain-size deposits, holds the promise 
of reaching the objective of providing films 
with freely accessible polycrystalline grains. As 
a planar technology, it is also suited for large 
substrates and considered a viable alternative to 
the dip-coating process.
Screen Printing/Silk Screening
Introduction
Screen printing presents a more cost-effective means 
of depositing a wide variety of films on planar sub-
strates than does IC technology, especially when 
 fabricating devices at relatively low production vol-
umes. The technique constitutes one of several thick 
film or hybrid technologies used for selective coating 
of flat surfaces (e.g., a ceramic substrate). The tech-
nology was originally developed for the production 
of miniature, robust, and (above all) cheap electronic 
circuits. The up-front investment in a thick film facil-
ity is low compared with that of IC manufacturing. 
For disposable chemical sensors, recent industrial 
experience indicates that screen printing thick films 
is a viable alternative to Si thin film technologies. 
Materials based on low-temperature organic poly-
mers, to be cured at low temperatures or using UV 
radiation, as well as high-temperature enamel coat-
ings with ceramic paints are coated in screen print-
ing; the latter need sintering at high temperatures. 
Typical film thicknesses are in the range from sev-
eral 10 to several 100 µm. Therefore, the coefficients 
of thermal expansion of the coat have to be matched 
well to that of the substrate.
576   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 9.14 Screen-printing. (a) Screen with a 0.002-in. line opening oriented at 45° to the mesh weave. (b) Schematic 
representation of the screen-printing process. (From Lambrechts, M., and W. Sansen. 1992. Biosensors: microelectrical 
devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics Publishing. With permission.20)
FIGURE 9.13 Grain structure in a sintered powder, thick 
SnO2 film (a) and a PVD, SnO2 thin film (b).

[Page 577]
How Does It Work?
The elements of screen printing are the screen with 
openings defining the pattern to be printed, the 
screen frame, a squeegee, the ink material, and the 
substrate. A paste or ink is pressed onto the substrate 
through the openings in the photoemulsion 
fash  ioned on the stainless steel screen (see Figure 
9.14a).20 The mesh openings are created using 
photolithography on the photoemulsion in the screen 
frame. The paste consists of a mixture of the material of 
interest, an organic binder, and a solvent. The organic 
vehicle determines the flow properties (rheology) of 
the paste. The bonding agent provides adhesion of 
particles to one another and to the substrate. The 
choice of active particles makes the ink a conductor, 
a resistor, or an insulator. The lithographic pattern in 
the screen emulsion is transferred onto a substrate 
by forcing the paste through the mask openings with 
a squeegee (Figure 9.14b). This process depends on 
the mesh opening size and the viscosity of the ink. 
The squeegee further keeps the mesh in contact with 
the substrate, a process that depends on the screen 
tension and the off-contact distance. Squeegees 
are made from a stiff material like polyurethane 
to avoid deformation during printing. Relatively 
hard squeegees are required to withstand the high 
pressure needed to print at high speed, for example, 
high-viscosity materials on glass plates. However, the 
harder the material, the lower the ability to print an 
even layer of ink on an uneven surface. The squeegee 
edge must be sharp. The angle of the squeegee to the 
mesh defines the amount of material to be printed. 
Pulling the squeegee at 15–20° off vertical ensures 
an even deposit of material. The setting of the exact 
angle depends in part on the squeegee’s profile and 
its hardness. The possible speed of the squeegee 
depends on the hardness of the squeegee and the 
viscosity of the printed material.
In a first step, paste is put down on the screen 
(Figure 9.15Aa); then the squeegee lowers and 
pushes the screen onto the substrate, forcing the 
paste through openings in the screen during its 
horizontal motion (Figure 9.15Ab).20 During the last 
step, the screen snaps back; the thick film paste that 
adheres between the screen and the substrate shears; 
and the printed pattern is formed on the substrate 
(Figure 9.15Ac). Heavier frames cause the screen 
to be less deflected and minimize distortions and 
achieve a better resolution of the printed pattern. 
Throughput and resolution depend on the dimen-
sions of the mesh openings (holes in the screen) 
and the nature of the pastes/inks. This leads to com-
promises in selecting the mesh size: a coarse mesh 
enables fast processing and high throughput but at 
low resolution, whereas a fine mesh enables bet-
ter resolution but causes problems when pressing 
highly viscous materials through the screen. With 
a 325-mesh screen (i.e., 325 wires/in. or 40-µm 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   577
FIGURE 9.15 (A) The three different steps of the silk screening process. (From Lambrechts, M., and W. Sansen. 1992. 
Biosensors: microelectrical devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics Publishing. With permission.20) (B) Shanghai Shuoxing 
Screen Printing Equipment Co., Ltd.

[Page 578]
holes) and a typical paste, a lateral resolution of 100 
µm can be obtained. For difficult-to-print pastes, 
a stencil mask may be used, such as a thin metal 
foil with cut openings. However, the resolution of 
this method is inferior (>500 µm). Lower-cost and 
high-throughput printing techniques, such as screen 
printing, have a great promise in the fabrication of 
organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs). Jabbour et 
al. demonstrated, for the first time, the use of screen 
printing to deposit ultrathin layers in OLEDs of less 
than 15 nm with root mean square surface rough-
ness of less than 1.5 nm.21 After printing, the wet 
films are allowed to settle for 15 min to flatten the 
surface while drying. This removes the solvents from 
the paste. Subsequent firing burns off the organic 
binder; metallic particles are reduced or oxidized; 
and glass particles are sintered. Typical temperatures 
range from 500–1000°C. After firing, the thickness 
of the film ranges from 10–50 µm.
A typical silk screening setup is the one from 
Universal Instruments Corporation (http://www4.
uic.com), the DEK 4265 Horizon Screen (see also 
The Shanghai Shuoxing screen printing machine 
in Figure 9.15B). Dupont provides technical tips for 
screen printing at http://www2.dupont.com/MCM/
en_US/techinfo/techtips.html, 
and 
the 
Screen 
Printing Magazine can be found at http://www.
screenweb.com/home.php.
Types of Inks/Pastes and Applications
Inks are formulated to exhibit pseudoplastic* 
behavior, as illustrated in Figure 9.1622,23 (see also 
Volume I, Chapter 6 on fluidics), to prevent flow-
ing through the screen until the squeegee applies 
sufficient pressure. Almost all materials compatible 
with the high firing temperature and the other ink 
constituents can be used to screen print. Different 
pastes—conductive (e.g., Au, Pt, Ag/Pd), resistive 
(e.g., RuO2, IrO2), overglaze, and dielectric (e.g., 
Al2O3, ZrO2)—are commercially available.
The conductive pastes are based on metal particles, 
such as Ag, Pd, Au, Pt, or a mixture of these combined 
with glass. Glass is necessary for the  adhesion of the 
metal conductor to the ceramic (Al2O3) substrate. The 
* In pseudo-plastic fluids viscosity diminishes as the applied velocity 
gradient increases (see also Volume I, Chapter 6).
following conductive pastes can be distinguished by 
the bonding mechanism used.
 
◾Glass-bonded or fritted pastes are inks where 
adhesion of the metal is achieved with the 
addition of a glass mixture (30%) (a typical 
glass composition is 65% PbO, 25% SiO2, and 
10% Bi2O3). A fritted ink contains powdered 
glass that binds the ink to the substrate mate-
rial when fired at a temperature of 850°C. Thus, 
a fritted ink will generally consist of the glass 
frit, a material defining the desired ink prop-
erty, and an organic vehicle that renders the ink 
printable. Vehicles typically consist of solvents 
mixed with slightly more viscous materials, 
such as resins, in a ratio designed to give the 
optimum overall vis cosity to the ink.
 
◾Oxides or fritless-bonded inks adhere to the 
metal via the addition of copper oxide (3%).
 
◾Mixed-bonded pastes are inks for which adhe-
sion is achieved by use of both glass and copper 
oxide.
Resistive pastes are based on RuO2 or Bi2Ru2O7 
mixed with glass (65% PbO, 25% SiO2, 10% Bi2O3). 
The resistivity is determined by the mixing ratio. 
Overglaze and dielectric pastes are based on glass 
mixtures. According to composition, different melt-
ing temperatures can be achieved.
Thick film technology with the above type of tra-
ditional inks has application in the construction of 
578   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Shear rate (S-1)
Shear stress (Pa)
Ca
sso
n-t
yp
e p
las
tic
Bingham plastic
P
s
e
u
d
o
pl
a
st
ic
Newtonian
Dilatant
FIGURE 9.16 Pseudoplastic behavior of inks for silk 
screening (see also Volume I, Chapter 6).

[Page 579]
a wide variety of hybrid sensors, such as sensors for 
radiant signals, pressure sensors, strain gauges, dis-
placement sensors, humidity sensors, thermocouples, 
capacitive thick-film temperature sensors, and pH sen-
sors (see Middlehoek et al.23 and references therein). 
Also, with silicon-based sensors (e.g., pressure sen-
sors and accelerometers) die-mounted on a ceramic 
substrate, thick film resistors are used for calibration 
by trimming resistors on the ceramic substrate.
New inks, specifically developed for chemical and 
biological sensor applications, are available or under 
development. For example, SnO2 pastes incorpo-
rating Pt, Pd, and Sb dopants have been developed 
for the construction of high-temperature (>300°C) 
semiconductor gas sensors for reducing gases (so-
called Taguchi sensors) (see Example 9.1).18 Thick 
metal phthalocyanine films have been deposited 
on alumina to form the active material in relatively 
low-temperature (<180°C) gas sensors.24
In Chapter 8 we saw that for biosensor appli-
cations, thick film technology based on pastes 
(polymer-based inks) that can be deposited at room 
temperature have been developed.
Doctor’s Blade or Tape Casting
Silk screening and tape casting technology constitute 
two important thermal forming processes, often 
referred to as hybrid manufacturing methodologies. 
Here we detail tape casting as yet another example 
of thermal forming. Tape casting is also known 
as doctor blading or knife coating, and the process is 
well known under these names in many industries, 
including paper, plastic, and paint manufacturing. 
The “doctor’s blade” is a scraping blade for the 
removal of excess substance from a moving surface 
being coated. Howatt was the first to obtain a patent 
to use the technique for “forming ceramic materials 
into flat plates, especially useful in the electric and 
radio fields.”25 This is still the principal application 
of tape casting today, although its use extends far 
beyond the field envisioned in 1952 (http://www.
drblade.com). Since then, tape casting has been 
used to manufacture a variety of multilayer ceramic 
package products, such as low-temperature cofired 
ceramics, solid oxide fuel cells, and piezoelectric 
smart devices.
The ceramic application of doctor blading, also 
referred to as green tape technology, is a thermal 
forming process well suited for fabrication of 
mesoscale devices (layers with a thickness between 
several micrometers and millimeters). In green 
tape technology, a ceramic slurry, either aqueous 
or organic solvent-based, is continuously dispensed 
onto a moving substrate from a hopper or other 
appropriate plumbing. An important requirement of 
the slurry is that its viscosity is in the 100–130-Poise 
(10−13 Ns/m2) range. The substrate and dispensed 
product then move under the doctor’s blade, an 
adjustable gate with a precisely controlled height on 
a smooth casting/coating surface. The purpose of 
the doctor’s blade is to allow a known thickness of 
material to pass under the blade. In today’s technology, 
very thin ceramic layers are defined in micrometers, 
with tapes as thin as 5 µm reported by equipment 
manufacturers (http://www.drblade.com). Standard 
tape casting machines come with thickness ranges 
from 12 µm to more than 3 mm. Precise, smooth 
control of the carrier or web speed is also essential to 
ensure uniform films. Next, the substrate and bladed 
ceramic slurry are moved through a precision oven for 
partial drying. The result is a flexible green ceramic 
tape that can be easily machined before final drying 
and sintering. Ceramic in green tape form may be 
cut, for example, with lasers or razor blades into 
any desired shape. Tape stacks are produced by 
lamination of several single green tapes under heat 
and pressure. The optimum dried thickness range 
for tape casting is generally accepted as being from 
0.025–1.27 mm. The green tape process flow is 
summarized in Figure 9.17. In Figure 9.18 we show a 
photo of a typical tape caster.
Tape casting is the best method for forming large-
area, thin, flat ceramic parts and even for certain 
thin metal foils. Such thin parts are virtually 
impossible to press and are very difficult to extrude. 
The difficulties are compounded in dry pressing 
when the plate is to be pierced with numerous holes 
because of the increased possibility of nonuniform 
die fill. On the other hand, punching via holes 
and slots of various sizes and shapes into green 
tape is relatively easy and essential to the many 
types of multilayered ceramic packages designed 
and manufactured today. Tape casting has been 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   579

[Page 580]
expanded to nonceramic, polymer, and metal 
applications, such as polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) 
battery separator films and tape automated bond ing 
(TAB) semiconductor adhesive-metals. Tape casting 
is often the preferred choice in manufacturing these 
products because of its relative simplicity and low 
implementation cost compared with other available 
methods, such as dry pressing, slip casting, or injec-
tion molding. Tape casting is a straightforward 
method of forming uniformly thin sheets of film 
that is inexpensive, scaleable, and may be used with 
any ceramics, metals, or polymers that are readily 
mixed in a liquid suspension or slip.
An industrial green tape setup costs between 
$100,000 and $120,000. Dupont Microcircuit 
Materials is a typical supplier of green tape materi-
als for a wide variety of electronic and electrical 
applications in the wireless and wired tele-
communications, automotive, military, medical, 
instrumentation, industrial, data processing, compo-
nents, and consumer industry segments (Green 
Tape™; http://www.mcm.dupont.com).
An excellent recent review of tape casting can be 
found in Tape Casting: Theory and Practice by Richard 
E. Mistler and Eric R. Twiname.26 More background 
information on tape casting is also available at 
http://www.drblade.com.
Example 9.2: Green Tape Technology: 
Multilayer Planar Oxygen Sensor
Green tape methodology is of special interest 
in the fabrication of high-temperature gas sen-
sors. As an example, we show Figure 9.19, a mul-
tilayer planar oxygen sensor manufactured by 
NGK Spark Plug Co., Ltd. Also known as a wide 
range air-to-fuel ratio sensor, it incorporates two 
oxygen-pumping cells and one potentiometric 
gauge. The operating principle of the NGK sensor 
is as follows. The potentiometric cell—a lambda 
sensor—measures EMF between the exhaust in 
the gap and the atmospheric air. The measured 
voltage VEMF is compared with Vo (corresponding 
to EMF of the stoichiometric point). The ampli-
fier applies an appropriate pumping voltage to 
the pumping cell after comparing VEMF and Vo 
(if VEMF > Vo then the exhaust is rich; if VEMF < Vo 
then the exhaust is lean). It is fabricated by lami-
nating and cofiring, at high temperatures, sev-
eral layers of ceramic green tape, some of which 
are metal coated and have openings through 
them.27 Because both metal and ceramic lay-
ers constitute the sensor, the materials should 
be carefully prepared, and the cofiring process 
must be tightly controlled to avoid metal diffu-
sion or reaction with the ceramic. Because of the 
process complexities, this sensor turned out too 
expensive for common use. 
Plasma Spray Deposition
Introduction
Because of the need to incorporate more and 
different materials in a thickness ranging anywhere 
from monolayers to a few hundred micrometers, 
580   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 9.17 Tape casting. The top schematic drawing 
illustrates tape casting. The bottom sketch shows the 
different stages during the processing: the slip  consisting 
of water, ceramic particles and binder; the cast, dried 
green sheet; and finally, the microstructure of the sintered 
material.
FIGURE 9.18 A typical tape caster. HED Lab-Cast 7-ft. 
tape caster.

[Page 581]
micromachinists are broadening their horizon 
beyond IC deposition techniques and increasingly 
are incorporating hybrid thick film methodology 
in their tool box. Microstructures can be crafted 
economically with non-IC equipment and mater-
ials, and thick film silk screening, spray pyrolysis, 
sol-gel, and tape casting are all attractive additive 
techniques in this regard. Spray pyrolysis (see earlier), 
drop delivery systems (see Chapter 8), and pick-
and-place technology (see Volume III, Chapter  4) 
are but a few examples. Here we review plasma 
spraying as another example of a non-IC thermal 
forming tool. With plasma spraying almost any 
material can be coated on many types of substrates. 
Applications include corrosion- and temperature-
protective coatings, superconductive materials, and 
abrasion resistance coatings.28 Today, turbine blades 
and other components of aircraft engines are 
plasma coated with corrosion- and temperature-
resistant coatings. In this section, we propose that 
the technique be expanded to the mass manufac-
ture of ceramic-based sensors.
How Does It Work?
The CVD and PVD techniques discussed in 
Chapter 7, except for the cluster deposition method, 
rely on atomistic deposition, that is, atoms or 
molecules are individually deposited onto a sur-
face to form a coating. Plasma spraying, like spray 
pyrolysis, is a typical particle deposition method; 
particles a few micrometers to 100 µm in diameter 
are transported from source to substrate. The basic 
configuration of a plasma-arc torch setup for layer 
deposition and a plasma spray nozzle are shown in 
Figures 9.20 and 9.21, respectively.
In plasma spraying, a high-intensity plasma arc 
is operated between a stick-type cathode and a 
nozzle-shaped, water-cooled anode as illustrated in 
Figure 9.21. For atmospheric spraying, one typically 
works at power levels from 10–100 kW. Plasma gas, 
pneumatically fed along the cathode, is heated by 
the arc to plasma temperatures and leaves the anode 
nozzle as a plasma jet or plasma flame. Argon and 
mixtures of argon with other noble (He) or molecu-
lar gases (e.g., H2, N2, O2) are frequently used for 
plasma spraying. Fine powder suspended in a car-
rier gas is injected into the plasma jet where the par-
ticles are accelerated and heated. The plasma jet may 
reach temperatures of 20,000 K and velocities up to 
1,000 ms–1. The temperature of the particle surface 
is lower than the plasma temperature, and the dwell-
ing time in the plasma gas is very short. The lower 
surface temperature and short duration prevent 
the spray particles from being vaporized in the gas 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   581
FIGURE 9.19 Planar Oxygen Sensor from NGK, Spark Plug Co., Ltd. 
FIGURE 9.20 Setup for plasma spray. With a robot arm 
and a sound-proof spraying booth.

[Page 582]
plasma. The particles in the plasma assume a nega-
tive charge, owing to the different thermal veloci-
ties of electrons and ions. As the molten particles 
splatter with high velocities onto a substrate, they 
spread, freeze, and form a more or less dense coat-
ing, typically forming a good bond with the sub-
strate. The resulting coating is a layered structure 
(lamellae), as shown in Figure 9.22. Typical coatings 
for high-temperature applications involve an oxida-
tion-resistant coating and a thermal barrier coating 
(TBC). The role of TBCs is, as their name suggests, to 
provide thermal insulation of the blade. A coating 
of about 1–200 µm can reduce the temperature by 
up to 200°C. The oxidation-resistant coating is also 
called bond coat because it provides a layer on which 
the ceramic TBC can adhere.
As shown in Figure 9.23, a particle leaving the 
spray nozzle goes through different regions of 
temperature and flow velocity. Ideally, the particles 
should arrive at the substrate at high velocities 
in a completely molten state to form the densest 
coating with little porosity. To produce porous films 
for the fabrication of oxygen sensors in our own 
work,19 we positioned the substrate somewhere 
between regions 4 and 5. To produce dense films, 
we posi tioned the substrate in region 4. With this 
technique, a minimum thickness is about 25 µm, and 
very thick coats up to a few millimeters thick are 
possible. When attempting to deposit gas-sensitive 
layers, such as ZrO2, on thermally isolated, thin Si 
membranes to make a power-efficient gas sensor, 
we found that the kinetic energy of the plasma 
was too high, and it broke the thin suspended Si 
membranes. The high temperature and kinetic 
energy preclude the potential for integrating Si with 
high-temperature plasma spraying. In Example 
9.3 below we demonstrate how plasma spraying of 
yttria-stabilized zirconia may be used in the batch 
fabrication of all solid-state oxygen sensors.
Plasma spray deposition is perhaps the most flex-
ible of all the thermal spray processes because it can 
develop sufficient energy to melt any material. Because 
it uses powder as the coating feedstock, the number of 
coating materials that can be used in the plasma spray 
process is almost unlimited. Plasma spraying equip-
ment may be purchased, for example, from Sulzer 
Metco (http://www.sulzermetco.com/index.html).
Example 9.3: Plasma Spraying: 
Multilayer Planar Oxygen Sensor
Here we present an example of how to use 
plasma spray technology to batch produce solid-
state oxygen sensors based on yttria-stabilized 
ZrO2 (YSZ) solid electrolyte films.29 Plasma 
spraying is a particulate method geared toward 
582   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 9.22 Schematic microstructure of a TBC obtained 
by APS on a TGO.
FIGURE 9.21 Plasma spray nozzle.

[Page 583]
fast deposition of thicker films (>30 µm), and it 
might enable the batch fabrication of solid-state 
oxygen sensors at a fraction of the current cost 
($2 vs. $12 and up). Traditional automotive solid-
state oxygen sensors for combustion control 
(so-called lambda probes) are nose-shaped, 
3D structures fabricated by sintering a molded 
green tape zirconia body (see Figure 9.24a). A 
plasma-sprayed, porous, gas-diffusion barrier, 
typically a spinel structure oxide, protects the 
resulting dense ceramic YSZ solid electrolyte 
and 
the 
silk-screened 
oxygen-sensing 
Pt 
electrode contacting it. Newer designs for 
oxygen sensors, called wide range air-to-fuel 
ratio sensors, incorporate two oxygen pumping 
cells and one potentiometric gauge. As we saw 
in Example 9.2, these sensors are planar and 
fabricated by laminating and cofiring at high 
temperatures several layers of ceramic green 
tape, some of which are metal coated and have 
openings through them (see Figures 9.19 and 
9.24b).27 Because both metal and ceramic layers 
constitute the sensor, the materials should be 
well prepared, and the cofiring process must 
be tightly controlled to avoid metal diffusion 
or reaction with the ceramic. Because of the 
process complexities, this sensor is too expensive. 
In Figure 9.24c, an alternative planar oxygen 
sensor fabricated using plasma-spray deposition 
is compared with the traditional cone-shaped 
oxygen sensor.29,30 In this planar oxygen sensor, 
the metal electrodes are deposited by sputtering, 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   583
FIGURE 9.23 (a) Typical ranges of temperature and flow velocity with distance from the nozzle. (b) Plasma spray nozzle.

[Page 584]
and the plasma-sprayed YSZ film acts both as a 
gas-diffusion layer and as an oxygen-conducting 
electrolyte. The ionic conductivity of the plasma-
deposited YSZ films does not reach the same level 
as YSZ electrolytes sintered at high temperatures 
because the films are not as dense. However, 
the relatively thin film geometry of the present 
sensor allows for using the plasma-sprayed 
YSZ film as an oxygen-pumping cell for the 
wide-range, air-to-fuel ratio sensor. The major 
challenge in the manufacture is the control of 
the porosity gradient in the gas diffusion barrier 
and electrolyte material, which is accomplished 
by controlling the size of the spraying powder 
and spraying conditions.30 To change the 
temperature and flow velocity of the particles, 
we changed the distance between the nozzle 
and the substrate. With reference to Figure 
9.23, to produce porous YSZ, we positioned the 
substrate somewhere between regions 4 and 
5; to produce dense films, we positioned the 
substrate in region 4. The plasma-sprayed films 
adhere very well to the substrates and have 
exceptionally high integrity. The plasma method 
produces almost fully activated YSZ films onto 
a substrate carrying the thin film sputter-
deposited Pt electrodes, and there is no need 
for additional sintering. This straightforward 
manufacture of solid-state oxygen sensors can 
be performed in large batches by using simple 
shadow masks and laser cutting the separate 
sensor elements.
We believe that this approach—a combina-
tion of thin and thick film methods—opens up 
the potential for planarization of many types of 
gas sensor devices. In the manufacture of chemi-
cal sensors, thick film technology on hybrid sub-
strates is more prevalent than in the IC industry, 
and plasma deposition of all types of chemical 
sensor materials is, in the author’s opinion, fer-
tile ground for research. Plasma deposition of 
sensor materials such as ZrO2, SnO2, and ZnO 
on large inert carrier substrates could provide 
wafers coated with chemical sensor material 
very quickly and inexpensively.
Plasma Arc Deposition
In the plasma reactors discussed above, the energy 
necessary for evaporation and reaction is provided 
by an electric arc that forms between a stick-type 
cathode and a nozzle-shaped, water-cooled anode 
584   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 9.24 Solid-state oxygen sensors. (a) Traditional 
oxygen probe only protective, gas diffusion barrier is 
applied by plasma spray. (b) Wide-range air-to-fuel ratio 
sensor. (c) Planar oxygen probe, sensor, and gas diffusion 
layer made by plasma spray and compared with a classical 
oxygen probe. [(b) from Suzuki, S., T. Sasayama, M. Miki, 
M. Ohsuga, S. Tanake, S. Ueno, and N. Ichikawa. 1986. SAE 
Paper 860408. With permission.27]

[Page 585]
as illustrated in Figure 9.21. The material to be 
deposited is a fine powder suspended in a carrier 
gas and is injected into the plasma jet where the 
particles are accelerated and heated. The electrodes 
themselves do not participate in the reaction itself; 
in contrast, in the arc spray deposition process, illus-
trated in Figure 9.25, the electrodes are made of the 
metal to be vaporized. The electrodes are polarized 
in the presence of an inert background gas until the 
breakdown voltage is reached, and an arc is formed 
across the electrodes that vaporizes them. The mol-
ten material is propelled by compressed air toward 
the substrate surface. The impacting molten parti-
cles on the substrate rapidly solidify to form a coat-
ing. High spray rates and efficiency make plasma arc 
deposition a good tool for spraying large areas and 
high production rates. Disadvantages of the electric 
arc spray process are that only electrically conduc-
tive electrodes can be sprayed. The main traditional 
applications of the arc spray process are anticorro-
sion coatings of zinc and aluminum.
Plasmas and Nanoparticles
In the section above on spray pyrolysis, we discovered 
that this technique can be used for either film forma-
tion or for nanopowder generation. The same is true 
for the plasma equipment discussed above. Plasma 
temperatures are in the order of 10,000 K; thus, 
precursors injected in those plasmas are generally 
decomposed fully into atoms. To form nanoparticles 
from these, the atoms must then react or condense to 
form small solid particulates when cooled by mixing 
with a cool gas or by expansion through a nozzle. We 
saw an example of that in the ion cluster beam tech-
nology discussed in Chapter 7. In ion cluster beam 
technology the cooling occurs when the vapor exits 
a special evaporation cell. As shown in Figure 7.14, 
the heating of the evaporant in an evaporation cell 
with a small opening causes an adiabatic expansion 
of more than 100–10–5 or 10–7 mbar on exiting that 
cell. The expansion causes a sudden cooling, induc-
ing the formation of atom clusters.
A very prominent application of arc deposition 
is that of fullerenes. The first large-scale synthesis 
of fullerenes was discovered in 1989 by Huffman 
and Kratschmer; their technique consisted of the 
arc evaporation of graphite electrodes via resistive 
heating within an atmosphere of approximately 100 
atm of helium (see Volume III, Chapter 3). Spark dis-
charge deposition was also the very technique that 
led to the discovery of carbon nanotubes in 1991. 
Carbon nanotubes were found in the carbon soot 
of graphite electrodes during arc discharge by using 
a current of 100 amps. In this process, the negative 
electrode sublimates because of the high tempera-
tures caused by the discharge. Because nanotubes 
were initially discovered using this technique, it 
is still the most widely used method for nanotube 
synthesis. The yield for this method is up to 30% 
by weight, and it produces both single- and multi-
walled nanotubes with lengths of up to 50 µm. The 
method is also used, for example, to produce fused 
silica. Silica sand is first vaporized in arc plasma 
at atmospheric pressure, and the resulting mixture 
of plasma gas and silica vapor is rapidly cooled by 
quenching with oxygen, thus ensuring the quality of 
the fumed silica produced.
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   585
FIGURE 9.25 Plasma arc spray deposition process.

[Page 586]
In an RF induction plasma, energy coupling to 
the plasma is accomplished through the electromag-
netic field generated by an induction coil. The plasma 
gas does not come in contact with electrodes, thus 
eliminating possible sources of contamination and 
allowing the operation of such plasmas with a wide 
range of gases, including inert, reducing, oxidizing, 
and other corrosive atmospheres. The working fre-
quency is typically between 200 kHz and 40 MHz. 
Because the residence time of the injected feed drop-
lets in the plasma is very short, it is important that 
the droplet sizes are small enough to obtain com-
plete evaporation. The RF plasma method has been 
used to synthesize different nanoparticle materials, 
for example, various ceramic nanoparticles such as 
oxides and nitrides of Ti and Si.
Laser and Electron Beam Deposition
Introduction
Laser and electron beam machining are thermal 
techniques that are used as either subtractive tools 
in laser and electron beam etching (see Chapter 5) 
or as additive tools such as in the applications cov-
ered in this section, i.e., laser-assisted CVD (LCVD), 
SLS  (a RP technique), and electron-assisted CVD 
(ECVD). Lasers also are used in stereolithography 
to make polymeric microstructures; this additive 
 photochemical technology was reviewed in Chapter 
8 and will not be repeated here. Pulsed laser deposi-
tion (Chapter 5) is also not covered here; although it 
uses intense laser radiation (thermal) to erode a tar-
get, it deposits the eroded material onto the adjacent 
substrate mechanically, not thermally.
Forming Processes with Laser Machining
Laser-Assisted Chemical Vapor Deposition
Laser-assisted chemical vapor deposition (LCVD) 
is an additive technique that involves the deposi-
tion of solids by localized chemical reaction using a 
laser beam (see Figure 9.26). The method has been 
used for growing 3D microstructures and thin films 
in elemental or compound form, and at least 17 
elements of the periodic chart have been deposited 
(e.g., W, Ni, Ti).31 The reactions are either pyrolytic, 
i.e., thermally activated, or photolytic, i.e., nonther-
mally activated. The latter method fills the need for 
a low-temperature deposition process. Because this 
chapter is about thermal forming, we will empha-
size the former types of reactions. 
The setup shown in Figure 5.25 is used to both 
laser etch and to laser deposit materials. Lasers 
and electron and ion beams add another impor-
tant capability to materials processing, namely, the 
ability to process selected materials at specific sites 
and at low bulk temperatures. Of the different tech-
niques, the laser is the more versatile. It can be oper-
ated in air, is not affected by surface charging, and 
can more easily be incorporated in a manufacturing 
assembly line.32 With a laser source, it is possible 
to write a pattern on a surface directly by scanning 
the microsized light beam over the substrate in the 
presence of the suitable reactive gases. The species to 
be deposited is usually chemically encapsulated in a 
precursor gas with carbonyls or alkyl “backbones.” 
Typical laser-driven deposition reactions are:
 
◾Tungsten deposited by:
 
WF6 + 3H2 → W + 6HF Reaction 9.1
 
◾Nickel deposited by:
 
Ni(CO)4 → Ni + 4CO 
Reaction 9.2
 
◾Silicon deposited by:
 
SiH4 → Si + 2H2 
Reaction 9.3
Doped polysilicon lines with conductivities as 
low as 10–2–10–3 Ω-cm may be obtained by adding 
PH3 to the silane. Typical deposition rates are in 
the order of micrometers per second. By optimiz-
ing the process, very high deposition rates have 
been obtained in LCVD. For example, in the case 
586   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
CVD reaction
LCVD 
1-D diﬀusion path
3-D diﬀusion path
reaction
FIGURE 9.26 Comparison of a CVD and an LCVD reaction.

[Page 587]
of silicon, deposition rates of 500 µm/s have been 
reported by using 100% SiH4 at 1 atm, and the 
writing speed of tungsten on silicon substrates can 
exceed several centimeters per second.33
Not only “flat” lines but also more complex 3D 
structures such as fibers and springs can be grown 
by LCVD (Figure 9.27). This is accomplished by 
adjusting the focal point of the laser continuously 
by moving the substrate using a 3D linear micro-
positioning system.33 Microscale Si and boron rods 
and helical structures, freestanding tungsten coils, 
and a tungsten helix on a cylindrical silicon sub-
strate (for a microsolenoid) have been demonstrated 
this way. For deposition of the tungsten helix on the 
Si rod, a rotating  goniometer is used.
Table 9.2 lists examples of localized, electroless, 
and maskless laser depositions. Besides 2D and 3D 
writing patterns, there are two other site-specific 
actions that are possible by the laser irradiation 
technique: 1) the driving of dopants into semicon-
ductor materials, and 2) the inducing of oxidation 
at a surface. Examples of the latter two laser machin-
ing applications are listed in Table 9.2 as well.
Selective Laser Sintering
Selective laser sintering (SLS®, registered trademark 
by DTM™ of Austin, TX) is a process that was pat-
ented in 1989 by Carl Deckard, a University of Texas 
graduate student.
SLS is an additive layered rapid manufactur-
ing method that creates solid, 3D objects by using 
a high-power laser (for example, a carbon dioxide 
laser) to fuse small particles of plastic, metal, or 
ceramic powders into a mass representing a desired 
3D object. A thin layer of powder material is laid 
down, and the laser “draws” on the layer, sintering 
together the particles hit by the laser. The layer is 
then lowered a small amount, and a new layer of 
powder is placed on top. This process is repeated one 
layer at a time until the part is complete. As shown 
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   587
FIGURE 9.27 Examples of LCVD microfabricated shapes 
made by adjusting the focal point of a laser (tungsten 
helix) (a) and rotating goniometer (Si microsolenoid 
with tungsten helix) (b). [From Boman, M., H. Westberg, 
S. Johansson, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 1992. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’92). 
Travemunde, Germany: IEEE. With permission.33]
TABLE 9.2 Examples of Localized Laser Deposition, Doping, and Oxidation
Material Deposition
Deposit
Precursor
Laser
Ti
TiCl4
Ar+
Ti/Al
TiCl4, Al(CH3)3
Ar+
Cr
Cr(CO)6
Ar+
Laser-induced doping
Dopant/substrate or film
Precursor
Laser
B in Si
Evaporated B
Ruby
P in polysilicon
P-doped glass
N2 dye
As in Si
AsH3
XeCl
Laser oxidation of substrates
Substrate
Oxide species
Laser
Ti
TiO2
Nd:YAG
Zr
ZrO2
CO2

[Page 588]
in Figure 9.28, an SLS machine consists of two pow-
der magazines on either side of the work area. A lev-
eling roller moves  powder over from one magazine, 
crossing over the work area to the other magazine. 
The laser selectively fuses powdered material by 
scanning cross-sections generated from a 3D digital 
description of the part (for example, from a CAD file 
or scan data) on the surface of a powder bed. After 
each cross-section is scanned, the powder bed is 
lowered by one layer thickness; a new layer of mate-
rial is applied on top; and the process is repeated 
until the part is completed.
The chief advantage of SLS over other RP meth-
ods such as stereolithography (SLA) revolves around 
material properties. Many materials are possible, 
and these materials can approximate the properties 
of ther moplastics such as polycarbonate, nylon, or 
glass-filled nylon.
A new RP method combines additive and subtrac-
tive techniques. The laser sintering/milling hybrid 
machine, the LUMEX 25C, developed by Matsuura 
Machinery Corpora tion, successfully combines free-
form manufacturing and high-speed milling (see inset 
in the heading of this chapter). This is the world’s first 
“metal laser modeling hybrid machining unit.” The 
integration of laser sintering of metallic powder and 
high-speed cutting eliminates the finish machining 
operations. It layers a powder mixture (90% steel and 
10% copper) over the part and then sinters it with a 
300-W (500 W maximum) CO2 laser. The edges of 
the part are milled after sintering five layers, with 
tolerances in the 25-µm range. For the generated part, 
a surface roughness of 15 µm can be obtained.
Conclusions
Additive 
laser 
machining 
presents 
several 
application opportunities in micromachining 
because of its versatility, site-specific operation, 
and RP capability. Ultrafast laser machining, 
when lasers become less expensive, will make 
laser micromachining yet more attractive. There 
are some obvious drawbacks with these direct 
write techniques; they are serial processes, 
and the deposition rate limits the speed of 
the micromanufacture. However, for RP, mold 
fabrication, and site-specific manufacturing, laser 
machining has a very bright future, and, as we 
have remarked before, some microsystems might 
carry a bigger price tag than an IC, making more 
expensive manufacturing technology acceptable.
Electron Beam Forming Processes: 
Electron Beam-Assisted CVD
Electron beam-induced metal deposition is a slow 
but flexible and versatile process for the fabrication 
of microstructures with high lateral accuracies. 
For example, using a precursor gas at a pressure 
of 2 × 10–2 mbar, W/C needles 0.2 µm in diameter 
have been deposited. The diameter of the needles is 
bigger than the electron beam diameter, which is 
less than 100 nm, because of electron scattering. To 
increase the growth rate, directing the precursor gas 
through a small nozzle onto the surface increases 
the local gas flow. The total gas flow needs to be 
kept below a maximum value to maintain the base 
pressure less than 10–5 mbar. For the deposition of 
other metals, numerous gases have been reported in 
the literature as precursors (mainly, for ion beam-
induced deposition): Al(CH3)3 for Al, C7H7O2F6Au 
for Au, and (methylcyclopentadienyl)trimethyl 
platinum for Pt.34 A schematic of an electron beam 
fabrication setup is shown in Figure 9.29, along 
with an SEM photograph of W/C needles produced 
in this type of setup.34 The deposition time of 
the needles shown was 1–2 min. Using the same 
type of technology, Matsui35,36 demonstrated tips 
with a diameter of 15 nm for use in a tunneling 
microscope.
588   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
FIGURE 9.28 Selective laser sintering.

[Page 589]
For processes such as controlled submicrometer 
repair of masks, focused ion beam-induced deposi-
tion appears to be the preferred technique, although 
both lasers37,38 and electron beams39 have been used 
as well.
Questions
Questions by Dr. Madou assisted by Mr. Omid Rohani, 
UC Irvine
 9.1:  Explain how salt-assisted spray pyrolysis 
(SASP) overcomes some of the limitations of 
traditional spray pyrolysis.
 9.2:  Explain the flame spray pyrolysis process. 
What are the advantages and disadvantages 
of using this method?
 9.3:  What are typical applications of thick film 
technology?
 9.4:  Suppose that you want to form a thin flat 
ceramic part with a large surface area and 
various holes and shapes cut into it. Which 
manufacturing method do you suggest for 
this purpose? Why?
 9.5:  Sketch a multilayer ceramic planar oxygen 
sensor. Explain how this sensor works.
 9.6:  What might the possible advantages be of 
plasma depositing (plasma spraying) sensor 
materials in the manufacture of chemical 
sensors?
 9.7:  Explain the plasma spray deposition manu-
facturing process briefly.
 9.8:  How do we get nanoparticles from plasma 
atoms?
 9.9:  Explain the selective laser sintering (SLS) 
process.
9.10:  How do you convert your chemical vapor 
deposition (CVD) reactor into a reactor that 
produces nanoparticles?
9.11:  Why does one need a pseudoplastic material 
to function as an ink in silk screening?
9.12:  What is a doctor’s blade, and where is it 
used?
9.13:  Compare laser-assisted CVD (LCVD) with 
E-beam assisted CVD (ECVD). 
9.14:  Name some of the applications of TiO2 
powders.
Thermal Energy-Based Forming Techniques—Thermoforming   589
FIGURE 9.29 Electron beam machining setup (a) and example of an electron beam-formed W/C microstructure (b). [From 
Brunger, W. H., and K. T. Kohlmann. 1992. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’92). Travemunde, 
Germany: IEEE. With permission.34]

[Page 590]
References
 
1. Messing, G. L., S.-C. Zhang, and G. V. Jayanthi. 1993. 
Ceramic powder synthesis by spray pyrolysis. J Am Cer Soc 
76:2707–26.
 
2. Mooney, J. B., and S. B. Radding. 1982. Spray pyrolysis pro-
cessing. Ann Rev Mater Sci 12:81–101.
 
3. Tomar, M. S., and F. J. Garcia. 1988. Spray pyrolysis in solar 
cells and gas sensors. Prog Cryst Growth Charact 4:221–48.
 
4. Xia, B., I. W. Lengorro, and K. Okuyama. 2001 Particle for-
mation processes of conventional spray pyrolysis (CSP) and 
salt-assisted spray pyrolysis (SASP). Adv Mater 13:1579.
 
5. Vemury, S., S. E. Pratsinis, and L. Kibbey. 1977. Electrically-
controlled flame synthesis of nanophase TiO2, SiO2, and 
SnO2 powders. J Mater Res 12:1031–42.
 
6. Lenggoro, I. W., K. Okuyama, J. F. d. l. Mora, and N. Tohge. 
2000. Preparation of ZnS nanoparticles by electrospray 
pyrolysis. Aerosol Sci 31:121–36.
 
7. Deng, W., J. F. Klemic, X. Li, M. A. Reed, and A. Gomez. 
2006. Increase of electrospray throughput using multi-
plexed microfabricated sources for the scalable generation 
of monodisperse droplets. Aerosol Sci 37:696–714.
 
8. Dzenis, Y. 2004. Spinning continuous fibers for nanotech-
nology. Science 304:1917.
 
9. Sutasinpromprae, J., S. Jitjaicham, M. Nithitanakul, 
C. Meechaisue, and P. Supaphol, P. 2006. Preparation and 
characterization of ultrafine electrospun polyacrylonitrile 
fibers and their subsequent pyrolysis to carbon fibers. Polym 
Int 55:825.
 10. Zussman, E., X. Chen, W. Ding, L. Calabri, D. A. Dikin, 
J. P. Quintana, and R. S. Ruoff. 2005. Mechanical and struc-
tural characterization of PAN-derived carbon nanofibers. 
Carbon 43:2175.
 11. Wang, Y., S. Serrano, and J. J. Santiago-Aviles. 2002. 
Conductivity measurement of electrospun PAN-based car-
bon nanofiber. J Mater Sci 21:1055.
 12. Doshi, J. and H. D. Reneker. 1995. Electrospinning process 
and applications of electrospun fibers. J Electrost 35:151.
 13. Shin, Y. M., M. M. Hohman, M. P. Brenner, and G. C. 
Rutledge. 2001. Electrospinning: A whipping fluid jet gen-
erates submicron polymer fibers. Appl Phys Lett 78:1149.
 14. Theron, S. A., E. Zussman, and A. L. Yarin. 2004. 
Experimental investigation of the governing parameters 
in the electrospinning of polymer solutions. Polymer 
45:2017.
 15. Sharma, C. S., A. Sharma, and M. Madou. 2010. Multiscale 
carbon structures fabricated by direct micropatterning of 
electrospun mats of SU-8 photoresist nanofibers. Langmuir 
26(4):2218–22.
 16. Turon Teixidor, G., B. Park, P. Mukherjee, Q. Kang, and 
M.  Madou. 2009. Modeling fractal electrodes for Li-ion 
batteries. Electrochim Acta, 54(24):5928–36.
 17. Turon Teixidor, G., R. Gorkin, P. Tripathi, G. Bisht, M. 
Kulkarni, T. Maiti, T. Battacharyya, J. Subramaniam, A. 
Sharma, B. Park, and M. Madou. 2008. Carbon-MEMS as a 
substratum for cell growth. J Biomed Mater 3(3):034116.
 18. Madou, M. J., and S. R. Morrison. 1989. Chemical sensing 
with solid state devices. New York: Academic Press.
 19. Madou, M. 1994. NIST special publication 865. Gaithersburg, 
MD: NIST.
 20. Lambrechts, M., and W. Sansen. 1992. Biosensors: microelec-
trical devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics Publishing.
 21. Jabbour, G. E., R. Radspinner, and N. Peyghambarian. 
2001. Screen printing for the fabrication of organic light-
emitting devices. J IEEE Selected Topics Quantum Electronics 
7:769–73.
 22. Riemer, D. E. 1988. Analytical engineering model of 
the screen printing process: part I. Solid State Technol 
August:107–11.
 23. Middlehoek, S., D. J. W. Noorlag, and G. K. Steenvoorden. 
1983. Silicon and hybrid micro-electronic sensors. 
Electrocomponent Sci Technol 10:217–29.
 24. White, N. M., and A. W. J. Cranny. 1987. Design and fabri-
cation of thick film sensors. Hybrid Circuits 12:32–36.
 25. Howatt, G. N. 1952. Method of producing high-dielectric high-
insulation ceramic plates. US Patent 2582993.
 26. Mistler, R. E., and E. R. Twiname. 2000. Tape casting: theory 
and practice. Westerville, OH: American Ceramic Society.
 27. Suzuki, S., T. Sasayama, M. Miki, M. Ohsuga, S. Tanake, S. 
Ueno, and N. Ichikawa. 1986. Air-fuel ratio sensor for rich, 
stoichiometric and lean ranges. SAE Paper 860408.
 28. Pfender, E. 1988. Fundamental studies associated with the 
plasma spray process. Surf Coat Technol 34:1–14.
 29. Oh, S., and M. Madou. 1992. Planar-type, gas diffusion-
controlled oxygen sensor fabricated by the plasma spray 
method. Sensors Actuators B B14:581–82.
 30. Oh, S. 1994. A planar-type sensor for detection of oxidiz-
ing and reducing gases. Sensors Actuators B B20:33–41.
 31. Eden, J. G. 1986. Photochemical processing of semicon-
ductors: new applications for visible and ultraviolet lasers. 
IEEE Circuits Devices Mag 2:18–24.
 32. Helvajian, H. 1995. Microengineering technology for space 
systems. Ed. H. Helvajian. El Segundo, CA: Aerospace 
Corporation.
 33. Boman, M., H. Westberg, S. Johansson, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 
1992. Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems 
(MEMS ’92). Travemunde, Germany.
 34. Brunger, W. H., and K. T. Kohlmann. 1992. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’92). 
Travemunde, Germany: IEEE.
 35. Matsui, S. 1987. Direct writing onto Si by electron beam sim-
ulated etching. Appl Phys Lett 51:1498–99.
 36. Matsui, S., and K. Mori. 1986. New selective deposition tech-
nology by electron beam induced surface reaction. J Vac Sci 
Technol B4:299–304.
 37. Bauerle, D. 1986. Chemical processing with lasers. Berlin, 
Germany.
 38. Ehrlich, D. H., and J. Y. Tsao. 1983. A review of laser– 
microchemical processing. J Vac Sci Technol B1:969–84.
 39. Kunz, R. R., and T. M. Mayer. 1987. Catalytic growth rate 
enhancement of electron beam deposited iron films. Appl 
Phys Lett 50:962–64.
590   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology

[Page 591]
591
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Plastic Molding
LIGA—Background
LIGA and LIGA-Like Process Steps 
Comparison of Master Micromold 
Fabrication Methods
Alternative Molding Materials in 
LIGA and Pseudo-LIGA
Examples
Questions
References
10
Micromolding 
Techniques—LIGA
Introduction
A wide variety of micro- and nanofabrication techniques such as x-ray 
lithography (Chapter 2), computer numerical control (CNC) machining 
(Chapter 6), laser machining (Chapter 5), and many others are either too 
slow or too expensive for the mass production of inexpensive devices. This 
is where micromolding/replication technology comes into play because 
of its capacity for very large volume and inexpensive manufacture.1
A key example involving micromolding is LIGA, which, we learned 
in Chapter 2, is the German acronym for x-ray lithography (x-ray litho-
graphie), electrodeposition (galvanoformung), and molding (abformtechnik). 
The process involves a thick layer of x-ray resist (from micrometers to 
centimeters), high-energy x-ray radiation exposure, and development to 
The Graduate, starring Dustin Hoffman, was released by Embassy Pictures in 1967. 
A memorable poolside scene from the movie:
Mr. McGuire: 
 Come with me for a minute. I want to talk to you. I just want to 
say one word to you. Just one word.
Ben: 
 
Yes, sir.
Mr. McGuire: 
Are you listening?
Ben: 
 
Yes sir, I am.
Mr. McGuire: 
PLASTICS.
Ben: 
 
Exactly how do you mean?
Mr. McGuire: 
 There is a great future in plastics. Think about it. Will you think 
about it?
Ben: 
 
Yes I will.

[Page 592]
592   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
arrive at a three-dimensional (3D) resist structure. 
Subsequent metal deposition fills the resist mold 
with a metal, and, after resist removal, a freestand-
ing metal structure results.2 The metal shape may be 
a final product or serve as a mold insert for preci-
sion plastic molding. Molded plastic parts may in 
turn be final products or lost molds (see Figure 2.9). 
The plastic mold retains the same shape, size, and 
form as the original resist structure but is produced 
quickly and inexpensively as part of an infinite loop. 
The plastic lost mold may generate metal parts in a 
second electroforming process or generate ceramic 
parts in a slip casting process.
The bandwidth of possible sizes in all three 
dimensions renders LIGA useful for manufacture 
of microstructures (micrometer and submicrometer 
dimensions) and packages for these microstructures 
(millimeter and centimeter dimensions), and even 
for the connectors from those packages to the “macro 
world” (e.g., electrical, through-vias or physical and 
gas, in- and outlets). Once LIGA was established in 
the research community, interest in other micro- and 
nanomolding/replication methods became more 
pronounced. Given the cost of the LIGA equipment, 
various LIGA-like (pseudo-LIGA) processes took 
center stage. These pseudo-LIGA methods involve 
micromolding/replication of masters created by 
alternate means such as deep reactive ion etching 
(DRIE) and novel deep ultraviolet (UV) thick 
photoresists (e.g., SU-8). This more generalized 
lithography and replication procedure is illustrated 
in Figure 10.1.
Micro- and nanofabrication of molds is reshap-
ing manufacturing approaches for a wide variety of 
mass-produced small parts. Frequently, integrated 
circuit (IC)-based batch microfabrication meth-
ods are considered together with more traditional, 
serial machining methods. In this evolution, LIGA 
and pseudo-LIGA processes constitute “handshake-
 technologies,” bridging IC and classical manu-
facturing technologies. The capacity of LIGA and 
pseudo-LIGA for creating a wide variety of shapes 
from different materials makes these methods akin 
to classical machining with the added benefit of 
unprecedented aspect ratios and absolute tolerances 
rendered possible by lithography or other high-pre-
cision mold fabrication techniques.
LIGA and LIGA-like processes can be used 
directly to fabricate prototype microdevices, but, 
for commercial-scale manufacture of microdevices, 
replication by molding from a LIGA or LIGA-like 
mold is required. If the feature sizes are larger than 
Idea
Design
CAD
Photomask
Silicon bulk 
micromachining
Mechanical 
micromachining
Electroplate micromolds
Master fabrication
Seed layer
  - CVD/PVD metal
Electroplating
  - Over Si
  - Over glass
  - Over thick resists
  - Over bulk metal
Plastics replication
Injection molding
Hot embossing
Plastics casting
Bonding
With adhesives 
With solvents 
With heat/pressure
Deposition of
electrical
layer
Electroplating
Separation mold 
insert from master
Backside
planarizaon
Lithography
Injection 
molding
Pressure
Pressure
hot
embossing
Heat
Heat
Casting
Silicon bulk micromachining
  - Deep reactive ion etching
  - Wet etching
Photodeﬁnable glass
Mechanical micromachining
  - Micro - EDM
  - Excimer laser
  - CNC machining
Lithography
  - Deep UV
  - X-ray exposure (LIGA)
E-beam machining
Ion-beam machining
FIGURE 10.1 Process flow for plastic microfabrication.

[Page 593]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   593
50  µm and several levels of feature depths are 
involved, even CNC machining may be used to 
manufacture a prototype device. For example, in 
Figure 10.2, we show a CNC-machined plastic 
(polycarbonate) fluidic compact disc (CD) platform 
prototype. Compared with LIGA or LIGA-like 
processes, CNC machining does not provide as good 
a surface finish or dimensional control (see Chapter 
6). However, it does not have any material limita-
tion;  various metals and plastics can be used. For 
feature sizes smaller than 50 µm (but larger than 
several micrometers), ultraprecision milling or laser 
ablation can be used. These prototype processes, just 
like LIGA and LIGA-like processes, are all intensive, 
slow, and costly, and for these microfabrication 
techniques to become economically viable, micro-
structures must be able to be replicated/micromolded 
successively, in an “infinite loop,” without remaking 
the master mold. For example, in the plastic molding 
process, a metal structure produced by metal 
deposition serves as a mold insert and is used over 
and over without remaking the metal master. For 
mass-produced plastic devices, one of the following 
molding techniques is suitable: liquid resin mold-
ing, thermoplastic injection molding (IM), and com-
pression (embossing/imprinting) molding. Our 
results of IM of a plastic fluidic platform, as shown 
in Figure 10.2, from a micromachined mold using 
pseudo-LIGA is shown in Figure 10.6.
In this chapter, we first review the most popular 
industrially available polymer molding techniques, 
and then, as examples that push the technology to 
its extremes, we detail LIGA and LIGA-like processes. 
The miniature features and the high-aspect ratios of 
the mold inserts generated from LIGA and LIGA-
like methods present new problems compared with 
the molding and demolding processes of macro-
components and compared with the production of 
small but low-aspect-ratio products such as CDs. 
A variety of the special processes developed to 
accommodate these new needs are reviewed. We start 
with a historical introduction to LIGA and analyze 
the process steps. The different applications and 
technical characteristics of x-rays from a synchrotron 
are discussed, and then we present an introduction 
to the crucial issues involved in making x-ray masks 
and their alignment for LIGA. This is followed by a 
treatise on LIGA substrate choice, resist requirements, 
exposure, development, electroplating, and finally 
molding. The electroplating and molding sections 
apply to LIGA and pseudo-LIGA approaches. The 
section on LIGA is followed by a review of competing 
mold fabrication techniques and a short treatise on 
ceramic molding.
Micromolding with an elastomeric mold (e.g., 
polydimethylsiloxane), or soft lithography, was 
reviewed in Chapter 2, where we stressed its low cost 
and convenience in research. Compared with other 
micromolding techniques reviewed in the current 
chapter, soft lithography is especially useful for thin 
microstructure fabrication.
Bonding of plastic molded microparts, includ-
ing plastic welding, organic solvent bonding, and 
bonding with thermoset adhesives, is covered in 
Volume III, Chapter 4 in its discussion of packaging 
techniques.
Plastic Molding
Liquid Resin Molding Techniques
Introduction
Because mold inserts made by photolithography 
techniques are typically limited to rather soft met-
als like nickel or brittle materials such as silicon and 
glass, micromolding based on low-viscosity liquid 
resins (instead of high-viscosity polymer melts) is a 
very attractive approach. During liquid resin mold-
ing, the low-viscosity reactive polymer components 
are mixed shortly before injection into the mold 
FIGURE 10.2 CNC-machined plastic lab CD platform: 
prototype cell disrupter disk, made from machined plastic 
disks and cut transfer adhesive films. (UCI and RotaPrep, 
Drs. Madou and Kido.)

[Page 594]
594   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
cavity, and polymerization takes place during the 
molding process. Under liquid resin molding tech-
niques, we distinguish between reaction IM (RIM) 
and transfer molding.
Reaction Injection Molding 
and Transfer Molding
Two typical setups for RIM and transfer molding are 
shown in Figure 10.3a and b, respectively.3 In the 
RIM setup shown in Figure 10.3a, two or more highly 
reactive liquid resins impinge and mix inside a mixer 
and are injected into the mold. In RIM, the polymer-
ization is usually mixing activated; therefore, it can 
quickly react at room temperature or slightly above 
and convert from liquid to solid. The transfer mold-
ing setup in Figure 10.3b, for a thermally activated 
system, is simpler and less expensive. Here, the reac-
tive species have been premixed at room tempera-
ture, and the mixture is poured into the “transfer 
pot.” A plunger squeezes the mixture through the 
sprue into the mold cavity. To cure the mixture, the 
mold is heated or radiated, depending on the resin 
system. With the lowest viscosity resins, vacuum-
assisted transfer molding is used, which is even less 
expensive than mechanical transfer molding.
Two complications associated with RIM are 
1)  an internal mold release agent must be used 
and 2)  polymer shrinkage during polymerization. 
Release agents are added to the bulk polymer and 
tend to reduce the thermomechanical properties of 
the molded polymer. External mold release agents, 
coating the surfaces of the mold insert, are unsuit-
able because they are difficult to introduce into all 
the microfeatures of the mold insert. Because the 
resin must be fully cured at high temperatures, the 
cycle time is typically more than 10 min. Hanemann 
et al.4 developed a photoinitiated RIM process by 
using the methylmethacrylate (MMA) resin. They 
found that the cycle time can be greatly reduced (to 
2–3 min), but other disadvantages, such as internal 
mold release agent and polymerization shrinkage, 
still exist.
Summary: Pros and Cons of 
Liquid Resin Molding
The pros and cons of RIM are summarized in Table 
10.1. Typical materials are optically clear reactive 
liquid resins, e.g., epoxies, urethanes, silicone rub-
bers, cross-linkable acrylics, and hydrogels.
Injection Molding
Introduction
Injection molding (IM) is based on heating a 
thermoplastic material until it melts, thermostatting 
the mold parts, injecting the melt with a controlled 
injection pressure into the mold cavity, and cooling 
the manufactured goods. IM is probably the most 
widely used technique in macroscopic production of 
polymer parts. Besides conventional IM, one variant 
of IM—a good candidate for microfabrication—is 
FIGURE 10.3 Two typical setups for RIM (a) and transfer molding or TM (b).

[Page 595]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   595
detailed here3: thin-wall IM. A typical injection 
compression molding setup is shown in Figure 
10.4. The mold insert in IM, as in RIM, must have 
extremely smooth walls to be able to demold the 
plastic structures. Such smooth walls cannot be 
produced with a classical mold-making technique 
such as spark erosion. For some polymers, such as 
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), the polymer 
pellets need to be dried for 4–6 h at 70°C before 
use in IM because PMMA absorbs water in air (up to 
0.3%), leading to poorer wall quality.
Conventional Injection Molding
In conventional IM of microparts, the mold remains 
closed, and the walls are kept at a uniform tempera-
ture above the glass transition temperature (Tg) of 
the polymer; thus, the injected molten plastic mass 
does not harden prematurely. To be able to fill very 
small mold features with aspect ratios higher than 
10, the temperature of the tool holding the insertion 
mold should be higher than what is typically used 
in IM applications of parts with lower aspect ratios. 
However, one should stay well below the melting 
temperature (e.g., 170°C for PMMA with a melting 
temperature of 240°C) because the microstructure 
might show temperature-induced defects if one works 
at a temperature closer to the melting temperature.5
One of the most important factors for replica-
tion fidelity in IM is the thickness of the skin, which 
forms on the mold surface during filling of the cav-
ity (see Figure 10.5).3
The injection pressure must penetrate this skin 
to replicate the shape of the master accurately. The 
faster the injection, the thinner this skin on the 
insert mold surfaces. The upper shapes of the master 
forming the bottom of the parts are usually perfectly 
formed. It is the bottom of the master and especially 
inner corners that cause problems. Because in 
conventional IM the mold is kept closed during the 
entire mold-filling process, high clamping forces on 
the mold parts are required, and the method is used 
for relatively thick substrates with high replication 
demands and low cost. Parts made this way often 
end up having high molded-in stresses.
Conventional thermoplastic IM is the technique 
used, for example, to make compact discs (CDs), 
involving features about 0.1 µm in depth and 
minimum lateral dimensions of 0.6 µm; that is, 
an aspect ratio of 0.16. CDs are made by IM of 
polycarbonate in a cavity formed between a mirror 
surface block and a stamper (i.e., mold or master). 
Conventionally, electroforming from a glass master 
generates nickel stampers. The principal attributes 
required of a stamper substrate are toughness, 
thermal shock resistance, thermal conductivity, and 
hardness. For IM in particular, toughness, thermal 
shock resistance, and thermal conductivity are 
critical. Thermal shock resistance is the product of a 
material’s modulus of rupture or tensile strength and 
its thermal conductivity, divided by the product of its 
coefficient of thermal expansion and its modulus of 
elasticity. In Table 10.2, we compare some materials 
for their merit as stamper substrates. Ion machining 
is one of the methods that can be used to make mold 
TABLE 10.1 Pros and Cons of Liquid Resin Molding
Pros
Cons
Ease of mold filling (low η)
Long cycle time (minutes, 
sometimes even hours)
Low stress on master (low η)
Polymerization shrinkage
High chemical and thermal 
resistance (because of the 
cross-linking)
Contamination (resin 
residue if the reaction is 
not 100%)
Replication extremely good 
for small, high-aspect ratio, 
and 3D features
Production cost medium 
to high
FIGURE 10.4 Typical injection molding setup.
Conventional part
(3 mm)
Flowing core 2.5 mm
Tin-wall part
(1 mm)
Solid skin 0.25 mm
Solid skin 0.25 mm
Flowing core 0.5 mm
FIGURE 10.5 Schematics of solid skin buildup in conven-
tional and thin-wall injection molding. (OSU, Drs. Madou 
and Lee.)

[Page 596]
596   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
inserts (see Figure 10.1 under Master fabrication), 
and surface quality after ion etching is also listed 
(ion machinability).
Nickel CD stampers are normally 138 mm in dia-
meter and 0.3 mm thick with an average roughness 
less than 10 nm. For ceramic stampers, a thickness 
of 0.9 mm is chosen to avoid fracture in IM. Typical 
conditions for IM are summarized in Table 10.3.
IM of parts with small features and low-aspect 
ratios (e.g., CDs) have been widely applied. The 
main challenge in microelectromechanical system 
(MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical system (NEMS) 
replication attempts is to extend this technique to 
the fabrication of components with the same small 
feature size but much larger aspect ratios, as needed 
in many medical and biochemical applications (see 
later discussions of LIGA and pseudo-LIGA).
Thin-Wall Injection Molding
Thin-wall IM is basically high-speed IM.3,7 Speeds 
can be 10 times faster than in conventional IM, reduc-
ing the thickness of the polymer skin on the mold 
(see Figure 10.5). The polymer melt can quickly be 
injected into the mold to fill all the detail structure 
of the cavity before solidification occurs. 
In our own thin-wall IM experiments for repli-
cation of BioMEMS devices, such as the fluidic CD 
(about 1 mm thick)3,8 shown in Figure 10.6, we 
have used a Sumitomo 200-ton high-pressure and 
high-speed machine.7 Only at injection speeds of 50 
mm/s or higher does the quality of the replication 
become adequate. A birefringence technique was 
used to qualitatively examine the stress in the poly-
mer parts as demonstrated in Figure 10.7. Samples 
showing sharp color contrast have large molded-in 
stresses. At the lower flow rates the residual stress 
is higher because, during the flow, the polymer has 
been stretched and solidified, meaning that there 
is a lot of flow-induced stress. Increasing the flow 
TABLE 10.2 Materials Selection for Stamper/Insert Mold Substrates
Substrate
Knoop 
Hardness
(kg/mm2)
Fracture 
Toughness
(MPa m1/2)
Thermal
Shock Resistance
(W/m)
Thermal Conductivity
(W/m K)
Ion Machinability
(Surface Quality) 
Nickel
100
∼100
7,138
80
Poor
Al2O3
2,100
4
3,225
30
Very good
SiC
2,500
3
19,149
90
Excellent
Glassy carbon
500
2
135,517
120
Excellent
Corning 9647 (glass)
450
1.3
546
2.5
Excellent
Source: Bifano, T. G., H. E. Fawcett, and P. A. Bierden. 1997. Precision manufacture of optical disc master stampers. Precision Eng 20: 
53–62.6
TABLE 10.3 Typical Conditions for Injection Molding
Mold temperature
85°C
Polycarbonate temperature
330°C
Clamping force
60 tons
Injection time 
1 s
Cooling time
2 s
FIGURE 10.6 Microfluidic CD devices made at different 
injection rates (OQPC). (From Lee, L. J., C.-H. Shih, Y.-J. 
Juang, J. Garcia, M. J. Madou, and K. W. Koelling. 1999. 
Novel microfabrication options for BioMEMS conference. 
San Francisco: The Knowledge Foundation;3 and Madou, 
M. J., Y. Lu, S. Lai, Y.-J. Juang, L. J. Lee, and S. Daunert. 
2000. Proceedings of the IEEE: solid-state sensor and 
actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.8)

[Page 597]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   597
rate decreases the amount of residual stress because 
the polymer can quickly fill in the mold and relax 
before solidification occurs. Nevertheless, there is 
some remaining stress that may cause warpage or 
less chemical resistance. By comparison, in casting 
there is essentially no flow: it is stress free.
A comparison of sample birefringence from dif-
ferent replication methods is given in Figure 10.8.3 
One observes that reactive casting with an epoxy 
resin causes the least amount of residual stress (least 
sharp color contrasts).
Another example of thin-walled structures made 
with thin-wall IM is shown in Figure 10.9. High 
injection speed is needed to completely fill the mold 
cavities for a thin-wall relay case (0.45 mm thick, 
flow length is 50.4 mm).
Injection Molding Equipment
For manufacturing MEMS structures, conventional 
IM machines used for CD fabrication are expanded 
with special features for the molding of microsized 
parts or parts with high-aspect ratio. The IM 
machine periphery then includes a vacuum unit 
for the evacuation of the split mold cavity and a 
precise temperature control unit. It is desirable 
to use one temperature control cycle on each 
surface of the split mold (see Figure 10.4). The flow 
temperatures are adapted to the respective half of 
the tool or to the molding and demolding process 
cycle to achieve a relatively short overall cycle time 
and a homogeneous tool temperature. To keep the 
cycle time as short as possible, the thermal mass 
of the tool sections to be heated is minimized and 
FIGURE 10.7 Birefringence of microfluidic devices made at different injection rates. (From Madou, M. J., Y. Lu, S. Lai, Y.-J. 
Juang, L. J. Lee, and S. Daunert. 2000. Proceedings of the IEEE: solid-state sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head 
Island, SC;8 and Lee, L. J., C.-H. Shih, Y.-J. Juang, J. Garcia, M. J. Madou, and K. W. Koelling. 1999. Novel microfabrication 
options for BioMEMS conference. San Francisco: The Knowledge Foundation.3)
FIGURE 10.8 Comparison of birefringence patterns of microfluidic platforms made by different replication methods. 
(From Lee, L. J., C.-H. Shih, Y.-J. Juang, J. Garcia, M. J. Madou, and K. W. Koelling. 1999. Novel microfabrication options 
for BioMEMS conference. San Francisco: The Knowledge Foundation.3)

[Page 598]
598   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
thermally insulated from the adjacent assemblies. 
The guiding mechanisms of the tool halves and the 
ejector system may not be fitted too loosely because 
small transverse movements might damage the 
microstructures during demolding. The machines 
and tools to be evacuated have to comply with 
tolerances in the micrometer range.9 Demolding of 
the microstructures takes place by means of ejector 
pins, which are located on the sole of the mold tool, 
the guiding mechanism, or directly at extremities 
of the microstructure.9 Under laboratory conditions, 
the microstructures are removed manually. In small 
series production, a handling robot is used. It may 
be equipped with a feed picker. In addition, the 
machines used for small series and mass production 
are provided with a granulate drying, supply, and 
metering system such that fully automatic molding 
in personnel-free shifts is possible.10
Commercial IM machines designed for microsized 
parts or parts with microsized features are avail-
able from Battenfeld (http://www. battenfeld.de), 
Boy Machines (http://www.dr-boy.de/ right machine.
htm), Engel (http://www.engel.at), Ferromatik Milacron 
(http://www.ferromatik.com), Murray (http://www. 
murrayeng.com), and Nissei (http://www. nisseiamerica.
com). Figure 10.10 shows a photograph of Battenfeld’s 
Microsystem 50.
Summary: Pros and Cons of Injection Molding
Pros and cons of IM are summarized in Table 10.4. 
Example materials in IM include polycarbonate 
(PC), polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), polysty-
rene (PS), polyvinylchloride (PVC), polypropylene 
(PP), polyethylene (PE), and polyacrylnitrilbutadi-
enstyrol (ABS).
Compression Molding (Also Relief 
Imprinting or Hot Embossing)
Introduction
The basic principle of compression molding (also hot 
embossing and relief imprinting) is that a polymer sub-
strate is first heated above its glass transition tem-
perature, Tg (or softening temperature). A mold (or 
master) is then pressed against the substrate, fully 
transferring the pattern onto it (embossing). After 
a certain time of contact between the mold and the 
substrate, the system is cooled down below Tg, fol-
lowed by separation of the mold and the substrate 
(de-embossing). Importantly, the hot embossing 
process can be achieved in either a cyclic process or 
a continuous process. Compression molding11,12 pro-
vides several advantages compared with IM, such as 
relatively low costs for embossing tools, simple pro-
cess, and high replication accuracy for small features. 
FIGURE 10.9 Relay case made by thin-wall injection molding at different injection rates (Nissei). (Courtesy Dr. Jim Lee, OSU.)

[Page 599]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   599
A typical setup for cyclic and continuous embossing 
is shown in Figure 10.11a and Figure 10.11b, respec-
tively.3 In a cyclic process (Figure 10.11a), a metal 
master is put in a hydraulic press, and applying the 
appropriate force, thus replicating the structure from 
the master to the polymer, stamps a heated polymer 
sheet. This constitutes a low-cost method for mak-
ing prototypes. For mass production, a continuous 
process is preferred (Figure 10.11b). Here, a poly-
mer sheet stretches through a temperature chamber, 
and several masters, mounted on a conveyor belt, 
continuously produce parts. The process also may 
incorporate a lamination station to enclose certain 
features. This continuous-type process is very much 
in keeping with a vision for continuous manufacture 
of MEMS and NEMS devices.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10.10 (a) Detail of the Battenfeld Microsystem 50 IM machine. (b) Examples of micromolded components with 
microfeatures.
TABLE 10.4 Pros and Cons of Injection Molding
Pros
Cons
Good for small structures with low aspect ratio, e.g., CD 
and DVD
Only low-molecular-weight polymers (may reduce 
mechanical and thermal strength)
Good for large, high-aspect ratio, and 3D features
More expensive equipment
Excellent dimensional control
Cyclic process only
Short cycle time (as low as 10 s)
High stress on master
High productivity
High residual stresses on molded parts
Closed mold process enables packing pressure application

[Page 600]
600   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Hot Embossing
As seen from Figure 10.11a, hot embossing takes place 
in a machine frame similar to that of a press. The force 
frame delivers the embossing force—on the order of 
5–20 tons. An upper boss holds the molding tool, 
and the lower boss holds the substrate. Processing 
parameters include thermal cycle, compression force, 
and compression speed. The temperature difference 
between embossing and de-embossing determines 
the thermal cycle time, typically from 25–40°C. 
In principle, one could, after hot embossing, cool 
down the whole device to room temperature before 
de-embossing, or, at the other extreme, one could 
de-emboss just below or at the glass-transition tem-
perature. A compromise is needed; the quality of the 
replication may not be good if one tries to remove 
the master when the polymer is still soft, whereas 
cooling all the way down to room temperature takes 
too long. A small temperature cycle leads to smaller 
induced thermal stress. Such a smaller temperature 
cycle also reduces replication errors as a result of dif-
ferent thermal expansion coefficients of tool and 
substrate. By actively heating and cooling the upper 
and lower bosses, one gets cycle times of about 5 min. 
A vacuum for hot embossing ensures longer lifetime 
for the mold, absorbs any water released during the 
embossing process from the polymer material, and 
prevents bubbles from entrapped gases. A Jenoptik 
hot embossing machine is shown in Figure 10.12.
Replication of micro- and nanosized structures has 
been successfully achieved using hot embossing.12–18 
Adding an antiadhesive film to reduce the interaction 
between the mold and the replica during embossing 
Mold
Polymer sheet
Force
Cooling device
(a) 
(b)
Press
Heating zones
Mold
Belt
Polymer sheet
FIGURE 10.11 Schematic of cyclic (a) and continuous (b) embossing processes. (From Lee, L. J., C.-H. Shih, Y.-J. Juang, 
J. Garcia, M. J. Madou, and K. W. Koelling. 1999. Novel microfabrication options for BioMEMS conference. San Francisco: 
The Knowledge Foundation.3)
FIGURE 10.12 JENOPTIK HEX 04 hot embossing system 
manufactured by Jenoptik Mikrotechnik GmbH (http://
www.jenoptik.com).

[Page 601]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   601
has also been studied.19,20 Instead of the conven-
tional nickel molds, the possibility of using silicon 
molds because of their excellent surface quality and 
easy mold release has been demonstrated.21,22 Also, 
the use of a plastic mold in the embossing process 
was recently illustrated.23
At the Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe, or KfK, 
hot embossing is mainly used for small series pro-
duction, whereas IM is applied to mass production. 
Both techniques are applied to amorphous (PMMA, 
PC, PSU) and semicrystalline thermoplastics (POM, 
PA, PVDF, PFA). RIM is used for molding of thermo-
plastics (PMMA, PA), duroplastics (PMMA, epox-
ide), or elastomers (silicones).24
Summary: Pros and Cons of 
Compression Molding
Pros and cons of compression molding are summa-
rized in Table 10.5. In Figure 10.13 we compare hot 
embossing with UV-nanoimprint lithography (see 
Chapter 2) and microcontact printing (soft lithogra-
phy, Chapter 2). These techniques can all be grouped 
under nanoimprint lithography (NIL).
LIGA—Background
History
LIGA combines the sacrificial wax molding method, 
known since the time of the Egyptians, with x-ray 
lithography and electrodeposition. Combining elec-
trodeposition and x-ray lithography was first carried 
out by Romankiw and coworkers at IBM as early as 
1975.25 These authors made high-aspect-ratio metal 
structures by plating gold in x-ray-defined resist pat-
terns of up to 20 µm thick. They had, in other words, 
already invented “LIG”; that is, LIGA without the 
abformung (molding).25 This IBM work was an exten-
sion of through-mask plating, also pioneered by 
Romankiw et al. in 1969, and was geared toward the 
fabrication of thin film magnetic recording heads 
(see Figure 2.4a).26 The addition of plastic molding 
to the lithography and plating process was realized 
by Ehrfeld et al.27 at the Kernforschungszentrum 
Karlsruhe (KfK) in 1982. By adding molding, these 
pioneers recognized the broader implications of 
LIGA as a new means of low-cost manufacturing 
of a wide variety of microparts with unprecedented 
accuracies from various materials previously impos-
sible to batch fabricate.27 In Germany, LIGA origi-
nally developed almost completely outside of the 
semiconductor industry. In the United States, it was 
the late Henry Guckel who, starting in 1988, repo-
sitioned the field in light of semiconductor process 
capabilities and brought it closer to standard manu-
facturing processes.
TABLE 10.5 Pros and Cons of Compression Molding 
(Imprinting or Hot Embossing)
Pros
Cons
Low polymer flow
More difficult for structures 
with high-aspect ratio (near 
Tg processing)
High-molecular-weight 
polymers (with better 
mechanical and thermal 
properties)
Less dimensional control 
(open mold process)
Simple process
Planar features only
Continuous or cyclic (see 
Figure 10.7)
High residual stresses on 
molded parts
Good for small structures
Difficult for large parts and 
multiple feature depth (too 
high a pressure and 
temperature are required)
FIGURE 10.13 Nanoimprint lithography (NIL). Comparison 
of hot embossing with UV-nanoimprint lithography and 
 microcontact printing.

[Page 602]
602   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The development of the LIGA process initiated 
at KfK was intended for the mass production of 
micrometer-sized nozzles for uranium-235 enrich-
ment (see Figure 10.14).27 The German group used 
synchrotron radiation from a 2.5-GeV storage ring 
for the exposure of the poly(methylmethacrylate) 
(PMMA) resist.
Today LIGA and especially LIGA-like processes are 
researched in many laboratories around the world, 
and developing the ideal means for fabricating micro-
molds for the large-scale production of precise micro-
machines remains an elusive holy grail. In LIGA, mold 
inserts are made via x-ray lithography, but, depending 
on the dimensions of the microparts, the accuracy 
requirements, and the fabrication costs, mold inserts 
may also be realized by electron beam (e-beam) writ-
ing, computer numerically controlled (CNC) machin-
ing, wet Si bulk micromachining, deep UV resists, 
deep reactive ion etching (DRIE), ultrasonic cutting, 
excimer laser ablation, electrical discharge machin-
ing (EDM), and laser cutting (see Figure 10.1).
Synchrotron Orbital Radiation
Introduction
Lithography based on synchrotron radiation, also 
called synchrotron orbital radiation (SOR), is primarily 
pursued with the aim of adopting the technology as 
an industrial tool for the large-scale manufacture of 
microelectronic circuits with characteristic dimen-
sions in the submicrometer range (see Chapter 2).29,30 
Synchrotron radiation sources “outshine” electron 
impact and plasmas sources for generating x-rays. 
They emit a much higher flux of usable collimated 
x-rays, thereby allowing shorter exposure times and 
larger throughputs. Pros and cons of x-ray radiation 
for lithography in IC manufacture are summarized 
in Table 10.6.
Despite the many promising features of x-ray 
lithography, the technique today lacks mainstream 
acceptance in the IC industry, and continued 
improvements in optical lithography outpace the 
industrial use of x-ray lithography for IC applications. 
However, its use for prototype development on small 
product runs will no doubt continue its course. In 
1991, experts projected that x-ray lithography would 
be in use by 1995 for 64-Mb dynamic random 
FIGURE 10.14 Schematic and scanning electron micrograph of a separation nozzle structure produced by electroform-
ing with nickel using a micromolded PMMA template. This nozzle represents the first product ever made by LIGA. (From 
Hagmann, P., W. Ehrfeld, and H. Vollmer. 1987. First meeting of the European Polymer Federation, European symposium 
on polymeric materials. Lyon, France. http://opac.fzk.de:81/de/oai_frm.html?titlenr=24694&server=//127.0.0.1&port=81; 
Archiv KAROLA–OA–Volltextserver_des_Forschungszentrums Karlsruhe (Germany). With permission.28)
TABLE 10.6 Pros and Cons of SOR X-Ray Lithography 
for IC Manufacture
Pros
Cons
Lithography process 
insensitive to resist thickness, 
exposure time, development 
time (large DOF)
Resist not very sensitive 
(not too important 
because of the intense 
light source)
Absence of backscattering 
results in insensitivity to 
substrate type, reflectivity 
and topography, pattern 
geometry and proximity, dust 
and contamination
Masks very difficult and 
expensive to make
High resolution, <0.2 μm
Very high start-up 
investment
Some have suggested high 
throughput
Not proven as a system
Radiation effects on SiO2 

[Page 603]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   603
access memory (DRAM) manufacture with critical 
dimensions around 0.3–0.4 µm. With more certainty, 
they projected that the transition to x-rays would 
occur with the 0.2–0.3-µm critical dimensions of 
256-Mb DRAMs, which came online by 1998.29 Both 
dates obviously passed without materialization of 
the wide-scale industrial use of x-rays.
In addition to being an option for the next-
generation IC lithography as discussed in more detail 
in Chapter 2, x-rays are also used in the fabrication 
of 3D microstructures. In LIGA, synchrotron 
radiation is used in the lithography step only. 
However, other micromachining applications for 
SOR exist. Urisu and his colleagues, for example, 
explored the use of synchrotron radiation for 
radiation-excited chemical vapor deposition and 
etching.31 Micromachinists are hoping to piggyback 
x-ray lithography research and development efforts 
for the fabrication of micromachines onto major 
IC projects. Today the use of x-ray lithography for 
fabricating microdevices, other than ICs, does not 
present a large business opportunity by itself. Not 
having a major IC product line associated with x-ray 
lithography makes it extra hard to justify the use of 
x-ray lithography for micromachining, especially 
because other, less-expensive micromachining 
technologies are only very recently starting to open 
up the type of mass markets one is used to in the 
IC world. The fact that the x-rays used in LIGA 
are shorter wavelength than in the IC application 
(2–10 Å vs. 20–50 Å) also puts micromachinists at 
a disadvantage. For example, soft x-rays in the IC 
industry may eventually be generated from a much 
less-expensive source, such as a transition radiation 
source.32 Also, nontraditional IC materials are fre-
quently used in LIGA. The fabrication of x-ray masks 
poses more difficulties than masks for IC appli-
cations. Rotation and slanting of the x-ray masks 
to craft nonvertical walls further differentiate LIGA 
exposure stations. All these factors make exploring 
LIGA a challenge. However, given sufficient research 
and development money, large markets are likely to 
emerge in the next 10 years. These markets could 
be in the manufacture of devices with stringent 
requirements imposed on resolution, aspect ratio, 
structural height, and parallelism of structural 
walls. Optical applications for the information 
technology field seem particularly attractive early 
product targets.
Thus far, it is the research community that has pri-
marily benefited from the availability of SOR pho-
ton sources. With its continuously tunable radiation 
across a very wide photon range, highly polarized, and 
directed into a narrow beam, SOR provides a power-
ful probe of atomic and molecular resonances. Other 
types of photon sources prove unsatisfactory for these 
applications in terms of intensity or energy spread. As 
can be concluded from Table 10.7, applications of SOR 
beyond lithography range from structural and chemi-
cal analysis to microscopy, angiography, and even to 
the preparation of new materials.
TABLE 10.7 SOR Applications
Application Area
Instruments / Technologies 
Needed
Structural analysis
Atoms
Molecules
Very large molecules
Proteins
Cells
Crystals
Polycrystals
Photoelectron spectrometers
Absorption spectrometers
Fluorescent spectrometers
Diffraction cameras
Scanning electron microscope (to 
view topographical radiographs)
Time-resolved x-ray 
diffractometers
Chemical analysis
Trace
Surface
Bulk
Photoelectron spectrometers
(Secondary ion) mass spectrometer
Absorption/fluorescence 
spectrometers
Vacuum systems
Microscopy
Photoelectron
X-ray
Photoemission microscopes
X-ray microscopes SEM (for 
viewing)
Vacuum systems
Micro-/nanofabrication
X-ray lithography
Photochemical 
deposition of thin 
films
Etching
Steppers, mask making
Vacuum systems
LIGA process
Medical diagnostics
Radiography
Angiography and 
tomography
X-ray cameras and equipment
Computer-aided display
Photochemical reactions
Preparation of novel 
materials
Vacuum systems
Gas-handling equipment
Source: Muray, J. J., and I. Brodie. 1991. Report no. 2019. Menlo 
Park, CA: SRI International.33

[Page 604]
604   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Synchrotron Radiation: Technical Aspects
Some important concepts associated with syn-
chrotron radiation (such as the bending radius of 
the synchrotron magnet, magnetic field strength, 
beam current, critical wavelength, and total radiated 
power) require introduction. Figure 10.15 presents 
a schematic of an x-ray exposure station. Electrons 
are injected into the ring, where they are maintained 
at energies anywhere from 106–109 eV. The cone of 
radiation shown in this figure is the electromagnetic 
radiation emitted by the circling electrons as a result 
of the radial acceleration that keeps them in the 
orbit of the electron synchrotron or storage ring. 
For high-energy particle studies, this radiation, 
emitted tangentially to the circular electron path 
(Bremsstrahlung*), limits the maximum energy the 
electrons can attain. Bremsstrahlung is a nuisance 
for studies of the composition of the atomic nucleus 
in which high-energy particles are smashed into the 
nucleus. To minimize the Bremsstrahlung, physicists 
desire ever bigger synchrotrons.† The energy lost in 
the emission process is made up in a radiofrequency 
(RF) cavity, where electrons are accelerated back up 
to the storage ring energy. Injection of electrons must 
be repeated a few times a day because the electron 
current slowly decays as a result of leakage. For x-ray 
lithography applications, electrical engineers want 
to maximize the x-ray emission and build small 
synchrotrons instead (e.g., the radius of curvature 
for a compact, superconducting synchrotron is 2 
m). The operating cost of these magnets is primarily 
that of the liquid helium refrigeration. Once high-Tc 
(critical temperature, the temperature at which the 
resistance falls to zero) superconducting materials 
can be made in bulk, compact storage rings will 
become very attractive. The angular opening of the 
radiation cone in Figure 10.15 is determined by the 
electron energy, E, and is given by:
 
θ ≈
=
mc
E
E(GeV) mrad)
2
0 5
.
(
 
(10.1)
The x-ray light bundle with the cone opening, θ, 
describes a horizontal line on an intersecting sub-
strate because the x-ray bundle is tangent to the 
circular electron path. In the vertical direction, the 
intensity of the beam exhibits a Gaussian distribu-
tion, and the vertical exposed height on the inter-
secting substrate can be calculated knowing θ and 
R, the distance from the radiation point, P, to the 
substrate. With E = 1 GeV, θ = 1 mrad, and R = 10 m, 
the exposed area in the vertical direction measures 
about 0.5 cm. To expose a substrate homogeneously 
over a wider vertical range, the sample is moved ver-
tically through the irradiation band with a precision 
scanner, for example, at a speed of 10 mm/s over a 
* German for “braking radiation.”
† The Superconducting Super Collider Laboratory (SSCL or SSC for 
short), which was never finished, was to be an oval-shaped accel-
erator, the circumference of which would have been 54 miles. The 
collider oval was to be located about 200 ft. underground and would 
have surrounded the city of Waxahachie, Texas.
Mask-wafer combination mechanically
moved through sheet of X-radiation
Electron orbit
Acceleration
= Radius of orbit
= Magnetic ﬁeld
H
= Circulating current
R
P
H
Angle θ ≈mc2
E
D: Doctoring roll (metal or rubber)
P: Pumping roll (metal or rubber)
C: Coating roll (metal or rubber)
B: Back roll (rubber)
E: Exposure roll (metal)
Film ﬂow
Clearance
variable
Clearance
variable
Clearance
variable
Doctor blade
X-rays
D
P
C
B
E
Liquid
resist
Inset:
ρ
i
(i)
ρ
FIGURE 10.15 Schematic of an x-ray exposure station 
with a synchrotron radiation source. The x-ray radiation 
cone (opening θ) is tangential to the electron’s path, 
describing a line on an intersecting substrate. Inset, a 
vision for the future of x-ray lithography: continuous 
micromanufacturing.

[Page 605]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   605
100-mm scanning distance. Usually, the substrate is 
stepped up and down repeatedly until the desired 
x-ray dose is obtained. It is interesting to note that 
an SOR setup affords continuous lithography, a pros-
pect, this author believes, that will make disposable 
ICs and MEMS and NEMS a possibility. Rolls of dry 
x-ray photoresist or x-ray photoresist covered metal 
foils could pass through the exposure beam, result-
ing in a continuous lithography process, that is, a 
“beyond batch” type of approach (see Figure 10.15, 
inset).
The electron energy E in Equation 10.1 is given 
by:
 
E(GeV) = 0.29979 B(Tesla) ρ (meters) (10.2)
with B the magnetic field and ρ the radius of the cir-
cular path of the electrons in the synchrotron.
The total radiated power can be calculated from the 
energy loss of the electrons per turn and is given by:
 
P(kW)
88.47E i
4
=
ρ
 
(10.3)
with i the beam current.
The emission of the synchrotron electrons is a 
broad spectrum without characteristic peaks or line 
enhancements, and its distribution extends from 
the microwave region through the infrared, visible, 
ultraviolet (UV), and into the x-ray region. The criti-
cal wavelength, λc, is defined so that the total radi-
ated power at lower wavelengths equals the radiated 
power at higher wavelengths, and is given by:
 
λ =
ρ
c
3
5.59 (m)
E GeV)
(
 
(10.4)
Equation 10.3 shows that the total radiated power 
increases with the fourth power of the electron 
energy. From Equation 10.4, we appreciate that the 
spectrum shifts toward shorter wavelengths with 
the third power of the electron energy.
The dose variation absorbed in the top versus the 
bottom of an x-ray resist should be kept small so that 
the top layer does not deteriorate before the bottom 
layers are sufficiently exposed. Because the depth of 
penetration increases with decreasing wavelength, 
synchrotron radiation of very short wavelengths is 
needed to pattern thick resist layers. To obtain good 
aspect ratios in LIGA structures, the critical wave-
length ideally should be 2 Å. Bley et al.,34 at KfK, 
designed a new synchrotron optimized for LIGA. 
They proposed a magnetic flux density, B, of 1.6285 
T; a nominal energy, E, of 2.3923 GeV; and a bending 
radius, ρ, of 4.9 m. With those parameters, Equation 
10.4 results in the desired λc of 2 Å and an open-
ing angle of radiation, based on Equation 10.1, of 
0.2 mrad (in practice this angle will be closer to 0.3 
mrad because of e-beam emittance).
The x-rays traveling from the ring to the sample 
site are held in a high vacuum. The sample itself is 
either kept in air or in a helium atmosphere. The 
inert atmosphere prevents corrosion of the expo-
sure chamber, mask, and sample by reactive oxygen 
species, and removal of heat is much faster than in 
air (the heat conductivity of He is high compared 
with air). In He, the x-ray intensity loss is also 500 
times less than in air. A Be window separates the 
high vacuum from the inert atmosphere. For wave-
lengths shorter than 1 nm, Be is very transparent—
that is, an excellent x-ray window. A 25-µm-thick Be 
window can withstand a 1-atm pressure differen-
tial across a small diameter (<1 in.). For large area 
exposures, windows up to 6-cm diameter have been 
developed. Be windows age with x-ray exposure and 
must be replaced periodically.
Access to the Technology
Today, the construction cost for a typical synchro-
tron totals more than $30 million, restricting the 
access to LIGA. Obviously, a less-expensive alterna-
tive for generating intense x-rays is preferred. Along 
this line, in Japan, Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy 
Industries (IHI) is building compact synchrotron 
x-ray sources (e.g., an 800-MeV synchrotron of about 
30 ft./side) (http://www.ihi.co.jp).
By the end of 1993, eight nonprivately owned syn-
chrotrons were in use in the United States. The first 
privately owned synchrotron was put into service in 
1991 at IBM’s Advanced Semiconductor Technology 
Center (East Fishkill, NY). Table 10.8 lists the eight 
US synchrotron facilities.
Most of the facilities listed in Table 10.8 allow LIGA 
work to continue. For example, Cronos Integrated 
Microsystems, Inc., a JDS Uniphase Company and 
a spinoff from MCNC (Research Triangle Park, NC), 

[Page 606]
606   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
in collaboration with the University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, announced its first multiuser LIGA process 
sponsored by Advanced Research Projects Agency 
in September 1993 (http://www.memsrus.com). 
CAMD, at Louisiana State University, has three 
beam lines exclusively dedicated to micromachin-
ing work, and the Advanced Light Source at Berkeley 
has one beam line available for micromachining.
Like 
Cronos, 
Forschungszentrum 
Karlsruhe 
GmbH offers a multiuser LIGA service (LEMA, or 
LIGA experiment for multiple applications). The 
commercial exploitation of LIGA is pursued by at 
least three German organizations: microParts GmbH 
STEAG (http://www.microparts.de), IMM (http://
www.imm.uni-mainz.de), and Forschungszentrum 
Karlsruhe, or KfK (http://www.fzk.de). In the United 
States, Louisiana State University’s CAMD (http://
www.camd.lsu.edu; Baton Rouge, LA) with its spinoff 
Mezzo Systems, Inc., founded in 2000, (http://www.
mezzosystems.com) is leading the way.
LIGA and LIGA-Like Process Steps 
X-Ray Masks
Introduction
With reference to Figure 10.16 we now detail each of 
the steps in the LIGA process.
TABLE 10.8 Access to Synchrotron Radiation Is or Will Soon Be Available at the Following Facilities in the United States
Facility
Institute
URL
Advanced Photon Source (APS)
Argonne National Laboratory
http://www.aps.anl.gov
Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS)
Cornell University
http://www.tn.cornell.edu
National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS)
Brookhaven National Laboratory
http://www.nsls.bnl.gov
Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL)
Stanford University
http://www-ssrl.slac.stanford.edu
Synchrotron UV Radiation Facility (SURF)
National Institute of Standards 
and Technology
http://physics.nist.gov/
MajResFac/SURF
Synchrotron Radiation Center (SRC)
University of Wisconsin, Madison
http://www.src.wisc.edu
Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices 
(CAMD)
Louisiana State University
http://www.camd.lsu.edu
Advanced Light Source (ALS)
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
http://www-als.lbl.gov
FIGURE 10.16 (a) Basic LIGA process step: x-ray deep-etch lithography and first electroforming. (b) Plastic molding and 
second electroforming/slip casting.

[Page 607]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   607
X-ray mask production is one of the most difficult 
aspects of x-ray lithography. To be highly transmis-
sive to x-rays, the mask substrate by necessity must 
be a low Z (atomic number) thin membrane. X-ray 
masks should withstand many exposures without 
distortion, be alignable with respect to the sample, 
and be rugged. A possible x-ray mask architecture 
and its assembly with a substrate in an x-ray scanner 
are shown in Figure 10.17. The mask shown here has 
three major components: an absorber, a membrane 
or mask blank, and a frame. The absorber contains 
the information to be imaged onto the resist. It is 
made up of a material with a high atomic number (Z), 
often Au, patterned onto a membrane material with 
a low Z. The high-Z material absorbs x-rays, whereas 
the low-Z material transmits x-rays. The frame lends 
robustness to the membrane/absorber assembly so 
that the whole can be handled confidently.
The requirements for x-ray masks in LIGA differ 
substantially from those for the IC industry. A com-
parison is presented in Table 10.9.35 The main differ-
ence lies in the absorber thickness. To achieve a high 
contrast (>200), very thick absorbers (>10 µm vs. 1 
µm) and highly transparent mask blanks (transpar-
ency >80%) must be used because of the low x-ray 
resist sensitivity and the great depth of the resist. 
Another difference focuses on the radiation stability 
of membrane and absorber. For conventional optical 
lithography, the supporting substrate is a relatively 
thick, optically flat piece of glass or quartz highly 
transparent to optical wavelengths. It provides a 
highly stable (>106 µm) basis for the thin (0.1 µm) 
chrome absorber pattern. In contrast, the x-ray mask 
consists of a very thin membrane (2–4 µm) of low-Z 
material carrying a high-Z thick absorber pattern.36 
A single exposure in LIGA results in an exposure 
dose 100 times higher than in the IC case.
We will look into these different mask aspects 
separately before detailing a process with the poten-
tial of obviating the need for a separate x-ray mask 
altogether, that is, through the use of conformal or 
transfer masks.
FIGURE 10.17 Schematic of a typical x-ray mask (a) and 
mask and substrate assembly in an x-ray scanner (b). 
[(b) from IMM, http://www.imm-mainz.de/. 1995. 
Commercial brochure. With permission.2]
TABLE 10.9 Comparison of Masks in LIGA and the IC Industry
Semiconductor Lithography
LIGA Process
Transparency
≥50%
≥80%
Absorber thickness
±1 μm
±10 μm
Field size
50 × 50 mm2
100 × 100 mm2
Radiation resistance
= 1
= 100
Surface roughness
<0.1 μm
<0.5 μm
Waviness
<±1 μm
<±1 μm
Dimensional stability
<0.05 μm
<0.1–0.3 μm
Residual membrane stress
~108 Pa
~108 Pa
Source: Ehrfeld, W., W. Glashauer, D. Munchmeyer, and W. Schelb. 1986. Mask making for synchrotron radiation 
lithography. Microelectron Eng 5:463–70.35

[Page 608]
608   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
X-Ray Membrane (Mask Blank)
The low-Z membrane material in an x-ray mask 
must  have a transparency for rays with a critical 
wavelength, λc, from 0.2–0.6 nm of at least 80% 
and should not induce scattering of those rays. To 
avoid pattern distortion, the residual stress, σr,  in 
the membrane should be less than 108 dyn/cm2. 
Mechanical stress in the absorber pattern can 
cause in-plane distortion of the supporting thin 
membrane, necessitating a high Young’s modulus for 
the membrane material. Humidity or high deposited 
doses of x-ray might also distort the membrane 
directly. During one typical lithography step, the 
mask may be exposed to 1 MJ/cm2 of x-rays. Because 
most membranes must be very thin for optimum 
transparency, a compromise has to be found between 
transparency, strength, and form stability. Important 
x-ray membrane materials are listed in Table 10.10. 
The higher radiation dose in LIGA prevents the use 
of boron nitride (BN) and compound mask blanks, 
which incor porate a polyimide layer. Those mask 
blanks are perfectly appropriate for classical IC 
lithography work but will not do for LIGA work. Mask 
blanks of metals such as Ti and Be were specifically 
developed for LIGA applications because of their 
radiation hardness.35,37 In comparing titanium and 
beryllium membranes, beryllium can have a much 
greater membrane thickness, d, and still be adequately 
transparent. For example, a membrane transparency 
of 80%, essential for adequate exposure of a 500-
µm-thick PMMA resist layer, is obtained with a 
thin 2-µm titanium film, whereas with beryllium, 
a thick 300-µm membrane achieves the same result. 
The thicker beryllium membrane permits easier 
processing and handling. In addition, beryllium has 
a greater Young’s modulus E than titanium (330 vs. 
140 kN/mm2), and because it is the product of E × d 
that determines the amount of mask distortion, 
distortions resulting from absorber stress should 
be much smaller for beryllium blanks.37,38 Thus, 
beryllium comes forward as an excellent membrane 
material for LIGA because of its high transparency 
and excellent damage resistance. Such a mask 
should be good for up to 10,000 exposures and may 
cost $20,000–30,000 ($10,000–15,000 in quantity). 
Stoichiometric silicon nitride (Si3N4) used in x-ray 
mask membranes may contain numerous oxygen 
impurities, absorbing x-rays and thus producing 
TABLE 10.10 Comparison of Membrane Materials for X-Ray Masks
Material
X-Ray 
Transparency
Nontoxicity
Dimensional 
Stability
Remark
Si
0 (50% transmission at 5.5-μm 
thickness)
++
0 (thermal exp coefficient 
2.6°C–1 10–6) Young’s 
modulus = 1.3
Single-crystal Si, well developed, 
rad hard, stacking faults cause 
scattering, material is brittle
SiNx
(50% transmission at 2.3-μm 
thickness)
++
(thermal exp coefficient 
2.7°C–1 10–6) Young’s 
modulus = 3.36
Amorphous, well developed, rad 
hard if free of oxygen, resistant 
to breakage
SiC
(50% transmission at 3.6-μm 
thickness)
++
(thermal exp coefficient 
4.7°C–1 10–6) Young’s 
modulus = 3.8
Poly and amorphous, rad hard, 
some resistance to breakage
Diamond
+(50% transmission at 4.6-μm 
thickness)
++
++(thermal exp coefficient 
1.0°C–1 10–6) Young’s 
modulus = 11.2
Poly, research only, highest 
stiffness
BN
(50% transmission at 3.8-μm 
thickness)
(thermal exp coefficient 
1.0°C–1 10–6) Young’s 
modulus = 1.8
Not rad hard, i.e., not applicable 
for LIGA
Be
++
—
++
Research, especially suited for 
LIGA, even at 100 µm the 
transparency is good, 30 µm 
typical, difficult to electroplate, 
toxic material
Ti
—
0
Research, used for LIGA, not very 
transparent, films must not be 
more than 2–3 μm thick

[Page 609]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   609
heat. This heat often suffices to prevent the use of 
nitride as a good LIGA mask. Single-crystal silicon 
masks have been made (1 cm2 and 0.4 µm thick 
and 10 cm2 and 2.5 µm thick) by electrochemical 
etching techniques. Nanostructures, Inc. (http://
www.nanostructures.com) is one of the companies 
that make such thin Si masks. For Si and Si3N4, the 
Young’s modulus is low compared with CVD-grown 
diamond, and for SiC films, the Young’s modulus 
is as much as three times higher. These higher 
stiffness materials are more desirable because the 
internal stresses of the absorbers, which can distort 
mask patterns, are less of an issue. Unfortunately, 
diamond and SiC membranes are also the most 
difficult to produce.
Absorber Materials
The requirements on the absorber are high attenua-
tion (>10 db), stability under radiation for extended 
periods, negligible distortion (stress <108 dyn/cm2), 
ease of patterning, repairability, and low defect den-
sity. Typical absorber materials are listed in Table 
10.11. Gold is used most commonly, and some 
research groups are looking at the viability of tung-
sten and other materials. In the IC industry, an 
absorber thickness of 0.5 µm might suffice, whereas 
LIGA deals with thicker layers of resist requiring a 
thicker absorber to maintain the same resolution.
Figure 10.18 illustrates how x-rays, with a charac-
teristic wavelength of 0.55 nm, are absorbed along 
their trajectory through a Kapton preabsorber filter, 
an x-ray mask, and resist.39 As we saw in Volume I, 
Chapter 5, photon absorption by a solid in the vis-
ible region of the spectrum depends on the atomic 
arrangement of the atoms and their bonding (for 
example, pure silicon is strongly absorbing, but 
silicon combined with oxygen is transparent). For 
the energetic photons in the x-ray regime, photon 
absorption is much easier to predict and is indepen-
dent of the details of atomic arrangement. It depends 
primarily on the electron concentration per unit vol-
ume. Because the concentration of atoms per unit 
volume only differs by factors of two or three from 
each other, the electron concentration in two mate-
rials can be estimated from the atomic number, Z. 
Lead (Z = 82) absorbs x-rays much more efficiently 
than aluminum (Z = 13) and consequently is used in 
shielding around x-ray apparatus. X-ray absorption 
depends on the energy of the x-rays and decreases 
with increasing x-ray energy, E. Absorption decreases 
nearly proportionally to the cube of the energy (i.e., 
absorption proportional to 1/E3; Equation 10.4). 
Thus, the low energy portion of the synchrotron 
radiation is absorbed mainly in the top portion of 
the resist layer because absorption increases with 
increasing wavelength. The Kapton preabsorber fil-
ters out much of the low energy radiation to prevent 
overexposure of the top surface of the resist. The 
x-ray dose at which the resist gets damaged, Ddm, 
TABLE 10.11 Comparison of Absorber Materials for 
X-Ray Masks
Material
Remark
Gold
Not the best stability (grain growth), low 
stress, electroplating only, defects 
repairable (thermal exp coefficient 
14.2°C–1 10–6) (0.7 µm for 10 dB)
Tungsten
Refractory and stable, special care is 
needed for stress control, dry etchable, 
repairable (thermal exp coefficient 
4.5°C–1 10–6) (0.8 µm for 10 dB )
Tantalum
Refractory and stable, special care is 
needed for stress control, dry etchable, 
repairable
Alloys
Easier stress control, greater thickness 
needed to obtain 10 dB
FIGURE 10.18 Absorbed energy along the x-ray trajec-
tory including a 500-µm-thick PMMA specimen, x-ray 
mask, and a Kapton preabsorber. (From Bley, P., W. Menz, 
W. Bacher, K. Feit, M. Harmening, H. Hein, J. Mohr, 
W. K. Schomburg, and W. Stark. 1991. Proc. 1991 Int. 
MicroProcess Conf. J. Appl. Phys. JJAP Series 5, p. 384, 
Japan, Tokyo. With permission.39)

[Page 610]
610   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
the dose required for development of the resist, Ddv, 
and the “threshold dose” at which the resist starts 
dissolving in a developer, Dth, are all indicated in 
Figure 10.18. In the areas under the absorber pat-
tern of the x-ray mask, the absorbed dose must 
stay below the threshold dose, Dth. Otherwise, the 
structures partly dissolve, resulting in poor feature 
definition. From Figure 10.18, we can deduce that 
the height of the gold absorbers must exceed 6 µm 
to reduce the absorbed radiation dose of the resist 
under the gold pattern to below the threshold dose, 
Dth. In Figure 10.19, the necessary thickness of the 
gold absorber patterns of an x-ray mask is plotted 
as a function of the thickness of the resist to be pat-
terned; the Au must be thicker for thicker resist lay-
ers and for shorter characteristic wavelengths, λc, of 
the x-ray radiation. To pattern a 500-mm-high struc-
ture with a λc of 0.225 nm, the gold absorber must 
be more than 11 µm high.
Exposure of yet more extreme photoresist 
thicknesses is possible if proper x-ray photon energies 
are used. At 3,000 eV, the absorption length in 
PMMA roughly measures 100 µm, which enables the 
above-mentioned 500-µm exposure depth.40 Using 
20,000-eV photons results in absorption lengths of 
1 cm. PMMA structures up to 10 cm (!) thick have 
been exposed this way.41 A high-energy mask used 
by Guckel for these high-energy exposures has an 
Au absorber 50 µm thick and a blank membrane of 
400-µm-thick Si. Guckel obtained an absorption 
contrast of 400 when exposing a 1000-µm-thick 
PMMA sheet with this mask. An advantage of using 
such thick Si blank membranes is that larger resist 
areas can be exposed because one does not depend 
on a fragile membrane/absorber combination.42
Absorber Fabrication
Single-Layer Absorbers To make a mask with gold 
absorber structures of a height more than 10 µm, 
one must first succeed in structuring a resist of that 
thickness. The height of the resist should be a bit 
higher (e.g., 20%) than the absorber itself to accom-
modate the electrodeposited metal fully between 
the resist features. Currently, no means to structure 
a resist of that height with sufficient accuracy and 
perfect verticality of the walls exist unless x-rays 
are used. Different procedures for producing x-ray 
masks with thicker absorber layers using a two-stage 
lithography process have been developed.
The KfK solution calls for first making an inter-
mediate mask with photo or e-beam lithography. 
This intermediate mask starts with a 3-µm-thick 
resist layer, in which case the needed line-width 
accuracy and photoresist wall steepness of printed 
features are achievable. After gold plating between 
the resist features and stripping the resist, this inter-
mediate mask is used to write a pattern with x-rays 
in a thicker resist, e.g., 20 µm thick. After electrode-
positing and resist stripping, the x-ray mask, that is, 
the master mask, is obtained.
Because hardly any accuracy is lost in the copying 
of the intermediate mask with x-rays to obtain the 
master mask, it is the intermediate mask quality 
that determines the ultimate quality of the LIGA-
produced microstructures. The structuring of the 
resist in the intermediate mask is handled with 
optical techniques when the requirements on the 
LIGA structures are less stringent. The minimal 
lateral dimensions for optical lithography in a 
3-µm-thick resist typically measure about 2.5 µm. 
Under optimum conditions, a wall angle of 88° is 
achievable. With e-beam lithography, a minimum 
lateral dimension of less than 1 µm is feasible. The 
most accurate pattern transfer is achieved through 
reactive ion etching of a trilevel resist system. In this 
approach, a 3–4-µm-thick polyimide resist is first 
coated onto the titanium or beryllium membrane, 
followed by a coat of 10–15-nm titanium deposited 
FIGURE 10.19 Necessary thickness of the gold absorb-
ers of an x-ray mask. (From Bley, P., W. Menz, W. Bacher, 
K. Feit, M. Harmening, H. Hein, J. Mohr, W. K. Schomburg, 
and W. Stark. 1991. Proc. 1991 Int. MicroProcess Conf. 
J. Appl. Phys. JJAP Series 5, p. 384, Japan, Tokyo. With 
permission.39)

[Page 611]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   611
with magnetron sputtering. The thin layer of 
titanium is an excellent etch mask for the polyimide; 
in optimized oxygen plasma, the titanium etches 
300 times slower than the polyimide. To structure 
the thin titanium layer itself, a 0.1-µm-thick optical 
resist is used. Because this top resist layer is so 
thin, excellent lateral tolerances result. The thin Ti 
layer is patterned with optical photolithography 
and etched in argon plasma. After etching the thin 
titanium layer, exposing the polyimide locally, 
oxygen plasma helps to structure the polyimide 
down to the titanium or beryllium membrane. 
Lateral dimensions of 0.3 µm can be obtained in 
this fashion. Patterning the top resist layer with an 
e-beam increases the accuracy of the three-level 
resist method even further. Electrodeposition of 
gold on the titanium or beryllium membrane and 
stripping of the resist finish the process of making 
the intermediate LIGA mask. To make a master 
mask, this intermediate mask is printed by x-ray 
radiation onto a PMMA resist-coated master mask. 
The PMMA thickness corresponds to a bit more 
than the desired absorber thickness. Because the 
resist layer thickness is in the 10–20-µm range, a 
synchrotron x-ray wavelength of 10 Å is adequate 
for making the master mask. A further improvement 
in LIGA mask making is to fabricate intermediate 
and master mask on the same substrate, greatly 
reducing the risk for deviations in dimensions 
caused, for example, by temperature variations 
during printing.43 The ultimate achievement would 
be to create a one-step process to make the master 
mask. Along this line, Hein et al.38 investigated the 
direct patterning of 10-µm-high resist layers with a 
100-kV e-beam.
Stepped Absorber In principle, stepped absorber 
structures may result in stepped LIGA structures 
by means of x-ray lithography with a single mask. 
In this manner, variable dose depositions can be 
achieved at the same resist heights. The variable dose 
results in different molecular weights and hence 
in a different developing behavior. This technique 
unfortunately leads to rounded features and poor 
step-height control. Further below under “Stepped 
and Slanted Microstructures” we will learn how to 
make better resolved stepped features.
CNC Machined Absorbers A rather unexpected 
approach to pattern absorber layers for x-ray mask-
ing is pursued by Friedrich et al. from the Michigan 
Technological University (http://www.me.mtu.edu/ 
∼microweb). Friedrich et al. are exploring x-ray mask 
fabrication by traditional machining methods, such 
as micromilling, micro-EDM, and lasers.44 Using 
micromilling, this group succeeded in making mask 
features up to 62 µm deep and walls down to 4 µm 
thick and 10 µm high. The milling is carried out 
with a 22-µm end mill, fabricated itself by using a 
20-keV gallium ion beam. The advantages of this 
approach are rapid turnaround (less than 1 day/
mask), low cost, and flexibility (almost any type of 
material can be machined) because no intermediate 
steps interfere. Disadvantages are less dimensional 
edge acuity and nonsharp interior corners, as well as 
much lower absolute tolerance.
Alignment of X-Ray Mask to Substrate
The mask and resist-coated substrate must be prop-
erly registered to each other before they are put in 
an x-ray scanner. Alignment of an x-ray mask to the 
substrate is problematic because no visible light can 
pass through most x-ray membranes. To solve this 
problem, Schomburg et al.37 etched windows in their 
Ti x-ray membrane. Diamond membranes have  a 
potential advantage here because they are optically 
transparent and enable easy alignment for multiple 
irradiations without a need for etched holes.
Figure 10.20 illustrates an alternative, x-ray align-
ment system involving capacitive pickup between 
conductive metal fingers on the mask and ridges 
on a small substrate area; Si, in this case [US Patent 
4,607,213 (1986) and 4,654,581 (1987)]. When using 
FIGURE 10.20 Mask alignment system in x-ray lithogra-
phy. Conductive fingers on the mask and ridges on the Si 
are used for alignment. [From US Patents 4,654,581 (1987) 
and 4,607,213 (1986).]

[Page 612]
612   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
multiple groups of ridges and fingers, two-axis lat-
eral and rotational alignment become possible.
Another alternative may involve liquid nitrogen-
cooled Si (Li) x-ray diodes as alignment detectors, 
eliminating the need for observation with visible 
light.45
Conformal, Transfer, or Self-Aligned Mask 
for High-Aspect-Ratio Microlithography
Vladimirsky et al.46,47 developed a procedure to 
eliminate the need for an x-ray mask membrane. 
Unlike conventional masks, the so-called x-ray transfer 
mask does not treat a mask as an independent unit. The 
technique is based on forming an absorber pattern 
directly on the resist surface forming a conformal, 
self-aligned, or transfer mask. An example process 
is shown in Figure 10.21. In this sequence, a transfer 
mask plating base is first prepared on the PMMA 
substrate plate by evaporating 70 Å of chromium (as 
adhesion layer) followed by 500 Å of gold using an 
e-beam evaporator. A 3-µm-thick layer of standard 
Novolak-based AZ-type resist S1400-37 (Shipley 
Co., Marlborough, MA) is then applied over the 
plating base and exposed in contact mode through 
an optical mask using an UV exposure station. Three 
micrometers of electroplated gold on the exposed 
plating base further completes the transfer mask. 
A blanket exposure and subsequent development 
remove the remaining resist. The 500 Å of gold plating 
base is dissolved by a dip of 20–30 s in a solution 
of KI (5%) and I (1.25%) in water; the Cr adhesion 
layer is removed by a standard chromium etch 
(from KTI, Chemicals Inc., Sunnyvale, CA). Thus, 
fabrication of the transfer mask can be performed 
using standard lithography equipment available at 
almost any lithography shop. Depending on the 
resolution required, the x-ray transfer mask can be 
fabricated using known photon, e-beam, or x-ray 
lithography techniques. The patterning of the PMMA 
resist with a self-aligned mask is accomplished in 
multiple steps of exposure and development. An 
example of a cylindrical resonator made this way is 
shown in Figure 10.22. Each exposure/development 
step involves an exposure dose of about 8–12 
J/cm2. Subsequent 5-min development steps remove 
∼30 µm of PMMA. In seven steps, a self-supporting, 
1.5-mm-thick PMMA resist is patterned to a depth 
FIGURE 10.21 Sample transfer mask formation. [From 
Vladimirsky, Y., O. Vladimirsky, V. Saile, K. Morris, and J. 
M. Klopf. 1995. Microlithography ’95 (Proceedings of the 
SPIE). Santa Clara, CA: SPIE.46]
FIGURE 10.22 SEM micrograph of a cylindrical PMMA 
resonator made by the transfer mask method and 
multiple exposure/development steps. [From Vladimirsky, 
Y., O. Vladimirsky, V. Saile, K. Morris, and J. M. Klopf. 
1995. Microlithography ’95 (Proceedings of the SPIE). 
Santa Clara, CA: SPIE. With permission.46] (Courtesy of 
Dr. V. Saile.)

[Page 613]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   613
of more than 200 µm. The resist pattern shown in 
Figure 10.22 is 230 µm thick and exhibits a 2-µm 
gap between the inner cylinder and the pickup 
electrodes (aspect ratio is 100:1). The resonator 
pattern was produced using soft x-rays (=10 Å) and a 
3-µm-thick Au absorber only.
Vladimirsky et al.46 suggest that the forming of 
the transfer mask directly on the sample surface cre-
ates several additional new opportunities; besides 
in situ development, etching, and deposition, these 
include exposure of samples with curved surfaces 
and dynamic deformation of a sample surface dur-
ing the exposure (hemispherical structures for lenses 
are possible this way). Elegant and cost-saving inno-
vations like these could help mainstream LIGA.
Shih et al.48 further developed and fine-tuned 
the conformal mask method for LIGA. In one very 
attractive embodiment of the technology, a PMMA 
layer on an Al substrate is coated with a Cu foil 
(17.5 µm) by cold pressing. The copper foil is further 
laminated with a dry photoresist foil (48-µm Hitachi 
H-N650). After exposure and development of the 
dry resist, gold or tin/lead absorber patterns are elec-
troplated on the exposed Cu foil. After stripping the 
dry resist in a 3 wt% NaOH solution at around 50°C 
and the underlying copper foil in a Cu(NH3)4Cl2 
solution at 45°C, the conformal mask is ready for 
use. Using this approach, 1000-µm-high structures 
with an aspect ratio of 6.25 were fabricated with a 
double-exposure development cycle only. Using yet 
another transfer mask approach, this same research 
group made LIGA dies for spinnerets (see Example 
10.1).49 The authors summarize the advantages of 
the transfer mask method as follows:
 
◾Alleviates the difficulty in fabricating fragile 
mask membranes
 
◾Avoids alignment requirements during succes-
sive exposure steps
 
◾Reduces exposure time and absorber thickness 
for the same exposure source
 
◾Enhances pattern transfer fidelity because there 
is almost no proximity gap
 
◾Avoids thermal deformation caused by expo-
sure heat
 
◾Increases photoresist development rate by step-
wise elevated exposure dose
Choice of Primary Substrate
In the LIGA process, the primary substrate, or base 
plate, must be a conductor or an insulator coated 
with a conductive top layer. A conductor is required 
for subsequent electrodeposition. Some examples 
of primary substrates that have been used success-
fully are Al,48 austenite steel plate, Si wafers with a 
thin Ti or Ag/Cr top layer,50 and copper plated with 
gold, titanium, or nickel.43 Other metal substrates 
and metal-plated ceramic, plastic, and glass plates 
have been used.51 It is important that the plating 
base provide good adhesion for the resist. For that 
purpose, before applying the x-ray resist on cop-
per or steel, the surface sometimes is mechanically 
roughened by microgrit blasting with corundum. 
Microgrit blasting may lead to an average roughness, 
Ra, of 0.5 µm, resulting in better physical anchoring 
of the microstructures to the substrate.52 In the case 
of a polished metal base, chemical precondition-
ing may be used to improve adhesion of the resist 
microstructures. During chemical preconditioning, 
a titanium layer, sputter-deposited onto the polished 
metal base plate (e.g., a Cu plate), is oxidized for a 
few minutes in a solution of 0.5 M NaOH and 0.2 
M H2O2 at 65°C. The oxide produced typically mea-
sures 30 nm thick and exhibits a microrough surface 
instrumental to securing resist to the base plate. The 
Ti adhesion layer may further be covered with a thin 
nickel seed layer (∼150 Å) for electroless or electro-
plating of nickel. When using a highly polished Si 
surface, adhesion promoters need to be added to the 
resist resin (see “Resist Adhesion” further below). 
A substrate of special interest is a processed silicon 
wafer with integrated circuits (ICs). Integrating the 
LIGA process with IC circuitry on the same wafer 
will open up additional LIGA applications (see text 
below and Figure 10.39).
The back of electrodeposited microdevices is 
attached to the primary substrate but can be removed 
from the substrate if necessary. In the latter case, the 
substrate may be treated chemically or electrochemi-
cally to induce poor adhesion. Ideally, excellent adhe-
sion exists between substrate and resist, and poor 
adhesion exists between the electroplated structure 
and plating base. Achieving these two contradictory 
demands is one of the main challenges in LIGA.

[Page 614]
614   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Thick resist plates can act as plastic substrates them-
selves. For example, using 20,000-eV rather than the 
more typical 3,000-eV radiation, Guckel et  al.40,41 
exposed plates of PMMA up to 10 cm thick.
Resist Requirements
An x-ray resist ideally should have high sensitivity 
to x-rays, high resolution, resistance to dry and wet 
etching, thermal stability of greater than 140°C, and 
a matrix or resin absorption of less than 0.35 µm–1 
at the wavelength of interest.53 These requirements 
are only those for IC production with x-ray lithog-
raphy.54 To produce high-aspect-ratio microstruc-
tures with very tight lateral tolerances demands an 
additional set of requirements. The unexposed resist 
must be absolutely insoluble during development. 
This means that a high contrast (γ) is required. The 
resist must also exhibit very good adhesion to the 
substrate and be compatible with the electroform-
ing process. The latter imposes a resist glass transi-
tion temperature (Tg) greater than the temperature 
of the electrolyte bath used to electrodeposit metals 
between the resist features remaining after devel-
opment (e.g., at 60°C). To avoid mechanical dam-
age to the microstructures induced by stress during 
development, the resist layers should exhibit low 
internal stresses.55 If the resist structure is the end 
product of the fabrication process, further specifica-
tions depend on the application itself, for example, 
optical transparency and refractive index for opti-
cal components or large mechanical yield strength 
for load-bearing applications. For example, PMMA 
exhibits good optical properties in the visible and 
near-infrared range and lends itself to the making of 
all types of optical components.56 Because of excel-
lent contrast and good process stability known from 
e-beam lithography, PMMA is the preferred resist for 
deep-etch synchrotron radiation lithography. Two 
major concerns with PMMA as a LIGA resist are a 
rather low lithographic sensitivity of about 2 J/cm2 
at a wavelength λc of 8.34 Å and susceptibility to 
stress cracking. For example, even at shorter wave-
lengths, λc = 5 Å, more than 90 min of irradiation 
are required to structure a 500-µm-thick resist layer 
with an average ring storage current of 40 mA and 
a power consumption of 2 MW at the 2.3-GeV ELSA 
synchrotron (Bonn, Germany) (see Figure 10.18).57 
The internal stress arising from the combination of 
a polymer and a metallic substrate can cause crack-
ing in the microstructures during development, a 
phenomenon PMMA is especially prone to, as illus-
trated in the scanning electron microscope (SEM) in 
Figure 10.23.
To make throughput for deep-etch lithography 
more acceptable to industry, several avenues to 
more sensitive x-ray resists have been pursued. For 
example, copolymers of PMMA were investigated: 
methylmethacrylate (MMA) combined with metha-
crylates with longer ester side chains show sen-
sitivity increases of up to 32% (with tertiary 
butylmethacrylate). Unfortunately, a deterioration 
in structure quality was observed.59 Among the 
other possible approaches for making PMMA more 
x-ray sensitive, we can count on the incorporation 
of x-ray-absorbing high-atomic-number atoms or 
the use of chemically amplified photoresists. X-ray 
resists explored more recently for LIGA applications 
are poly(lactides), for example, poly(lactide-co-
glycolide) (PLG), polymethacrylimide (PMI), poly-
oxymethylene (POM), and polyalkensulfone (PAS). 
PLG is a new positive resist developed by BASF AG, 
more sensitive to x-rays by a factor of two to three 
compared with PMMA. From the comparison of 
different resists for deep x-ray lithography in Table 
10.12, PLG emerges as the most promising LIGA 
FIGURE 10.23 Cracking of PMMA resist. Method to test 
stress in thick resist layers. The onset of cracks in a pat-
tern of holes with varying size (e.g., 1–4 µm) in a resist is 
shifted toward smaller hole diameter the lower the stress 
in the film. The SEM picture displays extensive cracking 
incurred during development of the image in a 5-µm-
thick PMMA layer on an Au-covered Si wafer. The 5-µm-
thick PMMA layer resulted from five separate spin coats. 
Annealing pushed the onset of cracking toward smaller 
holes until the right cycle was reached and no more cracks 
were visible. (From Madou, M. J., and M. Murphy. 1995. 
Unpublished results.58)

[Page 615]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   615
resist. POM, a promising mechanical material, may 
also be suited for medical applications given its 
biocompatibility. All the resists shown in Table 10.12 
exhibit significantly enhanced sensitivity compared 
with PMMA, and most exhibit a reduced stress 
corrosion.57 Negative x-ray resists have inherently 
higher sensitivities compared with positive x-ray 
resists, although their resolution is limited by swell-
ing. Poly(glycidyl methacrylate-co-ethyl acrylate) 
(PGMA), a negative e-beam resist (not shown in 
Table 10.12), has also been used in x-ray lithography. 
In general, resist materials sensitive to e-beam 
exposure also display sensitivity to x-rays and 
function in the same fashion; materials positive in 
tone for e-beam radiation typically are also positive 
in tone for x-ray radiation. A strong correlation exists 
between the resist sensitivities observed with these 
two radiation sources, suggesting that the reaction 
mechanisms might be similar for both types of 
irradiation. IMM, in Germany, started developing 
a negative x-ray resist 20 times more sensitive than 
PMMA, but the exact chemistry has not yet been 
disclosed.2 More common x-ray resists from the IC 
industry are reviewed in Table 10.13.
Methods of X-Ray Resist Application
Multiple Spin Coats
Different methods to apply ultrathick layers of x-ray 
resists such as PMMA have been studied. In the case 
of multilayer spin coating, high interfacial stresses 
between the layers can lead to extensive crack prop-
agation on developing the exposed resist. For exam-
ple, in Figure 10.23, we present an SEM picture of a 
5-µm-thick PMMA layer deposited in five sequential 
spin coatings. Development results in the cracked 
riverbed mud appearance, with the most intensive 
cracking propagating from the smallest resist fea-
tures. The test pattern used to expose the resist con-
sisted of arrays of holes ranging in size from 1–4 
µm. Annealing the PMMA films shifted the cracking 
toward holes with smaller diameter compared with 
the unannealed film shown in Figure 10.23.58 CAMD 
(see Table 10.8) has demonstrated that multiple spin 
coating of PMMA can be used for up to 15-µm-thick 
resist layers and that applying the appropriate anneal-
ing and developer (see below) eliminates cracking.62 
Below, we will learn that a prerequisite for low stress 
and small lateral tolerances in PMMA films is a 
high mean molecular weight. The spin-coated resist 
films in Figure 10.23 do not have a high-enough 
molecular weight to lead to good enough selectivity 
between radiated and nonradiated PMMA during a 
long development process.
Commercial PMMA Sheets
High-molecular-weight PMMA is commercially avail-
able as prefabricated plate (e.g., GS 233, Rohm GmbH, 
Darmstadt, Germany), and several groups have used 
freestanding or bonded PMMA resist sheets for pro-
ducing LIGA structures.42,52 After over coming the ini-
tial problems encountered when attempting to glue 
PMMA foils to a metallic base plate with adhesives, 
this has become the preferred method in several 
labs.52 Guckel used commercially available thick 
PMMA sheets (thickness >3 mm), XY-sized and 
TABLE 10.12 Properties of Resists for Deep X-Ray 
Lithography
PMMA
POM
PAS
PMI
PLG
Sensitivity
−
+
++
0
0
Resolution
++
0
−−
+
++
Sidewall 
smoothness
++
−−
−−
+
++
Stress 
corrosion
−
++
+
−−
++
Adhesion on 
substrate
+
+
+
−
+
Source: Ehrfeld, 
W. 
1994. 
Notes 
from 
handouts. 
The 
Commercialization of Microsystems. September 11–16, 
Banff Conference Center, Banff, Canada.60
++, excellent; +, good; 0, reasonable; −, bad; −−, very bad.
TABLE 10.13 Few Common Resists for E-Beam and 
X-Ray Lithography
Resist
Tone
EBL Sens 
(μC/cm2)
EBL 
Contrast
XRL Sens 
(mJ/cm2)
XRL 
Contrast
PMMA
+
100
2.0
6500
2.0
PBS
+
1
2.0
170
1.3
EBR-9
+
1.2
3.0
Ray-PF
+
125
*
COP
−
0.5
0.8
100
1.1
GMCIA
7.0
1.7
DCOPA
−
14
1.0
Novakak 
based
*
200–500
2–3
750–2000
∼2
Source: Campbell, S. A. 1996. The science and engineering of micro-
electronic fabrication. New York: Oxford University Press.61
*Value is process-dependent.

[Page 616]
616   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
solvent-bonded them to a substrate, and, after mill-
ing the sheet to the desired thickness, exposed the 
resist plate without cracking problems.42
Casting of PMMA
PMMA also can be purchased in the form of a casting 
resin, for example, Plexit 60 (PMMA without added 
cross-linker) and Plexit 74 (PMMA with cross-linker 
added) from Rohm GmbH. In a typical procedure, 
PMMA is in situ polymerized from a solution of 
35 wt% PMMA of a mean molecular weight of any-
where from 100,000 g/mol up to 106 g/mol in meth-
ylmethacrylate (MMA). Polymerization at room 
temperature takes place with benzoyl peroxide 
(BPO) catalyst as the hardener (radical builder) and 
dimethylaniline (DMA) as the starter or initiator.52,59 
The oxygen content in the resin, inhibiting polym-
erization, and gas bubbles, inducing mechanical 
defects, are reduced by degassing while mixing the 
components in a vacuum chamber at room tempera-
ture and at a pressure of 100 mbar for 2–3 min.
In a practical application, resin is dispensed on a 
base plate provided with shims to define pattern and 
thickness and subsequently covered with a glass plate 
to avoid oxygen absorption. Because of the hardener, 
polymerization starts within a few minutes after 
mixing the components and comes to an end within 
5 min. The glass cover plate is coated with an adhe-
sion-preventing layer (e.g., Lusin L39, Firma Lange u. 
Seidel, Nuremberg, Germany). After  polymerization, 
the antiadhesion material is re moved by diamond 
milling, and a highly polished surface results. In situ 
polymerization and commercial-cast PMMA sheets 
top the list of thick resist options in LIGA today.
Plasma polymerization of PMMA in layers 
(>100 µm) was discussed in Chapters 7 and 8 (see 
Figure 8.9).
Resist Adhesion
Adhesion promotion by mechanically or chemically 
modifying the primary substrate was introduced 
above, under “Choice of Primary Substrate.” Smooth 
surfaces such as Si wafers with an average roughness, 
Ra, smaller than 20 nm pose additional adhesion 
challenges often solved by modifying the resist itself. 
To promote adhesion of resist to polished untreated 
surfaces, such as metal-coated Si wafers, coupling 
agents must be used to chemically attach the resist to 
the substrate. An example of such a coupling agent 
is methacryloxypropyl trimethoxy silane (MEMO). 
With 1 wt% of MEMO added to the casting resin, 
excellent adhesion results. The adherence is brought 
about by a siloxane bond between the silane and the 
hydrolyzed oxide layer of the metal. As illustrated in 
Polymerization
PMMA layer
Oxid layer
Oxid layer
Metal
Metal
Hydrolysis
Condensation
H2O
OH
H2O
OH
H2O
OH
CH3
X
CH2
CH2
X
(CH2)3
Si
OCH3
OCH3
OCH3
Methyl
methacrylate
Methacryl
oxypropyl
trimethoxy-
silane
X
O
CO
C(CH3)
X
(CH2)3
Si
O
O
O
X
(CH2)3
Si
O
O
X
(CH2)3
Si
O
O
FIGURE 10.24 Schematic presentation of the adherence mechanism of methacryloxypropyl trimethoxy silane (MEMO). 
(From Mohr, J., W. Ehrfeld, and D. Munchmeyer. 1988. Requirements on resist layers in deep-etch synchrotron radiation 
lithography. J Vac Sci Technol B6:2264–67. With permission.59)

[Page 617]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   617
Figure 10.24, the integration of this coupling agent 
in the polymer matrix is achieved via the double 
bond of the methacryl group of MEMO.59
Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) can improve 
PMMA adhesion to smooth surfaces, but higher 
concentrations are needed to obtain the same adhe-
sion improvement. Silanization of polished surfaces 
before PMMA casting, instead of adding adhesion 
promoters to the resin, did not seem to improve 
the PMMA adhesion. In the case of PMMA sheets, 
as mentioned before, one option is solvent bond-
ing of the layers to a substrate. In another approach, 
Galhotra et al.63 simply mechanically clamped the 
exposed and developed self-supporting PMMA 
sheet onto a 1.0-mm-thick Ni sheet for subsequent 
Ni plating. Rogers et al.64 have shown that cyano-
acrylate can be used to bond PMMA resist sheets 
to a Ni substrate and that it can be lithographically 
patterned using the same process sequence used to 
pattern PMMA. For a 300-µm-thick PMMA sheet on 
a sputtered Ni coating on a silicon wafer, a 10-µm-
thick cyanoacrylate bonding layer was used. Such a 
thick cyanoacrylate layer caused some problems for 
subsequent uniform electrodeposition of metal. The 
dissolution rate of the cyanoacrylate is faster than 
the PMMA resist, resulting in metal posts with a 
wide profile at the base.
Stress-Induced Cracks in PMMA
The internal stress arising from the combination of 
a polymer on a metallic substrate can cause crack-
ing in the microstructures during development. 
To reduce the number of stress-induced cracks 
(see Figure 10.23), both the PMMA resist and the 
development process must be optimized. Detailed 
measurements of the heat of reaction, the thermo-
mechanical properties, the residual monomer con-
tent, and the molecular weight distribution during 
polymerization and soft baking have shown the 
necessity to produce resist layers with a high molec-
ular weight and with only a very small residual 
monomer content.52,59 Figure 10.25 compares the 
molecular weight distribution determined by gel per-
meation chromatography of a polymerized PMMA 
resist (two hardener concentrations were used) with 
the molecular weight distribution of the casting 
resin. The casting resin is unimodal, whereas the 
polymerized resist layer typically shows a bimodal 
distribution, with peak molecular weights centered 
around 90,000 and 300,000 g/mol. The first low-
 molecular-weight peak belongs to the PMMA oli-
gomer dissolved in the casting resin, and the second 
molecular-weight peak results from the polymeriza-
tion of the monomer. The molecular weight distri-
bution is constant across the total resist thickness, 
except for the boundary layer at the base plate, where 
the average molecular weight can be significantly 
higher (∼450,000 g/mol).55
The amount of the high-molecular-weight portion 
in the polymerized resist depends on the concentra-
tion of the hardener. A low hardener content leads to 
a high-molecular-weight dominance and vice versa 
(see Figure 10.25).59 Because high molecular weight 
is required for low stress, a hardener concentration of 
Molecular weight (g/mol)
103
104
105
106
107
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Resin
Polymer
(0.25% BPO)
Polymer
(1.5% BPO)
Intensity
Intensity
Intensity
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 10.25 Molecular weight distribution of the 
casting resin (a), a resist layer polymerized at low 
hardener content (b), and a resist layer polymerized at 
high hardener content (c) determined by gel permeation 
chromatography. (From Mohr, J., W. Ehrfeld, and D. 
Munchmeyer. 1988. Requirements on resist layers in deep-
etch synchrotron radiation lithography. J Vac Sci Technol 
B6:2264–67. With permission.59)

[Page 618]
618   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
less than 1% BPO must be used. Ideally, for a low stress 
resist, the residual monomer content should be less 
than 0.5%. The residual monomer content decreases 
with increasing hardener content, and > 1% BPO is 
needed to reduce the residual monomer content to 
less than 0.5%. The problem resulting from these 
opposite needs can be overcome by the addition of 
1% of a cross-linking dimethacrylate (triethylene gly-
col dimethacrylate) to the resin. In such cross-linked 
PMMA, a smaller amount of BPO suffices to suppress 
the residual monomer content; crack-free PMMA can 
be obtained with 0.8% of BPO.52
For solvent removal, and to further minimize the 
defects caused by stress, the polymerized resin is 
cured at 110°C for 1 h (soft bake). The measurement of 
the reaction enthalpy shows that postpolymerization 
reactions occur at room temperature and during 
heating to the glass transition temperature.59 The rate 
of heating up to that temperature is 20°C/h; after 
curing, the samples are cooled down from 110°C to 
room temperature at a very low rate of 5–10°C/h.52, 55 
The soft-bake temperature is slightly below the glass 
transition temperature measured to be 115°C.
Another important factor that reduces stress in 
thick PMMA resist layers is the optimization of the 
developer. Stress-induced cracking can be minimized 
with solvent mixtures whose dissolution parameters 
lie near the boundary of the PMMA solubility 
range; that is, a nonaggressive solvent is preferred. 
This is discussed in more detail below under 
“Development.” Small amounts of additives such 
as described above for reducing stress or to promote 
adhesion do not influence the mechanical stability of 
the microstructures or the sensitivity of the resist.
Exposure
Optimum Wavelength
For a given polymer, the lateral dimension variation 
in a LIGA microstructure could, in principle, result 
from the combined influence of several mechanisms. 
These include Fresnel diffraction, the range of high-
energy photoelectrons generated by the x-rays, the 
finite divergence of synchrotron radiation, and 
the time evolution of the resist profiles during the 
development process. The theoretical manufacturing 
precision obtainable by deep x-ray lithography was 
investigated by means of computer simulation of 
both the irradiation step and the development step 
by Becker et al.65 and Munchmeyer.66 Results were 
further tested experimentally and confirmed by Mohr 
et al.52 The theoretical results demonstrate that the 
effect of Fresnel diffraction (edge diffraction), which 
increases as the wavelength increases, and the effect 
of secondary electrons in PMMA, which increases as 
the wavelength decreases, lead to minimal structural 
deviations when the characteristic wavelength 
ranges between 0.2 and 0.3 nm (assuming an ideal 
development process and no x-ray divergence). To 
fully use the accuracy potential of a 0.2–0.3-nm 
wavelength, the local divergence of the synchrotron 
radiation at the sample site should be less than 0.1 
mrad. Under these conditions, the variation in critical 
lateral dimensions likely to occur between the ends 
of a 500-µm-high structure as a result of diffraction 
and secondary electrons is estimated to be 0.2 µm. 
The estimated Fresnel diffraction and secondary 
electron scattering effects are shown as a function of 
characteristic wavelength in Figure 10.26.
Using cross-linked PMMA, or linear PMMA with 
a unimodal and extremely high-molecular-weight 
distribution (peak molecular weight greater than 1 
million g/mol), the experimentally determined lat-
eral tolerances on a test structure, as shown in Figure 
7.27, are 0.055 µm/100-µm resist thickness, in good 
agreement with the 0.2 µm over 500 µm expected 
Photo-
electrons
1,0
0,1
0,01
Sum
Fresnel
diﬀraction
Characteristic wavelength [nm]
∆ W [µm]
∆w
0,01                      0,1                  
  1,0 
          10,0
FIGURE 10.26 Fresnel diffraction and photoelectron 
generation as a function of characteristic wavelength, 
λc, and the resulting lateral dimension variation (∆W). 
(From Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. Mikrosystemtechnik fur 
Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: VCH Publishers.67)

[Page 619]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   619
on a theoretical basis.52 These results are obtained 
only when a resist/developer system with a ratio of 
the dissolution rates in the exposed and unexposed 
areas of approximately 1000 is used.
The use of resist layers, not cross-linked and dis-
playing a relatively low bimodal molecular-weight 
distribution, as well as the application of excessively 
strong solvents such as used to develop thin PMMA 
resist layers in the IC industry, leads to a more pro-
nounced conical shape in the test structure of Figure 
10.23. An illustration of the effect of molecular 
weight distribution on lateral geometric tolerances 
is that linear PMMA with a peak molecular weight 
less than 300,000 g/mol shows structure tolerances 
of up to 0.15 µm/100 µm.52 To obtain the best toler-
ances requires a PMMA with a very high molecu-
lar weight, also a prerequisite for low stress in the 
developed resist. Finally, if the synchrotron beam 
is not parallel to the absorber wall but at an angle 
greater than 50 mrad, greater coning angles may 
also result.52
Deposited Dose
As shown in Figure 10.28, depicting the average 
molecular weight of PMMA as a function of radiation 
dose, the x-ray irradiation of PMMA reduces the 
average molecular weight (Mn′ , see Chapter 1, Equa-
tion 1.10).67 For one-component positive resists, this 
decrease of the average molecular weight causes the 
solubility of the resist in the developer to increase 
dramatically. The average molecular weight making 
dissolution possible is a sensitive function of the 
type of developer used and the development tem-
perature. It can be observed from Figure 10.28 that 
above a certain dose (15–20 kJ/cm3), the average 
molecular weight does not decrease any further.
The molecular weight distribution, measured after 
resist exposure, is unimodal with peak molecular 
weights ranging from 3,000–18,000 g/mol, depend-
ent on the dose deposited during irradiation. The 
peak molecular weight increases nearly linearly 
with increasing resist depth; that is, decrease of the 
absorbed dose.55 At the bottom of the resist layer, the 
absorbed dose must be higher than the development 
dose, Ddv, whereas at the top of the resist, the 
absorbed dose must be lower than the damaging 
dose, Ddm. In Figure 10.18, where the absorption 
of x-rays along the path from source to sample was 
illustrated, the exposure time and the preabsorber 
were chosen so that the bottom of a 500-µm-thick 
PMMA layer received the necessary development 
dose Ddv, whereas the dose at the top of the layer 
stayed well below Ddm. Exposure of PMMA with 
longer wavelengths results in correspondingly longer 
exposure times and can lead to an overexposure of 
the top surface, where the lower energy radiation is 
mainly absorbed.
FIGURE 10.27 Structural tolerances. (a) SEM micro-
graph of a test structure to determine conical shape. 
(b) Structural dimensions as a function of structure height. 
The tolerances of the dimensions are within 0.2 mm over 
the total structure height of 400 mm. (From Mohr, J., W. 
Ehrfeld, and D. Munchmeyer. 1988. Requirements on resist 
layers in deep-etch synchrotron radiation lithography. 
J Vac Sci Technol B6:2264–67.59) (Courtesy of the Karlsruhe 
Nuclear Research Center.)
103
104
105
106
Dose [kJ/cm3]
Average molecular weight
Mn [g/mol]
0                        5                     10                      15                   20
*
FIGURE 10.28 Average molecular weight M*n versus 
x-ray radiation dose. (From Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. 
Mikrosystemtechnik fur Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: 
VCH Publishers. With permission.67)

[Page 620]
620   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Menz and Bley67 describe the influence of the 
radiation dose on the quality of the resulting LIGA 
structures in a slightly different manner. Following 
their approach, Figure 10.29a illustrates a typical 
bimodal molecular weight distribution of PMMA 
before radiation, exhibiting an average molecu-
lar weight of 600,000. The gray region in this fig-
ure indicates the molecular weight region where 
PMMA readily dissolves; that is, less than the 20,000 
g/mol level for the temperature and developer used. 
Because the fraction of PMMA with a 20,000 molec-
ular weight is very small in nonirradiated PMMA, 
the developer hardly attacks the resist. After irradia-
tion with a dose Ddv of 4 kJ/cm3, the average molecu-
lar weight becomes low enough to dissolve almost 
all the resist (Figure 10.29b). With a dose Ddm of 
20 kJ/cm3, all the PMMA dissolves swiftly (Figure 
10.29c). At a dose more than Ddm, the microstruc-
tures are destroyed by the formation of bubbles. It 
follows that to dissolve PMMA completely and to 
make defect-free microstructures, the radiation dose 
for the specific type of PMMA used must lie between 
4 and 20 kJ/cm3. These two numbers also lock in a 
maximum value of five for the ratio of the radiation 
dose at the top and bottom of a PMMA structure. To 
make this ratio as small as possible, the soft portion 
of the synchrotron radiation spectrum is usually fil-
tered out by a preabsorber [for example, a 100-µm-
thick polyimide foil (Kapton)] to reduce differences 
in dose deposition in the resist.
X-ray exposure equipment developed by KfK has 
vibration-free bedding; the exposure chamber is 
under thermostatic control (±0.2°C) and includes 
a precision scanner for the periodic movement 
of the sample through the irradiation plane. The 
polyimide window isolates the vacuum of the 
accelerator from the helium atmosphere (200 mbar), 
which serves as coolant for substrate and mask in 
the irradiation chamber.43 IMM, in collaboration 
with Jenoptik GmbH, developed an x-ray scanner 
for deep lithography, enabling irradiation of up to 
1000-µm-thick resists. A mask-to-resist registration 
within ±0.3 µm is claimed.68
Stepped and Slanted Microstructures
For many applications, stepped or inclined resist 
sidewalls are very useful—consider, for example, the 
fabrication of multilevel devices or prisms or, more 
basic yet, angled resist walls to facilitate the release 
of molded part.* Using stepped absorber layers on 
a single mask to make stepped multilevel micro-
structures was discussed above under “Absorber 
Fabrication” (see also the discussion in Chapter 2 
and Figure 2.11). We mentioned that structures made 
this way are not always very well resolved. To make 
better-resolved stepped features one can first relief 
print a PMMA layer, for example, by using a Ni mold 
insert made from a first x-ray mask. Subsequently, the 
relief structure may be exposed to synchrotron radi-
ation to further pattern the polymer layer through 
a precisely adjusted second x-ray mask. To carry out 
this process, a two-layer resist system needs to be 
developed consisting of a top PMMA layer, which 
* In using LIGA or LIGA-like techniques for plastic micromolding it is 
important to be able to control the resist wall inclination to facilitate 
the release of molded devices. Even a 2° angle can make the differ-
ence between form locking or easy release.
0
0,4
0,8
1,2
0
0,4
0,8
1,2
0
Molecular weight [g/mol]
0,4
0,8
1,2
Before irradiation
Dose = 4 kJ/em3
Dose = 20 kJ/em3
Average MW
= 600.000 
Average MW
= 5.700 
Average MW
= 2.800 
102
103
104
105
106
107
Rel. abundance
Rel. abundance
Rel. abundance
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
FIGURE 10.29 Molecular weight distribution of PMMA 
before (a) and after irradiation with 4 (b) to 20 kJ/cm3 (c). 
The shaded areas indicate the domain in which PMMA is 
minimally 50% dissolved (at 38°C in the LIGA developer 
described in the text). (From Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. 
Mikrosystemtechnik fur Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: 
VCH Publishers. With permission.67)

[Page 621]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   621
fulfills the requirement of the relief printing pro-
cess, and a bottom layer, which fulfills the require-
ments of the x-ray lithography.69 The bottom resist 
layer promotes high molecular weight and adhesion, 
whereas the top PMMA layer is of lower molecular 
weight and contains an internal mold-release agent. 
This process sequence combining plastic impres-
sion molding with x-ray lithography is illustrated 
in Figure 10.30. The two-step resist then facilitates 
the fabrication of a mold insert by electroforming, 
which can be used for the molding of two-step plas-
tic structures. Extremely large structural heights can 
be obtained from the additive nature of the individ-
ual microstructure levels.
There are several options to achieve miniaturized 
features with slanted walls. It is possible to modu-
late the exposure/development times of the resist, 
fabricate an inclined absorber, angle the radiation, 
or, following Tabata et al.,71 move the mask during 
exposure in so-called moving mask deep x-ray lithogra-
phy (M2DXL) (Example 10.2).
To make a slanted absorber, a slab of material 
can be etched into a wedge by pulling it at a linear 
rate out of an etchant bath. Changing the angle at 
which synchrotron radiation is incident on the 
resist, usually 90°, also enables the fabrication of 
microstructures with inclined sidewalls.72 This way, 
slanted microstructures may be produced by a sin-
gle oblique irradiation or by a swivel irradiation (see 
Figure 2.11 for an example). One potentially very 
important application of microstructures incorpo-
rating inclined sidewalls is the vertical coupling of 
light into waveguide structures using a 45° prism.73 
Such optical devices must have a wall roughness of 
less than 50 nm, making LIGA a preferred technique 
for this application. The sharp decrease of the dose 
in the resist underneath the edge of the inclined 
absorber, and the resulting sharp decrease of the dis-
solution of the resist as a function of the molecular 
weight in the developer, results in little or no devia-
tion of the inclination of the resist sidewall over the 
total height of the microstructure.
In Chapter 8, we described additional means to 
fabricate slanted and curved metal shapes using 
electrochemical and electroless plating.
Development
X-ray radiation changes the polymer in the unmasked 
areas, and chemicals etch away the regions that 
have been exposed during development. To fully 
use the accuracy potential of synchrotron radiation 
lithography, it is essential that the resist/developer 
system have a ratio of dissolution rate in the exposed 
and unexposed areas of approximately 1000 (see 
above). The developer empirically arrived at by 
KfK consists of a mixture of 20 vol% tetrahydro-
1,4-oxazine (an azine), 5 vol% 2-aminoethanol-1 
(a primary amine), 60 vol% 2-(2-butoxyethoxy)
ethanol (a glycolic ether), and 15 vol% water.52,55,74 
This developer causes an infinitely small dissolution 
of unexposed, high-molecular-weight, cross-linked 
PMMA and achieves a sufficient dissolution rate in 
the exposed area. It also exhibits much less stress-
induced cracking than developers conventionally 
used for thin PMMA resists.
Systematic investigation of different organic sol-
vents and mixtures of the above developer systems 
shows that solvents with a solubility parameter at the 
periphery of the solubility range of PMMA dissolve 
exposed PMMA slowly but selectively and without 
stress-induced cracking or swelling of unexposed 
areas. Solvents with a solubility parameter close to 
those of MMA show a much higher dissolution rate 
but cause serious problems related to cracking and 
swelling. As we have already seen, the application 
of excessively strong solvents also leads to more pro-
nounced conical shapes in the test structures shown 
in Figure 10.27. An improved developer found in 
the above systematic investigation is a mixture of 
Molding tool
Resist
Mask
Synchrotron radiation
FIGURE 10.30 Stepped microstructures. (From Mohr, 
J., C. Burbaum, P. Bley, W. Menz, and U. Wallrabe. 1990. 
Microsystem technologies 90. Ed. H. Reichl. Berlin: 
Springer. With permission.70)

[Page 622]
622   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
tetrahydro-1,4-oxazine and 2-aminoethanol-1. Its 
sensitivity is 30% higher, but the process latitude 
is much narrower compared with the developer 
described above.55
KfK has built a machine for the development 
process, enabling the continuous and homoge-
neous transport of developing and rinsing agents 
into deep structure elements and the removal of the 
dissolved resist from these structures. Several sub-
strates are arranged vertically on a rotor, with each 
structure surface facing out. During development, 
the developing agent flows toward the resist surface 
being developed, circulates, is filtered continuously, 
and the temperature remains controlled at 35°C. 
To stop development, less-concentrated developer 
solutions are applied to prevent the precipitation of 
already-dissolved resist. Three independent medium 
circuits are available for immersion and spraying 
processes.43
After development, the microstructures are rinsed 
with deionized water and dried in a vacuum. Alter-
natively, drying may be done by spinning and 
blasting with dry nitrogen. At this stage, the devices 
can be the final product, for example, as microoptical 
components, or they can be used for subsequent 
metal deposition.
Metal Deposition in LIGA and Pseudo-LIGA
Introduction
Electroplating, which is sometimes also called elec-
trodeposition, is a process in which a metal is coated 
on a conductive surface through electrochemical 
reactions that are facilitated by an applied electrical 
potential. In this process, the surface to be coated is 
immersed into a solution of one or more metal salts. 
LIGA and pseudo-LIGA depend critically on metal 
deposition to replicate the master photoresist mold. 
The additive metal deposition process was detailed 
in Volume I, Chapter 7, where we discussed the elec-
troplating of metals in high-aspect-ratio crevices, 
and in Chapter 8, this volume, where we compared 
electroless with electrodeposition and the crafting 
of slanted and curved plated metal shapes. In this 
section we add some modifications to the metal pro-
cess when applied to high-aspect-ratio resist molds 
encountered in LIGA and pseudo-LIGA.
Nickel Electrodeposition
Physical Properties of Electrodeposited Nickel 
Nickel, together with copper, is one of the most 
widely used metals in electroplating LIGA and 
pseudo-LIGA structures. A nickel sulfamate bath 
composition, optimized for Ni electrodeposition, is 
presented in Table 10.14. In addition to nickel sulfa-
mate and boric acid as a buffer, a small quantity of an 
anion-active wetting agent is usually added. Sulfur-
depolarized nickel pellets are used as anode materi-
als (sulfur-depolarized nickel has sulfur cast into it 
to aid in anode corrosion and keep the anode from 
going passive) and are held in a titanium basket.75
Table 10.14 also lists operational parameters. 
Nickel sulfamate baths produce low internal stress 
deposits without the need for additional agents, 
thus avoiding a cause for more defects. The bath is 
operated at 50–62°C and at a pH value between 3.5 
and 4.0. Metal deposition is carried out at current 
densities up to 10 A/dm2. Growth rates vary from 12 
(at 1 A/dm2) to 120 µm/h (at 10 A/dm2).
The hardness of the Ni deposits can be adjusted 
from 200–350 Vickers by varying the operating con-
ditions. Hardness decreases with increasing current 
density. To reach a high hardness of 350 Vickers, 
the electroforming must proceed at a reduced cur-
rent of 1 A/dm2. Also, for low compressive stress of 
20 N/mm2 or less, a reduced current density must be 
used. Internal stress in the Ni deposits is not only 
influenced by current density but also by the layer 
thickness, pH, temperature, and solution agitation. 
In the case of pulse plating (see below under Pulse 
Plating), pulse frequency has a distinct influence as 
well.76 From Figure 10.31 we derive that for thin Ni 
deposits the stress is high and decreases very fast as a 
function of thickness. For thick Ni deposits (>30 µm), 
TABLE 10.14 Composition and Operating Conditions 
of Nickel Sulfamate Bath
Parameter
Value
Nickel metal (as sulfamate)
76–90 g/L
Boric acid
40 g/L
Wetting agent
2–3 mL/L
Current density
1–10 A/dm2
Temperature
50–62°C
pH
3.5–4.0
Anodes
Sulfur depolarized

[Page 623]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   623
the stress as a function of thickness reaches a pla-
teau. At a current density of 10 A/dm2, these thick Ni 
films are under compressive stress; at 1 A/dm2, they 
are under tensile stress; and at 5 A/dm2, the internal 
stress reduces to practically zero. Stirring of the plat-
ing solution reduces stress dramatically, indicating 
that mass transport to the cathode is an important 
factor in determining the ultimate internal stress. 
Consequently, because high-aspect-ratio features do 
not experience the same agitation of a stirred solution 
as bigger features, this results in higher stress concen-
tration in the smallest features of the electroplated 
structure. Because the stress is most severe in the 
thinnest Ni films, Harsch et al.76 undertook a sepa-
rate study of internal stresses in 5-µm-thick Ni films. 
For three plating temperatures investigated (42°C, 
52°C, and 62°C), 5-µm-thick films  were found to 
exhibit minimal or no stress at a current density of 2 
A/dm2. At 62°C, the 5-µm-thick films show no stress 
at 2 A/dm2 and remain at a low compressive stress 
value of about 20 N/mm2 for the whole current range 
(1–10 A/dm2). The internal stress at 2 A/dm2 is mini-
mal at a pH value between 3.5 and 4.5 of a sulfamate 
electrolyte (Table 10.14). Ni concentration (between 
76 and 100 g/L) and wetting agent concentration do 
not seem to influence the internal stress. The higher 
the frequency of the pulse in pulse plating (see next 
section), the smaller the internal stress.
The long-term mechanical stability of Ni LIGA 
structures was investigated by electromagnetic acti-
vation of Ni cantilever beams by Mohr et al.77 The 
number of stress cycles, N, necessary to destroy a 
mechanical structure depends on the stress ampli-
tude, S, and is determined from fatigue curves, or 
S-N curves (applied stress on the x-axis and number 
of cycles necessary to cause breakage on the y-axis). 
Experimental results show that for Ni cantilevers 
produced by LIGA the long-term stability reaches 
the range of comparable literature data for bulk 
annealed and hardened nickel specimens. Usually, 
stress leads to crack initiation, which often starts 
at the surface of the structure. Because microstruc-
tures have a higher surface-to-volume ratio, one 
might have expected the S-N curves to differ from 
macroscopic structures, but so far this has not been 
observed. To the contrary, it seems that the smaller 
structures are more stable.
Pulse Plating
For the fabrication of microdevices with high depo-
sition rates exceeding 120 µm/h, a reduction of 
the internal Ni stress can occur only by increasing 
the temperature of the bath or by using alternative 
electrodeposition methods. Increasing the bath 
temperature is not an attractive option, but using 
alternative electrochemical deposition techniques 
deserves further exploration. For example, using 
pulsed (≥ 500 Hz) galvanic deposition instead of a 
DC method can influence several important proper-
ties of the Ni deposit. Properties such as grain size, 
purity, and porosity can be manipulated this way 
without the addition of organic additives.76 In pulse 
plating, the current pulse is characterized by three 
parameters: pulse current density, ip; pulse duration, 
td; and pulse pause, tp. These three independent 
variables determine the average current density, ia, 
which is the important parameter influencing the 
deposit quality and is given by:
 
i
t
t
t i
a
d
d
p
p
=
+
 
(10.5)
Pulse plating leads to smaller metal grain size and 
smaller porosity as a result of a higher deposition 
potential. Because each pulse pause allows some 
FIGURE 10.31 Influence of nickel layer thickness on 
internal stress. The electrolyte used is described in Table 
10.14 (pH = 4; bath temperature = 52°C). (From Harsch, S., 
W. Ehrfeld, and A. Maner. 1988. KfK report no. 4455. 
Karlsruhe, Germany: KfK.76) (Courtesy of the Karlsruhe 
Nuclear Research Center.)

[Page 624]
624   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
time for metal cation replenishment at the cathode 
(e.g., Ni2+ enrichment) and for diffusion away of 
undesirable reaction products that might otherwise 
get entrapped in the metal deposit, a cleaner metal 
deposit results. The higher the frequency of the 
pulse, the smaller the internal stress in the resulting 
metal deposit.76
Pulse plating represents only one of many emerg-
ing electrochemical plating techniques considered 
for microfabrication. For more background on 
techniques such as laser-enhanced plating, jet plat-
ing, laser-enhanced jet plating, and ultrasonically 
enhanced plating, refer to the review of Romankiw 
et al.78 and references therein.
LIGA and Pseudo-LIGA Plating Issues
Electrodeposition in High-Aspect-Ratio Resist Crev-
ices In Volume I, Chapter 7 we studied how a 
microelectrode of the same size or less than the dif-
fusion layer thickness δ could be expected to plate 
faster than a larger electrode because of the extra cur-
rent resulting from the nonlinear diffusion (Volume 
I, Equation 7.131). This turns out to be incorrect: as 
derived from Volume I, Equation 7.132, describing 
the current to a metal electrode recessed in a resist 
layer, the nonlinear diffusion contribution increases 
with decreasing radius r, but it also decreases with 
increasing resist thickness, L. High-aspect-ratio fea-
tures consequently plate slower than low-aspect-
 ratio features. Moreover, the hydrogen consumption 
accompanying cathodic reduction of the depositing 
metal in the high-aspect-ratio features causes the pH 
to locally increase. Because agitation is impossible 
in these deep crevices, an isolating layer might form 
(e.g., nickel hydroxide, in the case of Ni deposition), 
preventing further metal deposition. This all contrib-
utes to make the metal deposition rate, important 
for an economical production, much smaller than 
the rates expected from the linear diffusion model of 
current density in large, low-aspect-ratio structures.
A major cause of defects in electroplating in high-
aspect-ratio features is an incomplete wetting of the 
microchannels in the resist structure. For example, 
the contact angle between PMMA and the plating 
electrolyte at 50°C lies between 70 and 80°. Thus, 
a wetting agent is indispensable for wetting the sur-
face of the plastic structures for the electrolyte to 
penetrate into the microchannels. With a wetting 
agent, the contact angle between PMMA and the 
plating electrolyte can be reduced from 80 to 5°.76 In 
the electroforming of microdevices, a much higher 
concentration of wetting agent is necessary than in 
conventional electroplating. A dramatic illustration 
of this wetting effect can be seen in the case of plat-
ing of Ni posts, as shown in Figure 10.32. In the case 
illustrated in Figure 10.32a, where only 2.5  mL/L 
of a wetting agent is added to the sulfamate nickel 
deposition solution (see Table 10.14), nickel posts 
with a diameter of 50 µm often fail to form. In the 
same experiment, no posts with a diameter of 5 
and 10 µm form. Increasing the wetting agent con-
centration to 10 mL/L results in perfectly formed 
nickel posts with a diameter of 5 µm, as shown in 
Figure 10.32b.
Plating Compatibility Issues Two major sources of 
difficulty associated with plating of any metal struc-
ture in photoresist molds, not only the high-aspect 
ones described above, are chemical and mechanical 
incompatibility. Chemical incompatibility means 
that the photoresist mask may be attacked by the 
plating solution; mechanical incompatibility is film 
stress in the plated layer, which causes the plated 
structure to lose adhesion to the substrate.
If the plating solution attacks the photoresist even 
slightly, considerable damage to the photoresist layer 
may occur by the time a 200-µm-thick structure has 
been created. Therefore, the limiting thickness of a 
plated structure resulting from a chemical interac-
tion is dependent on both the photoresist chemistry 
and the plating bath itself. In general, the plating 
bath must have a pH in the range of ∼3–9.5 (acidic 
to mildly alkaline), a fairly wide range that can 
accommodate many of the commercially available 
photoresists. A surprising number of plating baths 
do not fall into that range, however. Baths, either 
very strongly acidic or more than mildly alkaline, 
tend to attack and destroy photoresist.
The plated structure must have extremely low 
stress to avoid cracking or peeling during the plat-
ing process. In addition, if the structure contains 
narrow features, the stress must be tensile because 
any compressive stress would result in buckling of 
the structure. The primary concern with regard to 

[Page 625]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   625
stresses is the incorporation of “brightening agents” 
into the plating solution. These can be selenium, 
arsenic, thallium, and ammonium ions, as well as 
others. The brightening materials often exhibit dif-
ferent atomic configurations and sizes compared 
with most materials that we would like to plate, such 
as Cu, Au, Ni, FeNi, Pt, Ag, and NiCo. This repre-
sents the source of a good deal of the stress intrinsic 
to the plating process. Ag and FeNi are notorious for 
their high stresses. The Ni-sulfamate bath, presently 
used extensively in LIGA, is used without brighten-
ers, leading to Ni deposits with extremely low stress. 
Electroless plating baths (see Chapter 8) also are 
a good option: these autocatalytic baths coat indis-
criminately but cause very low stress. They should 
be compatible with the LIGA process for certain 
applications, such as mold insert formation where 
significant overplating is required.
A third difficulty in finding plating baths compat-
ible with LIGA is that most plating baths are not 
intended for use in the semiconductor industry. 
Information (including normal deposition para-
meters, uniformity, stress, compatibility with various 
semiconductor processes, and particulate contam-
ination) normally supplied by a vendor is not 
available. Because the majority of the semiconductor 
industry does not incorporate these kinds of “thin 
film” processes, it may be difficult to determine 
whether a plating bath will be suitable simply from 
conversations with the vendor. In many instances, 
trial and error decide.
The treatise of electroplating in micropatterned 
resists is of importance for both micromachining 
and the IC industry. Additional reading on this topic 
is suggested (e.g., Masuko et al.,79 Dukovic,80 and 
Leyendecker et al.81).
Finishing Metal Parts and Metal Mold Inserts
Slight differences in final metal layer thickness can-
not be avoided in the electroforming process. Finish 
FIGURE 10.32 Electrodeposition of nickel posts of varying diameter. (a) Nickel posts with diameter of 50 µm. Only 
2.5 mL/L wetting agent was added to the nickel sulfamate solution. Many 50-µm posts are missing, and posts with a 
diameter of 10 or 5 µm do not even form. (b) Nickel posts with diameter of 5 µm; 10 mL/L wetting agent was added, and 
all posts developed perfectly. (Courtesy of the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center.)

[Page 626]
626   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
grinding of the metal samples with diamond paste 
is used to even out microroughness and slight varia-
tions in structural height. After finish grinding an 
electroplated LIGA or pseudo-LIGA work piece, a 
primary metal shape results from removing the pho-
toresist by ashing in oxygen plasma or stripping in 
solvent. In the case of cross-linked PMMA, the resist 
may be exposed again to synchrotron radiation, 
guaranteeing sufficient solubility before stripping.
If the metal part needs to function as a mold insert, 
metal is plated several millimeters beyond the front 
faces of the resist structures to produce a monolithic 
micromold (see Figure 10.33). In the latter case, to 
avoid damage to the mold insert when separating 
it from the plating base, an intermediate layer 
sometimes is deposited on the base plate, ensuring 
adhesion of the resist structures while facilitating the 
separation of the electroformed mold insert from its 
plating base. In addition, it helps to prevent burrs 
from forming at the front face of the mold insert 
as a result of underplating of the resist structures. 
Underplating can occur because the resist does not 
adhere well to the substrate, allowing electrolyte 
solution to penetrate between the two, or the plating 
solution might attack the substrate/resist interface. 
Finally, microcracks at the interface might contribute 
to underplating. Burrs are easily eliminated then 
by dissolving the thin auxiliary metal layer with a 
selective etchant, removing the mold without the 
need for a mechanical load. In view of the observed 
underplating problems, it is surprising that Galhotra 
et al.63 obtained good plating results by simply 
mechanically clamping the exposed and developed 
PMMA sheet to a Ni plating box.
Plating Automation
An automated galvanoforming facility used by KfK 
is shown in Figure 10.34.82 This setup includes 
provisions for on-line measurement of each elec-
trolyte constituent in flow-through cells and con-
centration corrections when tolerance limits are 
exceeded. A computer-controlled transport system 
moves the individual plating racks, holding the 
microdevice substrates, through the process stages 
whereby the substrates are degreased, rinsed, pickled, 
electroplated, and dried and are then returned to a 
magazine, which can accommodate up to seven racks. 
The facility is designed as clean-room equipment 
because contamination of the microstructures must 
be prevented.75 An instrument as described here can 
be bought, for example, from Reinhard Kissler (the 
µGLAV 750).82 Although this type of automation is 
a must for the eventual commercialization of the 
LIGA technique, it should be recognized that at 
this explanatory stage overautomatization may be 
counterproductive.
Demolding
Introduction
Even high-aspect-ratio metal structures can be 
molded and demolded with polymers easily, as 
long as a polymer with a small adhesive power and 
rubber-elastic properties, such as silicone rubber, 
is used. However, rubber-like plastics have low 
shape stability and would not be adequate. Shape-
preserving polymers, on the other hand, after 
hardening, require a mold with extremely smooth 
inner surfaces to prevent form-locking between the 
FIGURE 10.33 Fabrication of a LIGA mold insert. (From 
Hagmann, P., W. Ehrfeld, and H. Vollmer. 1987. Fabrication 
of microstructures with extreme structural heights by 
reaction injection molding. First meeting of the European 
Polymer Federation, European symposium on polymeric 
materials, pp. 241–51. Lyon, France. With permission.28)

[Page 627]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   627
mold and the hardened polymer. Mold release has a 
geometry aspect (i.e., smooth and slightly inclined 
mold walls) and a chemical aspect (i.e., mold release 
agents). A mold release agent may be required for 
demolding. Using external mold release agents is 
difficult because of the small dimensions of the 
microstructures to be molded because typically they 
are sprayed onto the mold. Consequently, internal 
mold release compounds need to be mixed with the 
polymer, hopefully without significantly changing 
the polymer characteristics.
Demolding in LIGA and LIGA-Like Applications
The demolding step in LIGA is often carried out by 
means of a clamping unit at preset temperatures and 
rates. Demolding is facilitated by slightly inclined 
FIGURE 10.34 (a) The µGALV 750 comprises the galvanoforming cell with nickel anodes and substrate carrier and an 
auxiliary tank incorporating heating and purification auxiliary equipment. Three concentration meters measure nickel 
ions, boric acid, and the concentration of the wetting agent. The concentrations are adjusted automatically by adding 
via-metering pumps. (From Reinhard Kissler, GmbH, Speyer, Germany. 1994. With permission.) (b) Schematic drawing of 
a galvanoforming unit. (From Maner, A., S. Harsch, and W. Ehrfeld. 1988. Mass production of microdevices with extreme 
aspect ratios by electroforming. Plating Surface Finish 75:60–65. With permission.75)

[Page 628]
628   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
mold walls and an internal mold release agent such 
as PAT 665 (Wurtz GmbH, Bingen, Germany), nor-
mally used with polyester resins.83 The optimum 
yield with this agent and Plexit M60 PMMA occurs 
at 3–6 wt%. The yield decreases very quickly to 
less than 3 wt% as adhesion between the molded 
piece and the mold insert becomes stronger. These 
adhesive forces are estimated by qualitatively deter-
mining the forces necessary to remove the plastic 
structures from the mold insert. An upper limit is 
10 wt%, where the MMA does not polymerize any-
more. At more than 5 wt%, the Young’s modulus 
and hence the mechanical stability decrease, and at 
more than 6 wt%, pores start forming in the micro-
structures. The internal mold release agent also 
has a marked influence on the optimum demold-
ing temperature. The demolding yield decreases 
quickly at more than 60°C for a 4 wt% PAT inter-
nal mold release agent. With 6 wt%, one can only 
obtain good yields at 20°C.28,83 The molding pro-
cess in LIGA initially led to a production cycle time 
of 120 min. For a commercial process, much faster 
cycle times are needed, for example, by optimiz-
ing the mold release agent. With that in mind, the 
KfK group started to work with a special salt of an 
organic acid, leading to a 100% yield at a release 
agent content of 0.2 wt% only and a temperature of 
40°C (at 0.05 wt%, a 95% yield is still achieved). At 
80°C, a 100% demolding yield was obtained, and 
significantly a cycle time of 11.5 min was reached. 
During these experiments the mold was filled at 
80°C and heated to 110°C within 7.5 min. As the 
curing occurs at 110°C, the material needs to be 
cooled down to 80°C for demolding. Moreover, the 
0.2 wt% of the “magic release agent” did not impact 
the Young’s modulus and the glass transition tem-
perature of Plexit M60.83
Use of Sacrificial Layers in LIGA
As in surface micromachining, sacrificial layers 
make it possible to fabricate partially attached and 
freed metal structures in the primary mold pro-
cess.84 The ability to implement these features leads 
to assembled micromechanisms with submicrom-
eter dimension accuracies, opening up many addi-
tional applications for LIGA, especially in the field 
of actuators. The sacrificial layer may be polyimide, 
silicon dioxide, polysilicon, or some metal.85 The 
sacrificial layer is patterned with photolithogra-
phy and wet etching before polymerizing the resist 
layer over it. At KfK, a several-micrometers-thick 
titanium layer often is used as the sacrificial layer 
because it provides good adhesion of the polymer, 
and it can be etched selectively against several other 
metals used in the process. If before exposure the 
x-ray mask is adjusted to the sacrificial layer pattern, 
some parts of the microstructures will lie above the 
openings in the sacrificial layer, whereas other parts 
will be built up on it. These latter parts will be able 
to move after removal of the sacrificial layer.70 The 
fabrication of a movable LIGA structure is illustrated 
in Figure 10.35.
FIGURE 10.35 Movable LIGA microstructures. (From 
Mohr, J., C. Burbaum, P. Bley, W. Menz, and U. Wallrabe. 
1990. Microsystem technologies 90. Ed. H. Reichl. Berlin: 
Springer. With permission.70)

[Page 629]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   629
Molding Technology Applied to LIGA
Application of Reaction Injection 
Molding to LIGA
A laboratory-sized reaction injection molding (RIM) 
setup, as shown in Figure 10.36, was used by the 
KfK group for their LIGA work.83 The setup consists 
of a container for mixing the various reactants, a 
vacuum chamber for evacuation of the mold cavity, 
the molding tool, and a hydraulic clamping unit to 
open and close the vacuum chamber and the mold-
ing tool. After the vacuum chamber has been closed 
and evacuated, the tool is closed by the clamping 
unit. The mixed reagents are degassed in the materi-
als container and, under a gas overpressure of up to 
3 MPa, pushed through the opened inlet valve into 
the tool holding the evacuated insert mold. To com-
pensate for shrinkage caused by polymerization, 
an overpressure of up to 30 MPa must be applied 
during hardening of the casting resin. If the hold-
ing overpressure is too low, sunken spots appear in 
the plastic because of shrinkage of the polymer. For 
PMMA, the volume shrinkage is about 21%. If the 
mold material is not degassed and the mold cavity is 
not evacuated, bubbles develop in the molded piece, 
resulting in defects and possible partial filling of 
the mold. To harden the mold material and anneal 
material stress, the RIM machine is operated at tem-
peratures up to 150°C.
To fabricate RIM-based microproducts, a variety 
of resins were tried, including epoxy resins, silicone 
resins, and acrylic resins. The most promising results 
are obtained with resins on an MMA base to which 
an internal mold release agent is added to reduce 
adhesion of the molded piece to the walls of the 
metal mold. The mold insert in the evacuated tool 
is covered by means of an electrically conductive 
perforated plate, called the gate plate (Figure 10.37a). 
For filling the mold, injection holes are positioned 
above large, free spaces in the metal structure, and 
low-viscosity reactants fill the smaller sections 
laterally. After hardening of the molded polymer, a 
form-locking connection between the produced part 
and the gate plate is established at the injection holes, 
permitting the demolding of the part from the insert 
(Figure 10.37b). No damage to the mold insert is 
observed after up to 100 mold/demold cycles, even 
at the level of an SEM picture. The secondary plastic 
structures formed are exact replicas of the original 
PMMA structures obtained after x-ray irradiation 
and development. If the final product is plastic, the 
molding process can be simplified considerably by 
omitting the gate plate. The mold insert is then cast 
over with the molding polymer in a vacuum vessel, 
building a stable gate block over the mold insert 
after hardening. The polymeric gate block is used to 
demold the part from the insert.
FIGURE 10.36 Schematic presentation of a vacuum molding setup. With minor changes, this setup can be used for reac-
tion injection molding, thermoplastic injection molding, and compression molding. (From Hagmann, P., and W. Ehrfeld. 
1988. Fabrication of microstructures of extreme structural heights by reaction injection molding. J Polymer Process Soc 
4:188–95. With permission.83)

[Page 630]
630   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
The secondary plastic templates may not be the 
final product and can be filled with a metal by elec-
trodeposition as with the primary molds. In this 
case, the secondary plastic templates must be pro-
vided with an electrode or plating base. The gate plate 
can be used directly as the electrode for the deposi-
tion of metal in the secondary plastic templates (see 
Figure 10.37c). It is important that the mold insert 
is pressed tightly against the gate plate so that no 
uniform isolating plastic film forms over the whole 
interface between the gate plate and the mold insert; 
otherwise, electrodeposition might be impossible. 
Safe sealing between mold insert and gate plate is 
achieved by use of soft-annealed aluminum gate 
plates into which the insert is pressed when closing 
the tool. It was found that the condition to be met 
for perfect deposition of metal does not require that 
the gate plate be entirely free of plastic.83 It suffices 
that a number of electrical conducting points emerge 
from the plastic film. Transverse growth of the metal 
layer produced in electrodeposition allows a fault-
free, continuous layer to be produced. The second-
ary metal microstructures are replicas of the primary 
metal structures, and a comparison of, for example, a 
master separation nozzle mold insert with a second-
ary separation nozzle structure did not reveal any 
differences in quality. After the metal forming, the 
top surface must be polished and the plastic struc-
tures must be removed. Depending on the intended 
use of the secondary metal shape, one can leave it 
connected to the gate plate, or the gate plate can be 
selectively dissolved or mechanically removed.
Gate plates can be applied only if the micro-
structures are interconnected by relatively large 
openings. The injection holes in the gate plate are 
produced by mechanical means with openings of 
about 1 mm in diameter and must be aligned with 
large openings in the mold insert. Many desirable 
microstructures cannot be built this way. For 
example, in Figure 10.38, we show a Ni honeycomb 
structure with a cell diameter of 80 µm, a wall 
thickness of 8 µm, and a height of 70 µm.86 The 
holes in a gate plate are too large to inject plastic 
into this structure, and the interconnections in the 
honeycomb are too small to provide a good trans-
verse movement of the polymerizing resin. In this 
case an electrically conductive plastic is used instead. 
The Ni plating occurs on the conductive plastic 
carrier plate, which is fused with the insulating 
plastic of the microstructure.
Application of Compression Molding to LIGA
Compression molding or relief printing is the 
method of choice for incorporating LIGA structures 
on a processed Si wafer. In a first step, the mold 
material is applied by polymerization onto the 
processed wafer with an electrically isolating layer 
and overlaid with a metal plating base (Figure 
10.39a). At the glass transition temperature, the 
plastic is in a viscoelastic condition suitable for 
the impression molding step. At more than this 
temperature (about 160°C for PMMA), the plastic 
is patterned in vacuum by impression with the 
molding tool. To avoid damaging the electronic 
circuits by contact with the molding tool, the mold 
material is not completely displaced during molding. 
A thin, electrically insulating residual layer is left 
between the molding tool and the plating base on 
the processed wafer (Figure 10.39b). The residual 
layer is removed by reactive ion etching (RIE) in 
an oxygen plasma etch (Figure 10.39c), freeing the 
plating base for subsequent electrodeposition. The 
oxygen RIE process is as anisotropic as possible so 
Gate plate
Injected 
plastic
Mold insert
Form-locking
connection
Demolded plastic
Gate as electrode
Metal deposit
Perforations
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 10.37 Molding process with a perforated gate 
plate. (a) Filling of the insert mold with plastic mate-
rial. (b) Demolding. (c) Electrodeposition with the gate 
plate as plating base. (From Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. 
Mikrosystemtechnik fur Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: 
VCH Publishers.67)

[Page 631]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   631
that the sidewalls of the structures do not deteriorate, 
and the amount of material removed from the top 
of the plastic microstructures is small compared 
with the total height. After electrodeposition on the 
plating base, the metal microstructures are laid bare 
by dissolution of the mold material (Figure 10.39d). 
Finally, using argon sputtering or chemical etching, 
the plating base between the metal microstructures 
is removed so that the metal parts do not short circuit 
(Figure 10.39e). In the case of chemical etching, a 
very fast etch should be used to avoid etching of the 
plating base from underneath the electrodeposited 
structures.5,50
Comparison of Master Micromold 
Fabrication Methods
The high cost of x-ray lithography has caused many 
miniaturization engineers to search for alternate 
means for fabricating high-aspect-ratio metal, sili-
con, or polymer micromasters, or mold inserts.
Polymer micromold inserts are widely used in 
lost mold micromolding of metals and ceramics 
where the molds are removed by dissolving or 
thermal degradation after molding. However, this 
is not always the case; certain polymer micromold 
inserts, such as elastomeric mold inserts (e.g., poly-
dimethylsiloxane), can be used repeatedly in soft 
lithography (see Chapter 2). The polymer mold inserts 
used for lost micromolding can be fabricated using 
photolithography, microstereolithography, and so on.
Most of the micromold inserts in micromolding 
are  metal micromold inserts. Nickel is most com-
monly used because of the well-known nickel 
electroplating process and its low internal stress. 
However, the hardness of nickel is relatively low 
compared with metals such as iron and stainless 
steel, resulting in a limited lifetime for nickel 
mold inserts. Other materials such as nickel-iron 
or tungsten-cobalt alloys with higher hardness are 
considered for longer-lived metal micromold inserts. 
Metal micromold inserts (or micromasters) can be 
FIGURE 10.38 Ni honeycomb structure with cell diameter of 80 mm, wall thickness of 8 mm, and wall height of 70 mm. 
A structure like this could not be produced using a gate plate; a conductive plastic is used instead. [From Harmening, M., 
W. Bacher, and W. Menz. 1991. Molding plateable micropatterns of electrically insulating and electrically conducting 
poly(methyl methacrylate)s by the LIGA technique. Makromol Chem Macromol Symp 50:277–84. With permission.86]

[Page 632]
632   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
fabricated by a variety of alternate techniques, such 
as CNC machining, e-beam or ion-beam milling, 
precision EDM or excimer laser ablation of a piece of 
metal, thick deep UV resist photolithography, resist 
DRIE, silicon wet bulk micromachining, polymer 
excimer laser ablation, and polymer e-beam or ion-
beam writing, all followed by electroplating (see 
Figure 10.1).
Both silicon wet and dry etching can be used for 
silicon mold insert fabrication. Silicon mold inserts 
have been applied to, for example, the hot emboss-
ing of polymer structures and for casting of ceram-
ics. In Table 10.15, LIGA metal molds are compared 
with metal masters fabricated by other means. For 
example, comparing metal mold inserts made by 
spark erosive cutting and x-ray lithography, the lat-
ter proves far superior.83 LIGA PMMA features as 
small as 0.1 µm are replicated in the metal shape 
with almost no defects. The electroformed struc-
tures have a superior surface quality with a surface 
roughness, Rmax, of less than 0.02 µm.28
DRIE and thick deep UV-sensitive resists (DUV) 
such as polyimides, AZ-4000, and SU-8 are recent 
contenders for micromaster mold fabrication. With 
respect to dry etching, higher and higher aspect-
ratio features are being achieved; especially when 
using highly anisotropic etching conditions as in 
cryogenic DRIE and in the Bosch process, remark-
able results are obtained. Wall roughness, causing 
form locking, remains a problem with DRIE; the 
dry etching process was optimized for speed, not for 
demolding. For small-quantity production, where 
the lifetime of mold inserts is not crucial, a silicon 
FIGURE 10.39 Fabrication of microstructures on 
a processed Si wafer. (a) Patterned isolation layer, 
conductive plating base, and in situ polymerization of 
PMMA. (b) Impression molding using a LIGA primary 
insert mold. (c) Removal of remaining plastic from 
the plating base by a highly directional oxygen etch. 
(d) Electrodeposition of metal shape. (e) Removal of 
plating base from between the metal structures by 
argon sputtering. (From Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. 
Mikrosystemtechnik fur Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: 
VCH Publishers.67)
TABLE 10.15 Comparison of Micromolds
Parameters
LIGA
DUV
DRIE
LASER
CNC
EDM
Aspect ratio
100
22
10–25
<10
14 (hole 
drilling)
Up to 100 
Wall roughness
<20 nm
∼1 µm
∼2 µm
1 µm–100 nm
Several 
micrometers
0.3–1 µm
Accuracy
<1 µm
2–3 µm
<1 µm
A few 
micrometers
See Figure 6.3
Some micrometers
Mask needed?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Maximum height
A few 
100 µm up 
to 1 cm
A few 
100 µm
A few 
100 µm
A few 
100 µm
Unlimited
Micrometers to 
millimeters
Source: Weber, L., W. Ehrfeld, H. Freimuth, M. Lacher, H. Lehr, and B. Pech. SPIE: micromachining and microfabrication process 
technology II. Austin, TX: SPIE. With permission.87

[Page 633]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   633
wafer etched by DRIE can be used directly as a mold 
insert for anywhere from 5–30 molding cycles.88,89 
Figure 10.40a shows such a Si mold for building a 
two-point calibration fluidic device on a compact 
disc (CD). Wet etching of Si leads to much smoother 
surfaces than DRIE (see, for example, the wet aniso-
tropically etched Si nozzle in Figure 4.45b and compare 
that with the sidewall scalloping caused by Si DRIE in 
Figure 3.38) and is therefore the preferred method 
for making master molds out of Si. For much longer-
lasting molds, metallizing the Si structure and using 
the metal as mold is preferred. Photoresist structures 
on a silicon substrate have also been tested as mold 
insert in plastic molding because of the simplicity 
and low cost of the process. Figure 10.40b shows 
an SU-8 photoresist mold for the same lab CD plat-
form shown in Figure 10.40a. In low-pressure mold-
ing processes, such mold inserts work for a limited 
number of runs (applying a thin metal layer over the 
top of the resist may further extend the lifetime of 
the mold), but their applicability in high- pressure 
processes needs to be further verified. A better 
approach is to use DUV-photosensitive resists for 
electroplating to yield a metal tool, usually nickel 
or nickel-cobalt. Figure 10.40c shows a nickel mold 
insert made using SU-8 in our lab for the two-point 
calibration microfluidic platform. Both DUV and 
DRIE are more accessible than LIGA and will con-
tinue to improve, taking more opportunities away 
from LIGA. Like LIGA, both alternative techniques 
FIGURE 10.40 (a) Silicon mold insert made by UV photolithography and DRIE at Burstein Technologies/UCLA/OSU. 
(b) Photoresist (SU-8) mold insert made by UV lithography at Ohio State University by the author. (c) Nickel mold insert made 
by UV photolithography and electroplating (OSU). The depth of the etched channel is measured by a laser profilometer.

[Page 634]
634   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
can be coupled with plating, but neither technique 
can yet achieve the extremely low surface roughness 
and vertical walls of LIGA.
Other competing technologies for making metal 
masters are laser ablation methods and ultraprecision 
CNC machining. The latter two methods are serial 
processes and rather slow, but because we are con-
sidering the production of a master only these tech-
nologies are competitive for certain applications.
Laser microablation produces minimum features 
of about 10 µm width and aspect ratios of 1/10. 
Challenges include taper and surface finish con-
trol. Recast layers around the laser-drilled features 
cause form locking and infidelity in the replication. 
Femtosecond pulse lasers promise thinner or even 
the absence of recast layers and excellent resolution 
and should be investigated further for the manufac-
ture of micromold inserts.90
For large features (> 50 µm) with tolerances and 
repeatability in the range of about 10 µm, traditional 
CNC machining of materials like tool steel and 
stainless steel are often accurate enough for mak-
ing metal mold inserts. The advantage of this tech-
nique is that the tool materials used are the same 
as those in conventional polymer molding; there-
fore, their design, strength, and service life are well 
established. Complicated 3D structures can also be 
machined easily. The main drawbacks are that it is 
difficult to make sharp corners or right angles, and 
the surface quality is usually poor (surface rough-
ness is around several micrometers).8 In contrast, 
lithographic methods can produce molds with 
excellent surface quality (surface quality <0.1 µm) 
and sharp corners or right angles. However, they 
cannot be used on conventional tool materials like 
steel. Diamond-based micromilling and microdrill-
ing91 reduce the surface roughness to 1 µm or less.92 
Although diamond-based machining methods can 
achieve features smaller than 10 µm, they are only 
applicable to “soft” metals such as nickel, alumi-
num, and copper.
From Table 10.15, a significant potential applica-
tion of LIGA remains the fabrication of those metal 
molds that cannot be accomplished with other 
techniques because of the tight wall roughness 
tolerances,s small size, and high aspect ratios. From 
the table it is obvious that LIGA micromolds excel 
both in very low surface roughness and excellent 
accuracy.
Summarizing, the requirements for an optimal 
micromold insert fabrication technique are93:
 
◾The master has to be removed from the molded 
structure, so the ease of release through wall 
inclination control is crucial (undercuts, for 
example, cannot be tolerated as they cause 
form locking)
 
◾The most important parameter, including mas-
ter lifetime and achievable aspect ratios, depends 
very  strongly on the surface quality of the 
master
 
◾The interface chemistry between master  and 
polymer is a critical factor and must be 
controlled
Alternative Molding Materials 
in LIGA and Pseudo-LIGA
In this last section we discuss alternative mold-
ing materials for LIGA and pseudo-LIGA. Besides 
PMMA and POM (see above), used in a commer-
cially available form, semicrystalline polyvinylidene 
fluoride (PVDF), a piezoelectric material, has been 
used to make polymeric microstructures.69 The opti-
mum molding temperature of PVDF is 180°C, and 
PVDF structures can be molded without using mold 
release agents. Fluorinated polymers such as PVDF 
will enable higher temperature applications than 
PMMA. PC, well known for molding CDs, is under 
development for LIGA and LIGA-like processes and 
should perform well.51
Other materials that have the ability to flow or be 
sintered, such as glasses and ceramics, can be incor-
porated in the LIGA and pseudo-LIGA processes as 
well. In the case of ceramics, for example, plastic 
microstructures are used as disposable or lost molds. 
The molds are filled with slurry in a slip-casting 
process. Before sintering at high temperatures, the 
plastic mold and the organic slurry components are 
removed completely in a burnout process at lower 
temperatures. First results have been obtained for 
zirconium oxide and aluminum oxide. An impor-
tant application for ceramic microstructures is 

[Page 635]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   635
the fabrication of arrays of piezoceramic columns 
embedded in a plastic matrix.
An alternative method to make LIGA and pseudo-
LIGA ceramic or glass structures is based on sol-gel 
technology (see Chapter 8). This technique involves 
relatively low temperatures and may enable LIGA 
and pseudo-LIGA products such as glass capillaries 
for gas chromatography, piezoelectric arrays, and 
even high-TC superconductor actuators. Sol-gel tech-
niques should work well with LIGA and pseudo-LI-
GA-type molds if they are filled under a vacuum to 
eliminate trapped gas bubbles. In the sol-gel tech-
nique, a solution is spun on a substrate that is then 
given an initial firing at around 200°C, driving off 
the solvent in the film. Subsequently, the substrate 
is given a high-temperature firing at 800–900°C 
to drive out the remaining solvents and crystallize 
the film (see Figure 8.2). A major issue is the large 
shrinkage of sol-gel films during the initial firing. 
For example, the maximum thickness of high-TC 
superconductor films currently achievable mea-
sures approximately 2 µm as a result of the high 
stress in the film caused during shrinkage. The lat-
ter is related to the ceramic yield or the amount of 
ceramic in the sol-gel compared with the amount of 
solvent. The sol-gel technique, in general, suits the 
production of thicker films well, as long as high-
ceramic-yield sol-gels are used. Because LIGA-style 
films tend to be thick, a reduction in the amount 
of solvents to allow a high ceramic yield after fir-
ing would be to make sol-gel compatible with LIGA. 
This would require some development. Combining 
sol-gel technology with LIGA and pseudo-LIGA, 
lead-zirconium-titanate (PZT) piezoelectric devices 
can be made. In this case it is better to use the metal-
plated structure rather than the direct PMMA tem-
plate for the creation of the device because PZT must 
be processed in several elevated temperature steps. 
PZT sol-gel contains no particles that would prevent 
flow into small channels in a plated mold. The sol-
gel contains high-molecular-weight polymer chains 
that hold the constituent metal salts, which are fur-
ther processed into the final ceramic film. Thus, the 
sol-gel could be formed into the mold in a process 
much like reaction injection molding (RIM), with 
the mold filled with the chemistry under vacuum. 
Because the performance of piezoelectric actuator 
arrays is linked to the height and width ratio of the 
individual ceramic columns, as well as the distance 
between the columns in the array, LIGA, with its tre-
mendous capacity for tall, dense, and high-aspect-
ratio features, is an ideal fabrication tool.94,95
Examples
Example 10.1: LIGA Spinneret Nozzles
Profiled capillaries (nozzles) in a spinneret plate 
for spinning synthetic fibers from a molten or 
dissolved polymer, as shown in Figure 10.41, nor-
mally are produced by micro-EDM (see Chapter 
5). This process establishes a practical lower 
limit of 20–50 μm for the minimal characteris-
tic dimension, and the method cannot satisfy 
the requirements to produce complexly shaped, 
high-aspect-ratio spinnerets at a low cost. 
Smaller, more precise, and high-aspect-ratio 
nozzles can be produced by LIGA.96
Spinneret nozzles lend themselves to LIGA 
from the technical point of view. Compared 
with fabrication by micro-EDM, the minimum 
characteristic dimensions with LIGA can be 
reduced by an order of magnitude, and a high 
capillary length with excellent surface finish can 
easily be obtained. Moreover, the LIGA process 
makes all the nozzles in parallel, whereas micro-
EDM operates as a serial technique. The market 
might focus on niche applications such as spe-
cialty, multilumen catheters. Also, medical use 
FIGURE 10.41 LIGA spinneret nozzles. (a) Spinneret plate. 
(b) Profiled spinneret nozzles. (c) Spinning synthetic fiber. 
(Courtesy of IMM, Germany.)

[Page 636]
636   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
of atomizers for dispensing drugs is projected 
to increase dramatically in the coming years; this 
might cause a run for a wide variety of precise, 
inexpensive micronozzles.
Shew et al.97 used a conformal mask to fabri-
cate a LIGA die with capillaries 2 mm deep and 
70 µm wide for the mass production of electro-
plated spinnerets for the spinning of polyester 
fibers. The conformal mask eliminates the need 
of alignment steps accompanying the multiple 
exposure processes required in the deep x-ray 
lithography used by these authors. As illustrated 
in Figure 10.42A, a thin sputtered copper layer 
covers a thick PMMA layer on an Al substrate (a). 
A resist layer (JSR 137N, a negative photoresist 
from Japan Synthesis Rubber Co.) is then pat-
terned on the copper layer by UV lithography, 
followed by plating gold absorbers (b). After 
stripping the resist and the Cu layer (c), the con-
formal mask is ready for multiple x-ray exposure 
and development steps (d) and die electroform-
ing (e). The die (f) is made by electroforming of a 
NiCo alloy on the Al substrate from a Ni/Co sulfa-
mate bath at current densities between 1 and 
5 A/dm2. The addition of increasing amounts of 
cobalt sulfamate increases the hardness of the 
deposit to about 420 Vickers. At a concentra-
tion higher than 20 g/L cobalt sulfamate, the 
hardness saturates. With increasing hardness 
also comes increased residual stress, which 
needs to be carefully controlled. Polypropylene 
(PP) was used to duplicate the NiCo microstruc-
tures by injection molding (IM) through a stain-
less steel tool as shown in Figure 10.42B. After 
removing sthe LIGA die, the result is a field of 
polymer microstructures standing up from the 
stainless steel tool. The stainless steel substrate 
is subsequently used for plating the spinneret 
structures.
Polyester fibers typically melt at 260°C and are 
extruded at speeds of more than 3,000 m/min. 
During this fiber extrusion, the spinneret suffers 
high-temperature excursions of up to 280°C, 
and high-temperature wear resistance becomes 
a problem when using a NiCo alloy. To improve 
the high-temperature hardness of Ni spinnerets, 
Shew et al.97 plated a Ni/SiC composite. With the 
addition of SiC nanopowder to the sulfamate 
plating electrolyte, stable composite hardness 
of 500 Hv (Vickers hardness) at temperatures as 
high as 500°C was demonstrated. The authors 
suggest that these new types of spinnerets will 
enable the production of a new generation of 
fibers with ultrafine sizes and new functional-
ities at a low cost.
Example 10.2: Inclined LIGA Walls
Using LIGA, microstructures as high as hun-
dreds or even thousands of micrometers can 
be achieved with an aspect ratio of 200, lateral 
UV light
UV mask
Resist
Cu layer
PMMA
AI
x-ray
Electrodeposit
Au
Plastic injection
Stainless 
steel
LIGA capillary
LIGA die
2 cm
2 mm
(A)
(a)
(d)
(b)
(e)
(c)
(f)
(B)
FIGURE 10.42 (A) Schematic diagram of the modified 
LIGA process (dimensions in this figure not to scale). 
(B) Replication process of the LIGA spinneret. (From Cheng, 
Y., B.-Y. Shew, C.-Y. Lin, D.-H. Wei, and M. K. Chyu. 1999. 
Ultra-deep LIGA process. J Micromech Microeng 9:58–63.49) 

[Page 637]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   637
dimensions smaller than 0.5 µm, accuracy of 
0.1  µm, and wall perpendicularity of 90°. For 
many applications, inclined sidewalls would be 
a very useful addition to the LIGA tool box; for 
example, for making lenses or for easier release 
of molded parts. This second LIGA example con-
cerns both these important applications. When 
using LIGA for plastic molding, such as through 
hot embossing, it is important to be able to 
control the resist wall inclination to facilitate 
the release of molded devices. To achieve this, 
one could make an inclined absorber or, follow-
ing Tabata et al.,71 one can also move the mask 
during exposure in M2DXL. The movement of 
the mask is realized by a precision x-y stage with 
a 10-nm step resolution. The principle of the 
technique is illustrated in Figure 10.43. Here, the 
x-ray mask with a circular hole of 30 µm is moved 
in a circle with a 15-μm diameter. The x-ray dose 
distributes according to the movement of the 
mask during exposure. As a result, the energy 
delivered to the PMMA photoresist shows a high 
constant value within the inner circle of the tra-
jectory of the hole’s movement and decreases 
with increasing trajectory diameter, becoming 
zero at the outside region. A truncated conical 
PMMA structure results with an inclination of 
the wall controlled by the diameters of the mask 
hole and its circular movement and the total 
x-ray dose.
For making inclined microfluidic channels 
whose depth is 40 µm, a mask with a channel 
width of 50 µm and mask movement of 10 µm 
was used. A good inclination for the sidewalls of 
microfluidic devices for easy release of molded 
parts is 80°. Tabata et al.71 demonstrated that 
their technique may also be used to make micro-
lens arrays. In the latter case, the mask hole 
diameter was 210 µm, and the mask movement 
100 µm.
Example 10.3: LIGA Fiber-Chip Coupling
LIGA elements for coupling monomode fibers 
with integrated optical chips have been devel-
oped. These prealignment arrays may use fixed 
nickel guiding structures in combination with 
Exposed
x-ray
energy
PMMA substrate
Outer circle
dia. 40 µm
x-ray mask
Mask hole dia. 30 µm
Movement of
x-ray mask
x-ray absorber: Cu
15 µm
FIGURE 10.43 Principle of M2DXL. (Based on Tabata, 
O., H. You, H. Shiraishi, H. Nakanishi, T. Nishimoto, 
K. Yamamoto, and Y. Baba. 2000. Micro total analysis 
systems 2000: proceedings of the µTAS 2000 symposium. 
Enschede, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.71)
FIGURE 10.44 Coupling for monomode fibers with nickel spring elements. (Courtesy of IMM, Germany, http://www.
imm-mainz.de/.)

[Page 638]
638   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
leaf springs to ensure a precise alignment of the 
optical fibers relative to the optical chip with 
accuracy in the submicrometer range, as shown 
in Figure 10.44. The thermal expansion coef-
ficient of the substrate material is matched to 
the optical chip material—for example, a glass 
substrate is used for coupling fibers to glass 
chips—and the use of spring elements simplifies 
the handling of the fibers.78 Alternatives involve 
the use of optical adhesives and silicon V-groove 
arrays (see Chapter 4). Both alternative technol-
ogies are more labor intensive and suffer from 
thermal expansion problems.
 The use of microoptical LIGA components is 
especially attractive for the coupling of multi-
mode fibers; here, the capability of exact lith-
ographic positioning of mechanical mounting 
supports is used advantageously to position the 
multimode fibers very precisely with respect to 
the microoptical components without need for 
any additional adjusting operations.73,98
A pull-push LIGA connector for single-mode 
fiber ribbons, shown in Figure 10.45, incorporates 
a set of precision microsprings coupling up to 12 
fibers spaced at 250 µm. It is now on the market 
and is one of the LIGA products with mass mar-
ket appeal. To obtain good coupling efficiency, 
the fibers are positioned horizontally with a pre-
cision of 1 µm. LIGA is an excellent method to 
provide that type of precision. These connectors 
were developed at IMM.99 In line with the micro-
manufacturing philosophy presented in this 
book (i.e., to optimize the use of each microma-
chining technique for optimal cost/performance 
application), those parts of the mold insert that 
do not require such high accuracy are fabricated 
using other methods of precision machining such 
as EDM (see Chapter 5).
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Dr. Nahui Kim, formerly at UCI, 
now at Samsung.
Questions
 10.1:  Describe why a synchrotron is the best tool 
for producing the x-rays required to make 
the most accurate LIGA parts and make a 
table comparing x-ray lithography with UV 
lithography.
 10.2:  An electroplating solution containing nickel 
sulphamate is used to electroplate nickel 
LIGA structures. The formula incorporates 
450 g of nickel sulphamate [Ni(NH2SO3)2] 
per liter of water (plus some additives). The 
solution is heated to 50°C. Assuming the 
plating is occurring on a nickel cathode.
 
(a) Calculate the concentration of the Ni++ 
ions in the solution.
 
(b) Calculate the equilibrium voltage across 
the nickel-solution interface at the cath-
ode prior to electroplating.
 
(c) If the plating is occurring inside high-
aspect-ratio PMMA cavities with a depth 
of 500 micrometers, and the diffusivity 
of Ni++ ions in water is 5 × 10–6 cm2/s, 
calculate the limiting current density 
(mA/cm2) assuming the boundary layer 
thickness is governed by the height of 
the PMMA.
 
(d) Plot the current density versus potential 
curve at the cathode using the values 
provided from part (c).
 
(e) If the current density is specified at 
75 mA/cm2, what is the likely result 
(qualitatively)?
 
(f) If the pH of the solution is 4 and the 
hydrogen ion diffusivity is 3 × 10–5 cm2/s, 
calculate the limiting current associated 
with the reaction H+ + e → 0.5 H2.
 10.3:  What is the difference between a thermo-
plastic, a thermoset, and an elastomer? Give 
three examples of each.
 10.4:  Assume a polymer is under a tensile load at 
a variety of temperatures from –20°C to its 
FIGURE 10.45 Pull-push connector for multimode fiber. 
(Courtesy of IMM, Germany, http://www.imm-mainz.de/.)

[Page 639]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   639
breakdown temperature at 150°C. Outline 
the potential stress-strain diagrams that may 
be found for a thermoplastic polymer under 
very short loading times.
 10.5:  What is viscoelastic polymer? Plot the stress-
strain curve for a viscoelastic polymer. 
 10.6:  Consider a laboratory setup (Galvanic cell) 
with a bar of copper (Cu) and a bar of silver 
(Ag) immersed in an electrolyte solution. The 
following are the redox half reactions and 
electrochemical potentials. The Gibbs free 
energy = (−) number of electron exchanged × 
electrochemical potential × Faraday con-
stant. For a reaction to spontaneously occur, 
the Gibbs free energy must be negative.
 
Ag+ + e− → Ag 
E° = 0.80 V
 
Cu++ + 2e− → Cu 
E° = 0.34 V
 
(a)  Will Ag react with Cu++ (i.e., will we be 
able to plate copper on the silver bar)?
 
(b)  Will Cu react with Ag+ (i.e., will we be 
able to plate silver on the copper bar)?
 
(c)  If you place a sheet of copper into an 
AgNO3 solution, what would happen? 
What is the reaction?
 10.7: Electrodeposition:
 
(a)  In an electrochemical cell, we deposit 
Zn from a Zn2+ solution. After the depo-
sition, we monitor the voltage of the Zn 
deposit with respect to a reference elec-
trode (in this case we are using a standard 
hydrogen electrode, i.e., SHE). First we 
measure the potential in a ZnSO4 solu-
tion at 10–2M and then in a ZnSO4 solu-
tion of 10–3M. What will be the change 
in potential of the Zn electrode between 
those two solutions? What is the poten-
tsial in the 10–2M solution? (Eo vs. SHE 
for Zn is –0.763V.)
 
Zn2+ + 2e− → Zn
 
(b)  Explain the difference between electro-
less deposition and electro-deposition.
 10.8:  What issues do traditional plating and poly-
mer molding companies face when trying to 
plate and mold LIGA-type structures?
 10.9:  Compare the pros and cons for injection 
molding, reaction injection molding, and hot 
embossing in LIGA. What are the differences 
in a micro part made with LIGA vs. pseudo-
LIGA? How would you find out which tech-
nology was used, LIGA or pseudo-LIGA?
10.10:  Describe two MEMS applications in which 
the use of LIGA may be justified.
10.11:  Fabricate an x-ray mask detailing all materials 
and processes required. The mask should be 
adequate for the fabrication of Au parts with 
an aspect ratio of 50 (height over width).
10.12:  For the following designs, decide which stan-
dard MEMS process (CMOS, LIGA, MUMPs) 
you would use and give a brief justification.
 
◾You want to build a very cheap impact 
sensor.
 
◾You want to build a rotating disk for a 
microoptical stroboscope.
 
◾You want to build a strong microgear train.
 
◾You want to build an array of structures 
with different resonance frequencies to 
test new theories on viscous damping.
10.13:  Describe some techniques that may be 
employed for the fabrication of MEMS struc-
tures with slanted walls.
References
 
1. Greener, J., and R. Wimberger-Friedl, eds. 2006. Precision 
injection molding-process, materals, and applications. Munich, 
Germany: Hanser.
 
2. IMM. 1995. Commercial brochure. IMM, http://www.
imm-mainz.de/.
 
3. Lee, L. J., C.-H. Shih, Y.-J. Juang, J. Garcia, M. J. Madou, 
and K. W. Koelling. 1999. Novel microfabrication options 
for BioMEMS conference. San Francisco: The Knowledge 
Foundation.
 
4. Hanemann, T., R. Ruprecht, and J. H. Haubelt. 1998. 
Photomolding in microsystem technology. Polym Preprints 
39:657–58.
 
5. Eicher, J., R. P. Peters, and A. Rogner. 1992. VDI-Verlag. 
Report no. VDI-Bericht 960, Dusseldorf, Germany.
 
6. Bifano, T. G., H. E. Fawcett, and P. A. Bierden. 1997. 
Precision manufacture of optical disc master stampers. 
Precision Eng 20:53–62.
 
7. Yu, L., Y.-J. Juang, K. W. Koelling, and L. J. Lee. 2000. 
Proceedings: Society of Plastics Engineers ANTEC. Orlando, FL.
 
8. Madou, M. J., Y. Lu, S. Lai, Y.-J. Juang, L. J. Lee, and S. 
Daunert. 2000. A novel design on a CD disc for two-point 
calibration measurement. Proceedings of the IEEE: solid-state 
sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.

[Page 640]
640   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 
9. Dunke, K., H.-D. Bauer, W. Ehrfeld, J. Hobfeld, L. Weber, G. 
Horcher, and G. Muller. 1998. Injection-molded fiber rib-
bon connectors for parallel optical links fabricated by the 
LIGA technique. J Micromech Microeng 8:301–6.
 10. Fahrenberg, J., W. Bier, D. Mass, W. Menz, R. Ruprecht, 
and W. K. Schomburg. 1995. A microvalve system fabri-
cated by thermoplasting molding. J Micromech Microeng 
5:169–71.
 11. Ramos, B. L., S. J. Choquette, and F. F. Nicholas. 1996. 
Embossable grating couplers for planar waveguide optical 
sensors. Anal Chem 68:1245–49.
 12. Becker, H., and W. Dietz. 1998. Microfluidic device for 
µ-TAS applications for fabrication by polymer hot emboss-
ing. Proc SPIE 3515:177–82.
 13. Kopp, M. U., H. J. Crabtree, and A. Manz. 1997. 
Developments in technology and applications in microsys-
tems. Curr Opin Chem Biol 1:410–19.
 14. Chou, S. Y., P. R. Krauss, and P. J. Renstrom. 1996. Imprint 
lithography 
with 
25-nanometer 
resolution. 
Science 
272:85–87.
 15. Schift, H., R. W. Jaszewski, C. David, and J. Gobrecht. 1999. 
Nanostructuring of polymers and fabrication of integrated 
electrodes by hot embossing lithography. Microelectron Eng 
46:121–24.
 16. Jaszewski, R. W., H. Schift, J. Gobrecht, and P. Smith. 1998. 
Hot embossing in polymers as a direct way to pattern resist. 
Microelectron Eng 41/42:575–78.
 17. Casey, B. G., W. Monaghan, and C. D. W. Wilkinson. 
1997. Embossing of nanoscale features and environment. 
Microelectron Eng 35:393–96.
 18. Gottschalch, F., T. Hoffman, C. M. Sotomayor Torres, H. 
Schulz, and H.-C. Scheer. 1999. Polymer issues in nanoim-
printing technique. Solid State Electron 43:1079–83.
 19. Jaszewski, R. W., H. Schift, P. Groning, and G. Margaritondo. 
1997. Properties of thin anti-adhesive films used for the 
replication of microstructures in polymers. Microelectron 
Eng 35:381–84.
 20. Jaszewski, R. W., H. Schift, B. Schnyder, A. Schneuwly, and 
P. Groning. 1999. The deposition of anti-adhesive ultra-
thin Teflon-like films and their interaction with polymers 
during hot embossing. Appl Surface Sci 143:301–8.
 21. Becker, H., and U. Heim. 1999. Silicon as tool mate-
rial for polymer hot embossing. 12th IEEE International 
Conference on MEMS ’99: Micro Electro Mechanical Systems. 
Orlando, FL.
 22. Lin, L.-W., C.-J. Chiu, W. Bacher, and M. Heckele. 1996. 
Microfabrication using silicon mold inserts and hot 
embossing. Seventh international symposium on micro machine 
and human science. Nagoya, Japan.
 23. Casey, B. G., D. R. S. Cumming, I. I. Khandaker, A. G. S. 
Curtis, and C. D. W. Wilkinson. 1999. Nanoscale emboss-
ing of polymers using a thermoplastic die. Microelectron 
Eng 46:125–28.
 24. Ruprecht, R., W. Bacher, J. Haubelt, and V. Piotter. 1995. 
Injection molding of LIGA and LIGA-similar microstruc-
tures using filled and unfilled thermoplastics. Proc SPIE 
2639:146–57.
 25. Spiller, E., R. Feder, J. Topalian, E. Castellani, L. Romankiw, 
and M. Heritage. 1976. X-ray lithography for bubble 
devices. Solid State Technol April:62–68.
 26. Romankiw, L. T., I. M. Croll, and M. Hatzakis. 1970. Batch-
fabricated thin-film magnetic recording heads. IEEE Trans 
Magn 6:597–601.
 27. Becker, E. W., W. Ehrfeld, D. Munchmeyer, H. Betz, A. 
Heuberger, S. Pongratz, W. Glashauser, H. J. Michel, and 
V. R. Siemens. 1982. Production of separation nozzle sys-
tems for uranium enrichment by a combination of x-ray 
lithography 
and 
galvanoplastics. 
Naturwissenschaften 
69:520–23.
 28. Hagmann, P., W. Ehrfeld, and H. Vollmer. 1987. Fabrication 
of microstructures with extreme structural heights by reac-
tion injection molding. First meeting of the European Polymer 
Federation, European symposium on polymeric materials. Lyon, 
France.
 29. Waldo, W. G., and A. W. Yanof. 1991. 0.25 micron imaging 
by SOR x-ray lithography. Solid State Technol 34:29–31.
 30. Clemens, J., and R. Hill, ed. 1991. JTEC Panel Report on X-ray 
Lithography in Japan. PB92-100205, Springfield, VA:NTIS.
 31. Urisu, T., and H. Kyuragi. 1987. Synchrotron radiation-
excited chemical-vapor deposition and etching. J Vac Sci 
Technol B5:1436–40.
 32. Goedtkindt, P., J. M. Salome, X. Artru, P. Dhez, N. Maene, F. 
Poortmans, and L. Wartski. 1991. X-ray lithography with a 
transition radiation source. Microelectron Eng 13:327–30.
 33. Muray, J. J., and I. Brodie. 1991. Report no. 2019. Menlo 
Park, CA: SRI International.
 34. Bley, P., D. Einfeld, W. Menz, and H. Schweickert. 1992. 
A dedicated synchrotron light source for micromechanics. 
Proceedings of the EPAC 92. Berlin, Germany.
 35. Ehrfeld, W., W. Glashauer, D. Munchmeyer, and W. Schelb. 
1986. Mask making for synchrotron radiation lithography. 
Microelectron Eng 5:463–70.
 36. Lawes, R. A. 1989. Sub-micron lithography techniques. 
Appl Surf Sci 36:485–99. 
 37. Schomburg, W. K., H. J. Baving, and P. Bley. 1991. Ti- and 
Be-x-ray masks with alignment windows for the LIGA pro-
cess. Microelectron Eng 13:323–26.
 38. Hein, H., P. Bley, J. Gottert, and U. Klein. 1992. Elektro-
nenstrahllithographie zur Herstellung von Rontgen-masken 
fur das LIGA-Verfahren. Feinwtech Messtech 100:387–89.
 39. Bley, P., W. Menz, W. Bacher, K. Feit, M. Harmening, H. 
Hein, J. Mohr, W. K. Schomburg, and W. Stark. 1991. 
Application of the LIGA process in fabrication of three-
dimensional mechanical microstructures. Microprocess 
91, 1991 International Microprocess Conference. Kanazawa, 
Japan.
 40. Guckel, H., T. R. Christenson, T. Earles, J. Klein, J. D. Zook, 
T. Ohnstein, and M. Karnowski. 1994. Laterally driven elec-
tromagnetic actuators. Technical digest: 1994 solid state sen-
sor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 41. Siddons, D. P., and E. D. Johnson. 1994. Precision machin-
ing using hard x-rays. Synchrotron Radiation News 7:16–18.
 42. Guckel, H. 1994. Notes from handouts. The Commer-
cialization of Microsystems. September 11–16, Banff 
Conference Center, Banff, Canada.
 43. Becker, E. W., W. Ehrfeld, P. Hagmann, A. Maner, and D. 
Munchmeyer. 1986. Fabrication of microstructures with 
high aspect ratios and great structural heights by synchro-
tron radiation lithography, galvanoforming, and plastic 
molding (LIGA process). Microelectron Eng 4:35–56.
 44. Friedrich, 
C. 
1994. 
Notes 
from 
handouts. 
The 
Commercialization of Microsystems. September 11–16, 
Banff Conference Center, Banff, Canada.
 45. Henck, R. 1984. Detecteurs au silicium pour electrons et 
rayons X, principes de fonctionnement, fabrication et per-
formance. J Microsc Spectrosc Electron 9:131–33.

[Page 641]
Micromolding Techniques—LIGA   641
 46. Vladimirsky, Y., O. Vladimirsky, V. Saile, K. Morris, and 
J. M. Klopf. 1995. Microlithography ’95 (Proceedings of the 
SPIE). Santa Clara, CA: SPIE.
 47. Khan Malek, C., Y. Vladimirsky, O. Vladimirsky, J. Scott, 
B. Craft, and V. Saile. 1996. X-ray microfabrication activi-
ties at the center for advanced microstructures and devices 
(CAMD). Rev Sci Instrum 67:1–6.
 48. Shih, W.-P., Y. Cheng, C.-Y. Lin, and G.-J. Hwang. Low-
cost x-ray conformal mask using x-ray dry FILM resist. 
Microelectron Eng 40:43–50.
 49. Cheng, Y., B.-Y. Shew, C.-Y. Lin, D.-H. Wei, and M. K. Chyu. 
1999. Ultra-deep LIGA process. J Micromech Microeng 
9:58–63.
 50. Michel, A., R. Ruprecht, and W. Bacher. 1993. Abformung 
von. mikrostrukturen auf prozessierten Wafern. KfK report 
no. 5171. Karlsruhe, Germany: Kernforschungszentrum 
Karlsruhe.
 51. Rogner, A., J. Eichner, D. Munchmeyer, R.-P. Peters, and J. 
Mohr. 1992. The LIGA technique: what are the new oppor-
tunities? J Micromech Microeng 2:133–40. 
 52. Mohr, J., W. Ehrfeld, and D. Munchmeyer. 1988. Analyse 
der defectursachen und der genauigkeit der structuru-bertragung 
bei der rontgentiefenlithographie mit synchrotronstrahlung. KfK 
report no. 4414. Karlsruhe, Germany: Kernforschungszentrum 
Karlsruhe.
 53. Moreau, W. M. 1988. Semiconductor lithography. New York: 
Plenum Press.
 54. Lingnau, J., R. Dammel, and J. Theis. 1989. Recent trends 
in x-ray resists: part I. Solid State Technol 32:105–12.
 55. Mohr, J., W. Ehrfeld, D. Munchmeyer, and A. Stutz. 1989. 
Resist technology for deep-etch synchrotron radiation 
lithography. Makromol Chem Macromol Symp 24:231–51.
 56. Gottert, J., J. Mohr, and C. Muller. 1991. Mikrooptische 
Komponenten aus PMMA, Hergestellt Durch Roent-
gentiefenlithographie Werkstoffe der Mikrotechnik-Bais 
fur neue Producte. VDI Berichte Düsseldorf, Germany: 
Deutscher Ingenieur-Verlag, pp. 249–63.
 57. Wollersheim, O., H. Zumaque, J. Hormes, J. Langen, P. 
Hoessel, L. Haussling, and G. Hoffman. 1994. Radiation 
chemistry of poly(lactides) as new polymer resists for the 
LIGA process. J Micromech Microeng 4:84–93.
 58. Madou, M. J., and M. Murphy. 1995. Unpublished results.
 59. Mohr, J., W. Ehrfeld, and D. Munchmeyer. 1988. 
Requirements on resist layers in deep-etch synchrotron 
radiation lithography. J Vac Sci Technol B6:2264–67.
 60. Ehrfeld, 
W. 
1994. 
Notes 
from 
handouts. 
The 
Commercialization of Microsystems. September 11–16, 
Banff Conference Center, Banff, Canada.
 61. Campbell, S. A. 1996. The science and engineering of micro-
electronic fabrication. New York: Oxford University Press.
 62. Vladimirsky, O. 1995. Private communication with the 
author, LSU.
 63. Galhotra, V., C. Marques, Y. Desta, K. Kelly, M. Despa, A. 
Pendse, and J. Collier. 1996. Fabrication of mold inserts 
using a modified LIGA procedure. SPIE: micromachining 
and microfabrication process technology II. Austin, TX.
 64. Rogers, J., C. Marques, and K. Kelly. 1996. Cyanoacrylate 
bonding of thick resists for LIGA. SPIE: microlithography and 
metrology in micromachining II. Austin, TX.
 65. Becker, E. W., W. Ehrfeld, and D. Munchmeyer. 1984. 
Untersuchungen zur abbildungsgenauigkeit der rontgentiefenlithog-
raphie mit synchrotronstrahlung. KfK report no. 3732. Karlsruhe, 
Germany: KfK. Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe.
 66. Munchmeyer, D. 1984. PhD thesis. University of Karhsruhe, 
Germany.
 67. Menz, W., and P. Bley. 1993. Mikrosystemtechnik fur 
Ingenieure. Weinheim, Germany: VCH Publishers.
 68. Editorial. 1994. Commercial Brochure.
 69. Harmening, M., W. Bacher, P. Bley, A. El-Kholi, H. Kalb, 
B. Kowanz, W. Menz, A. Michel, and J. Mohr. 1992. 
Proceedings: IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS 
’92). Travemunde, Germany: IEEE.
 70. Mohr, J., C. Burbaum, P. Bley, W. Menz, and U. Wallrabe. 
1990. Microsystem technologies 90. Ed. H. Reichl. Berlin: 
Springer.
 71. Tabata, O., H. You, H. Shiraishi, H. Nakanishi, T. Nishimoto, 
K. Yamamoto, and Y. Baba. 2000. Micro total analysis systems 
2000: proceedings of the μTAS 2000 symposium. Enschede, the 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
 72. Bley, P., J. Gottert, M. Harmening, M. Himmelhaus, W. Menz, 
J. Mohr, C. Muller, and U. Wallrabe. 1991. Microsystem tech-
nologies ’91. Eds. R. Krahn and H. Reichl. Berlin: VDE-Verlag.
 73. Gottert, J., J. Mohr, and C. Muller. 1992. Integrierte Optik 
und Mikrooptik mit Polymeren. Mainz, Germany: Max-
Planck-Institut für Polymerforschung.
 74. Ghica, V., and W. Glashauser. 1982. Verfahren fur die 
Spannungsrissfreie 
Entwicklung 
von 
Bestrahlthen 
Polymethylmethacrylate-Schichten, in Deutsche Offen-
legungsschrift. Patent No. 3039110, Germany.
 75. Maner, A., S. Harsch, and W. Ehrfeld. 1988. Mass produc-
tion of microdevices with extreme aspect ratios by electro-
forming. Plating Surface Finish 75:60–65.
 76. Harsch, S., W. Ehrfeld, and A. Maner. 1988. Untersuchungen 
zur herstellung von mikrostrukturen grosser strukturhöhe durch gal-
vanoformung im nickelsilfamatelektrolyten. KfK report no. 4455. 
Karlsruhe, Germany: Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe.
 77. Mohr, J., and M. Strohmann. 1992. Examination of long-term 
stability of metallic LIGA microstructures by electromagnetic 
activation. J Micromech Microeng 2:193–95.
 78. Romankiw, L. T., and T. A. Palumbo. 1987. Proceedings: sym-
posium on electrodeposition technology, theory and practice. San 
Diego.
 79. Masuko, N., T. Osaka, and Y. Ito, eds. 1996. Electrochemical 
technology: innovation and new developments. Tokyo and 
Amsterdam: Kodansha and Gordon and Breach Science 
Publishers, copublishers.
 80. Dukovic, J. O. 1993. Feature-scale simulation of resist pat-
terned electrodeposition. IBM J Res Dev 37:125–40.
 81. Leyendecker, K., W. Bacher, W. Stark, and A. Thommes. 
1994. New microelectrodes for the investigation of the 
electroforming of LIGA microstructures. Electrochim Acta 
39:1139–43.
 82. Sales Brochure, 1994. RK Kissler, Speyer, Germany.
 83. Hagmann, P., and W. Ehrfeld. 1988. Fabrication of micro-
structures of extreme structural heights by reaction injec-
tion molding. J Polymer Process Soc 4:188–95.
 84. Burbaum, C., J. Mohr, P. Bley, and W. Ehrfeld. 1991. 
Fabrication of capacitive acceleration sensors by the LIGA 
technique. Sensors Actuators A A25:559–63.
 85. Guckel, H., K. J. Skrobis, T. R. Christenson, J. Klein, S. Han, 
B. Choi, and E. G. Lovell. 1991. Proceedings: IEEE micro elec-
tro mechanical systems (MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan.
 86. Harmening, M., W. Bacher, and W. Menz. 1991. Molding 
plateable micropatterns of electrically insulating and elec-
trically conducting poly(methyl methacrylate)s by the LIGA 
technique. Makromol Chem Macromol Symp 50:277–84.

[Page 642]
642   Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
 87. Weber, L., W. Ehrfeld, H. Freimuth, M. Lacher, H. Lehr, and 
B. Pech. SPIE: micromachining and microfabrication process 
technology II. Austin, TX.
 88. Madou, M. 1997. Fundamentals of microfabrication. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
 89. Wimberger-Friedl, R. 1999. Injection molding of sub-µm 
grating optical elements. Proc SPE ANTEC 57:476–80.
 90. Momma, C., S. Nolte, N. Chichkov, B. V. Alvensleben, and 
F. A. Tunermann. 1997. Precise laser ablation with ultra-
short pulses. Appl Surf Sci 109/110:15–19.
 91. Warrington, R. O. 1999. Novel microfabrication options for 
BioMEMS conference (proceedings). San Francisco: The 
Knowledge Foundation.
 92. Roberts, M. A., J. S. Rossier, P. Bercier, and H. Girault. 1997. 
UV laser machined polymer substrates for the development 
of microdiagnostic systems. Anal Chem 69:2035–42.
 93. Becker, H., and C. Gärtner. 2000. Polymer microfabrica-
tion methods for microfluidic analytical applications. 
Electrophoresis 21:12–26.
 94. Preu, G., A. Wolff, D. Cramer, and U. Bast. 1991. Proceedings: 
second European ceramic society conference (2nd ECerS ’91). 
Augsburg, Germany: European Ceramic Society.
 95. Lubitz, K. 1989. Mikrostrukturierung von Piezokeramik. 
Düsseldorf, Germany: VDI-Tagungsbericht.
 96. Maner, A., S. Harsch, and W. Ehrfeld. 1987. Proceedings: 74th 
AESF annual technical conference (SUR/FIN ‘87). Chicago: 
AESF.
 97. Shew, B.-Y., Y. Cheng, C.-H. Lin, W.-P. Ma, G.-J. Huang, 
C.-L. Kuo, S.-C. Tseng, D.-S. Lee, and G.-L. Chang. 1999. 
Manufacturing process for LIGA spinnerets. Sensors 
Materials 11:329–37.
 98. Gottert, J., J. Mohr, and C. Muller. 1992. Proceedings: micro 
system technologies ’92. Berlin: VDE-Verlag.
 99. Editorial. 1994. Commercial brochure. http://www.imm-
mainz.de/.

[Page C]
V O L U M E  I I
55194
ISBN: 978-1-4200-5519-1
9 781420 055191
90000
Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology
Focuses on Emerging Trends and Traditional Manufacturing Methods
Designed for science and engineering students, Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and 
Nanotechnology focuses on emerging trends in processes for fabricating MEMS and NEMS devices. 
The book reviews different forms of lithography, subtractive material removal processes, and additive 
technologies, detailing those that differ the most from the miniaturization processes used to fashion ICs. It 
exhaustively covers top-down and bottom-up fabrication processes and compares the merits of the different 
approaches. Fully illustrated in color, the text contains end-of-chapter problems, worked examples, extensive 
references for further reading, and an extensive glossary of terms.
Topics include:
• 
Alternative next-generation lithographies (NGEs), including extreme ultraviolet (EUV), x-ray, 
and charged particle lithographies
• 
Lithography techniques in the early research and development stage, such as very thin resist layers 
and block copolymers, zone plate array lithography, quantum lithography, and proximal probe-
based techniques
• 
Gas and vapor dry etching processes, including chemical, physical, and chemical-physical 
• 
Wet chemical etching, wet bulk micromachining, thermal removing techniques, and traditional 
and nontraditional mechanical removing techniques
• 
Recent developments to miniaturized mechanical manufacturing equipment, the so-called 
desktop factories
• 
Additive (forming) processes, physical vapor deposition processes, chemical vapor deposition 
micromachining, thin ﬁlm properties, and surface micromachining
• 
Additive chemical, photochemical, and electrochemical processes geared towards BioMEMS 
applications, thermal forming techniques, and plastic molding techniques
The second volume in Fundamentals of Microfabrication and Nanotechnology, Third Edition, Three-Volume 
Set, the book provides a guide for establishing the appropriate fabrication technique for any type of micro- 
or nanomachine. 
Other volumes in Fundamentals of Microfabrication and Nanotechnology, Third Edition, Three-Volume Set 
include:
Solid-State Physics, Fluidics, and Analytical Techniques in Micro- and Nanotechnology
From MEMS to Bio-MEMS and Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Mechanical Engineering/Bioengineering/Electrical Engineering/Materials Science/Manufacturing Engineering
