# nil_review_2025_lin
# Extracted from: nil_review_2025_lin.pdf
# Total PDF pages: 29
# Page numbering: from PDF page labels
# ============================================================


[Page 1]
30 years of nanoimprint: development, 
momentum and prospects
30 years of nanoimprint: development, 
momentum and prospects
30 years of nanoimprint: development, 
momentum and prospects
Wei-Kuan Lin, L. Jay Guo*
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001

[Page 2]
30 years of nanoimprint: development, momentum and prospects
Wei-Kuan Lin and L. Jay Guo
Citation: Lin W-K, Guo LJ. 30 years of nanoimprint: development, momentum and prospects. Opto-Electronic Technology
1, 250001(2025).
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
Received: 12 May 2025; Accepted: 23 June 2025; Published online: 29 June 2025
Related articles
Fast source mask co-optimization method for high-NA EUV lithography
Ziqi Li, Lisong Dong, Xu Ma, Yayi Wei
Opto-Electronic Advances    2024, 7(4): 230235        doi: 10.29026/oea.2024.230235
OptoGPT: A foundation model for inverse design in optical multilayer thin film structures
Taigao Ma, Haozhu Wang, L. Jay Guo
Opto-Electronic Advances    2024, 7(7): 240062        doi: 10.29026/oea.2024.240062
More related articles in Opto-Electronic Journals Group website  
 OE_Journal
 @OptoElectronAdv

[Page 3]
DOI: 10.29026/oet.2025.250001     |     CSTR: 32419.14.oet.2025.250001
Open Access
30 years of nanoimprint: development, momentum and prospects
Wei-Kuan Lin and L. Jay Guo*
 
Abstract: 2025  marks  the  30th  anniversary  of  nanoimprint  lithography  (NIL).  Since  its  inception  in  1995,  and
through global efforts over the past three decades, nanoimprint has emerged as the primary alternative to extreme
ultraviolet (EUV) lithography for deep-nanoscale silicon (Si) electronics. Numerous semiconductor companies have
recognized NIL's manufacturing quality and are actively being evaluated for the production of the most advanced
semiconductor devices. Nanoimprinting's potential extends beyond silicon chip fabrication and wafer-scale applica-
tions.  With  its  high  throughput  and  3D  patterning  capabilities,  NIL  is  becoming  a  key  technology  for  fabricating
emerging devices, such as flat optics and augmented reality glasses. This review summarizes the key developments
and applications of nanoimprint lithography, with a particular focus on the latest industry advancements in nano-Si
device manufacturing and nanophotonics applications.
Keywords: nanoimprinting; manufacturing; high-volume production; semiconductor
 
 Introduction
Nanoimprint  lithography  (NIL)  was  first  introduced  by
Chou et al.1,2 to provide a cost-effective solution for high-
resolution  nanopatterning  across  a  wide  range  of  applica-
tions,  such  as  fabricating  nanoscale single-domain
magnets3.  In  his  seminal  work1,2,  Chou  employed  a
patterned hard mold with 25 nm feature size to mechani-
cally press onto a substrate coated with a thin PMMA layer
at  elevated  temperatures.  This  process  demonstrated,  for
the  first  time,  that  mechanical  molding  could  reliably
produce features at the nanometer scale, orders of magni-
tude smaller than what was previously considered possible
in plastic molding. This breakthrough fundamentally chal-
lenged the prevailing assumptions about the limitations of
mechanical  patterning.  Another  critical  finding  from  this
early  work  was  that  the  mold  protrusions  could  nearly
displace all the polymer resist, leading to a near-zero resid-
ual  layer  thickness.  This  phenomenon  is  essential  for
achieving high-resolution nanostructures.
Following  these  foundational  advances,  Chou’s  group
conducted  a  comprehensive  series  of  studies  that  laid  the
groundwork  for  the  development  and  industrialization  of
NIL. Key contributions included: demonstrating sub-10 nm
imprinting resolution for metal contact structures4,5, identi-
fying  key  process  parameters,  particularly  the  mold–
resist interface4,6, characterizing mold durability and pattern
fidelity for large-scale production7, exploring NIL’s unique
features, such as imprinting on non-planar surfaces, direct
3D  patterning8,  and  multilayer  structuring9,  developing
new  NIL  systems,  such  as  roller-based  imprinters10,  and
establishing  the  first  NIL-focused  commercial  enterprise.
Chou’s team also demonstrated a broad range of NIL appli-
cations,  including  high-storage  disks3,11,12,  the  first  silicon
nanoelectronic  devices13,  sub-wavelength  optical  compo-
nents14,  organic  thin-film  transistors15,  and  nanofluidic
devices16,  showcasing  NIL’s  versatility  and  transformative
potential.
Later, Haisma et al.17 (mold lithography) and Colburn et
al.18 (step  and  flash  imprinting)  developed  UV  nanoim-
printing  lithography,  respectively,  by  using  slightly  differ-
ent  implementation  methods  and  addressing  the  high-
temperature requirements of thermal imprinting. In 1998,
the roller-based NIL was proposed to reduce the required
force and achieve uniform imprinting10. The work inspired
the later development of high-throughput yet low-cost solu-
tions for continuous nanopatterning10,19. In 1999 and 2000,
Lebib et al. and Heidari et al. demonstrated the larger-scale
patterning  capability  at  the  4-inch  and  6-inch  wafer-level
with  sub-100  nm  resolution  respectively20,21.  In  2003,
nanoimprinting  technology  was  first  selected  for  Interna-
tional Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) for
patterning 32-nm and beyond technology nodes22. In 2004,
 
Received: 12 May 2025
Accepted: 23 June 2025
Published online: 29 June 2025
 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109 , USA.
*Correspondence: LJ Guo, E-mail: guo@umich.edu
Review
www.oejournal.org/oet
July 2025, Vol. 1, No. 1
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)

[Page 4]
Molecular  Imprint  Inc.  launched  the  first  step-and-repeat
nanoimprinting  tools  that  patterned  an  entire  wafer  by
using a small stamp on a field-to-field basis23. This idea was
then used to make and replicate a large working template to
decrease  the  cost  of  molds8.  The  composite  mold  strategy
was  also  developed  in  the  2000s.  It  incorporates  a  rigid
patterned layer supported by a flexible or soft intermediate
layer and a backing substrate to ensure conformal contact
over  the  entire  imprinting  area24,25.  With  this  design,  low
defect  rates  and  high-fidelity  imprinting  with  sub-50  nm
resolution can be simultaneously achieved. As a result, the
composite  mold  approach  has  been  widely  adopted  for
imprinting  processes  that  target  moderate  resolution  and
high quality24. In 2023, Canon launched the first-ever semi-
conductor-grade  nanoimprinting  tools  that  match  the
industry's  demanding  requirements,  advancing  nanoim-
printing lithography to a new era.
As the NIL technology matures, several applications have
been  demonstrated.  Some  hard  disk  companies  have
applied the concept of NIL to develop patterned magnetic
nanostructures to expand the disk density beyond 1 Tb/in2
by  creating  magnetic  nanostructures  with  small  feature
sizes (<20 nm) and tight pitch spacings (< 30 nm)26,27. High-
resolution polymer OLED was fabricated by using NIL in
200228. Since 2010, NIL has also been used to manufacture
wafer-level  micro-optics  to  fabricate  compact  optical
modules  for  mobile  device  applications  at  a  high  volume.
The high throughput and large-scale features are also used
for display or panel-sized nanopatterning applications. It is
also  widely  used  in  research  for  microfluidic  devices  and
biomedical applications. As new applications, such as next-
generation gene sequencing, augmented reality, flat-optics,
semiconductor  devices,  and  several  others  emerged  after
2020,  NIL  has  finally  found  its  niche.  These  new  applica-
tions  require  the  technology  to  be  high-resolution,  large-
area, and have tight process control, which perfectly caters
to NIL’s advantage, making NIL irreplaceable. It is expected
that these applications will maintain a high growth rate in
the following years and can finally benefit from the devel-
opments of NIL.
In  this  review,  we  will  first  introduce  the  essential
elements  of  nanoimprinting  lithography  and  identify  the
key  innovations  of  NIL  over  the  past  30  years.  We  will
discuss the long-standing issues of nanoimprinting and the
general solutions for the challenges. In the 2nd part of the
manuscript, we will focus on the current application of NIL
in industrial manufacturing. Examples and manufacturing
standards  will  be  present.  The  last  part  will  discuss  the
current trends and direction in the academic research area.
This work serves as a review of the technological advance-
ments  in  NIL,  with  a  focus  on  the  more  recent  develop-
ments, especially those from the industry. These represent
the views of the authors, who do not intend to report the
history of NIL. The readers are referred to many outstand-
ing reviews published previously.
 The basic types of NIL
 Thermal nanoimprinting (T-NIL)
Thermal nanoimprinting is the first kind of nanoimprint-
ing lithography1. The working principle of thermal imprint-
ing  is  shown  in Fig. 1(a).  It  starts  with  patterning  a  mold
with the inverse tone of the final structure. Many types of
thermoplastic  materials,  such  as  polystyrene,  PMMA,  and
polycarbonate, can be used as NIL resist. After the resist is
spin-coated onto a substrate, the mold is then pressed into
the resist material at 50–80 °C above the resist's glass transi-
tion temperature (Tg) for a few minutes to allow the highly
viscous polymer to flow and fill the voids between the mold
and the substrate. Then, the substrate is cooled and sepa-
rated from the master mold29.
Theoretically, as long as the materials can be heated up to
a  glassy  state  with  sufficient  mobility  under  a  reasonable
temperature and pressure, materials can be patterned using
thermal  nanoimprinting  lithography.  The  direct  benefit  is
that  nanostructures  can  be  patterned  on  widely  accessible
materials at a meager cost, allowing users to achieve versa-
tile  functionalities  by  incorporating  different  functional
materials  into  the  nanostructures.  It  also  allows  direct
molding of integrated photonic devices in a single step, e.g.,
imprinted  polymer  microring  resonators30−34.  Thermal
nanoimprinting can also be used to pattern sheets of mate-
rials directly, such as thermoplastic and nanocellulose films,
without coating an additional layer of imprinting resist.
Even though the thermoplastic becomes flowable under
high  temperatures  and  pressure  in  T-NIL,  the  polymer's
viscosity  usually  remains  high,  resulting  in  a  prolonged
imprinting  time.  Additionally,  these  thermoplastic  resists
tend to stick to the mold, which seriously affects the fidelity
and  quality  of  the  pattern  definition.  Surfactants  for  easy
mold releasing can be incorporated into resist formulation.
 UV nanoimprinting
Soon after the first demonstration of thermal NIL, the ultra-
violet  NIL  (UV-NIL)  process  was  developed  by  using
photo-curable  resin  instead  of  thermoplastic  materials  to
avoid  high-temperature  heating  procedures18.  The  overall
process  procedure  is  illustrated  in Fig. 1(b).  UV-nanoim-
printing  starts  by  coating/dropping  UV-curable  precursor
resins  on  the  substrate  and  then  pressing  the  mold  with
pressure.  Since  the  UV  resin  is  intrinsically  fluid-like,  the
imprinting can be carried out at ambient temperature, thus
improving  process  throughput.  After  applying  pressure
with sufficient time to force the resist flow into the voids on
the  mold,  UV  light  triggers  the  cross-linking  of  the  UV
resist to form a stable nanostructure. Finally, the mold and
the imprinted substrate are separated. The low imprinting
temperature  property  also  allows  UV-NIL  to  be  imple-
mented on other substrates, such as plastic films. However,
UV shrinkage of the resins is one of the concerns that can
cause pattern distortion and demolding difficulties.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 2 of 27)

[Page 5]
 NIL mold
NIL  produces  a  replica  of  the  imprinting  mold,  including
the edge roughness of the patterns on the mold36. Therefore,
the  master  mold  must  be  fabricated  with  high-resolution
technology  to  ensure  its  quality.  The  roughness  of  the
etched pattern surface can potentially cause an increase of
frictional  force  between  the  mold  and  resist,  leading  to
pattern breakage during the demolding process. In general,
the intense inductively coupled plasma (ICP) power and the
Bosch process with scallop structures can significantly cause
roughness and should be avoided.
When  designing  the  mold  patterns,  the  layout  effect
needs  to  be  considered.  Even  though  nanoimprinting
lithography  is  not  limited  by  optical  diffraction,  the  final
imprinting quality can still be affected by the pattern layout.
Loading effect or high aspect ratio structures can result in
non-uniform resist issues and void defects37. Several tech-
nologies, such as inkjet dispensing, have been dedicated to
solving  these  issues38.  Having  a  low  surface  energy  of  the
mold is also crucial to the pattern fidelity during demold-
ing. The resist can stick to the mold and cause permanent
defect issues. Surface energy reduction can be achieved by
coating a fluorosilane-based self-assembled monolayer with
solvent or vapor incubation39.
 NIL by hard mold
The  mold  of  NIL  can  be  generally  categorized  into  two
major types based on mold stiffness: the hard mold and the
soft  mold,  suited  for  different  applications40−42.  The  hard
mold materials are typically silicon, dielectric materials, and
metals with high Young’s modulus43. The hard mold's high
toughness and high strength prevent the mold from defor-
mation during the high-pressure imprinting process. Most
high-resolution applications, such as semiconductor device
imprinting,  use  this  method  to  achieve  higher  pattern
fidelity44−47. Figure 2(a) shows that sub-10 nm contact holes
are faithfully imprinted using hard mold NIL and form an
Au  contact  after  metal  evaporation  and  the  resist  liftoff
process5.
On the other hand, hard mold imprinting can pose chal-
lenging issues. First, non-uniform pressure can arise from
the  thickness  variation  of  the  substrate/mold,  causing
imprinting defects or even mold/wafer breakage. The use of
pressurized  air  to  imprint  is  of  particular  significance  in
ensuring uniform pressure in a situation like this47. Second,
providing  the  conformal  contact  between  mold  and
substrate is difficult. The presence of particles, non-flat or
non-parallel  surfaces,  or  even  air  trapped  between  the
supporting plate can lead to non-conformal contact, result-
ing in imprinting defects47.
 NIL by composite mold
Soft NIL has been developed to circumvent the disadvan-
tages of hard mold NIL with slightly compromised pattern
fidelity.  The  soft  nanoimprinting  utilized  high-flexibility
materials,  such  as  polydimethylsiloxane  (PDMS)48,49 and
perfluoro-polyethers  (PFPE)50,51,  as  the  imprinting  mold.
The high flexibility and low surface energy feature allow the
mold  to  deform  slightly  with  the  presence  of  particles  or
residual  contaminants,  providing  better  contact  between
the  mold  and  the  substrate.  Due  to  the  benefits,  the  soft-
NIL can be easily implemented under less restricted condi-
tions. It has a higher dust tolerance than hard mold NIL.
Moreover,  soft  NIL  can  be  incorporated  into  the  roller-
based imprinting system for high throughput applications
due to its flexible features52. Another essential feature of soft
NIL is that it can be applied to a curved surface to expand
its applicability, which is impossible by traditional NIL or
challenging to achieve by photolithography53.
One significant challenge of using soft molds for pattern-
ing is mold distortion during the imprinting process, limit-
ing  the  achievable  resolution,  aspect  ratio,  and  pattern
density36. This issue can be lessened using a composite mold
strategy54,  where  thin  high-modulus  materials  (such  as
polyurethane  acrylate  resin54 or  high-modulus  PDMS55)
with  surface  relief  structures  grafted  on  top  of  the  low-
modulus  materials  and  flexible  carriers,  such  as  regular
PDMS, thin glasses, or PET films. This strategy combines
the advantages of the high-resolution property of the rigid
mold NIL, derived from the high-toughness patterned layer,
with  the  conformal  feature  of  the  soft  and  flexible  stamp
substrate. As shown in Fig. 2(b), a composite mold consist-
ing  of  rigid  features  on  a  flexible  PDMS  support  can
successfully achieve sub-15 nm resolution on a flat substrate
and  faithfully  duplicate  gratings  structure  with  200  nm
pitch on a cylindrical surface of a single mode optical fiber
with  a  125  μm  diameter25,54.  Another  implementation  of
composite  mold  is  the  so-called  substrate  conformal
imprinting lithography (SCIL), where a deformable cushion
layer is formed between the rigid nanopatterned layer and
the  stiff  support  plate,  providing  out-of-plane  flexibility,
 
NIL (Chou)
S-FIL (Willson)
UV
a
b
Fig. 1 | Basic imprinting type of nanoimprinting lithography. (a) Thermal
NIL  developed  by  Chou.  (b)  UV-imprinting/step-flash  imprinting  devel-
oped  by  Willson.  Figure  reproduced  with  permission  from  ref.35,  IOP
Publishing.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 3 of 27)

[Page 6]
while retaining in-plane stiffness to preserve pattern fidelity
and  alignment  precision. Figure 2(c) demonstrates  that
high-quality,  high-resolution  patterning  can  still  be
achieved  despite  dust  particles  by  using  this  SCIL.  The
composite mold strategy is widely used for high through-
put  and  large-scale  applications,  such  as  wafer-level
imprinting  and  roller-based  imprinting.  The  composite
mold  strategy  has  become  one  standard  solution  for
modern nanoimprinting technology.
 Working stamp
The primary concern in NIL is the high cost of the imprint-
ing mold and its limited lifetime. Fabricating an enormous
mold with a 300 mm wafer size through electron beam (E-
beam)  writing  is  costly  and  impractical.  In  addition,
because the molds directly interact with the resist and the
substrates,  they  are  susceptible  to  damage.  As  the  most
expensive element in the NIL system, the short life span of
the  mold  can  significantly  increase  the  cost  of  ownership
and potentially raise quality concerns about the process.
To  address  the  issues,  the  working  stamp  strategy  is
developed, in which a working stamp is duplicated from the
master  mold  and  is  used  to  perform  the  actual
imprinting56,57. Using a cm-sized master mold prepared by
E-beam writing and performing the step-and-repeat imprin-
ting on a large substrate, a large working stamp with wafer-
scale or even larger size with panel size can be replicated.
The  working  stamp  method  can  also  increase  the  life-
time of the master mold to reduce the cost further. In most
cases,  the  master  mold  can  only  perform  several  hundred
times  of  imprinting  before  considerable  degradation.
However,  by  using  the  working  templates,  the  lifetime  of
the master mold can be extended by several orders. As an
example,  in  semiconductor  manufacturing,  the  E-beam
master mold can make >100 replicas, and each replica can
pattern  >1000  wafers,  leading  to  an  equivalent  master
template life of >100,000 wafers, close to the lifetime of the
reticles in traditional photolithography44. In metalens appli-
cations, the use of a working stamp also extended the life-
time of the master mold by 15−20×, allowing the fabrica-
tion  of  >10,000  replicated  wafers  by  using  one  master
mold58. The working stamp idea is now widely adopted in
academics  and  industry,  even  for  the  most  advanced
processes.  Various  working  stamps  have  been  developed,
such  as  soft-working  stamps58,  hard-working  stamps44,
large-size  working  stamps,  and  water-soluble  working
stamps59 for  different  applications.  Dedicated  tools  have
been produced for working mold replications60,61.
 Recent advancements in NIL molds
In  addition  to  the  molds  mentioned  above,  several  other
types of molds—such as super-resolution imprinting molds,
high-durability  working  stamps,  and  natural  molds —are
also being actively developed. Typically, the feature sizes on
these  molds  must  match  the  desired  pattern  dimensions,
making the fabrication of molds with ultra-fine structures
particularly  challenging.  However,  it  has  been  shown  that
special treatments, such as heat treatment62 or mechanical
pressing63,  can  effectively  reduce  the  feature  sizes  on
imprinting molds, enabling the generation of even smaller
structures64. For example, Pina-Hernandez demonstrated in
reference62 that the imprinting feature size could be reduced
from 55 nm to 10 nm after two shrinking cycles by using
silsesquioxane imprint resist material65.
Most  of  the  aforementioned  working  stamps  are  made
from  polymer  materials.  While  they  offer  high  flexibility,
 
a
Mold
NIL imprint
Surface
treatment
i
UV cure
ImprinƟng on a curved surface
Releasing hybrid mold
Fiber
UV exposure
ElasƟc support
Cleaved facet
Rigid paƩern layer
O2 plasma
5 nm
5 nm
5 nm
500 nm
Composite stamp
10 nm
Au contacts
b
c
ii
ii
i
iii
Fig. 2 | Different types of molds in NIL. (a) Hard mold is used for high-resolution patterning. (b) Flexible composite mold can be used for imprinting on a
curved surface. (b-i) The imprinting process. (b-ii) The flexible composite mold. (b-iii) The imprinted grating structures on the optical fiber. (c) The substrate
conformal nanoimprinting lithography can provide high-resolution conformal imprinting by using the composite mold. (c-i) The composite mold. (c-ii) The
conformal imprinting over particle contaminants. Figure reproduced with permission from: (a) ref.5, AIP Publishing; (b) ref.25, American Chemical Society;
(c) ref.24, under a Creative Commons Attribution License.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 4 of 27)

[Page 7]
their low melting point and low modulus limit their suit-
ability for T-NIL and lead to durability issues. To overcome
this limitation, durable crystalline working templates have
been developed by imprinting UV-curable resin mixed with
nanoparticles —such  as  ZrO₂  and  TiO₂ —followed  by
annealing66,67. These hard molds exhibit high pattern fidelity
over more than 100,000 molding cycles without delamina-
tion or breakage.
Besides artificially making the imprinting templates, the
molds can also made from natural nanostructures, such as
cicada wings68 and collagen fibers69, to fabricate biomimetic
structures at low cost. These biomimetic patterns have pro-
ven effective in preventing bacterial adhesion, enhancing cell
coupling,  and  supporting  tissue  engineering  applications.
 NIL resist
Nanoimprinting  resist  is  another  critical  element  of  NIL
that  directly  interacts  with  the  mold  and  is  patterned  in
nanoscales. Depending on the functionality, the imprinting
resist can be used as a reactive ion etching (RIE) mask to
transfer  the  pattern  to  the  underlying  layer  (NIL  +  RIE
method) or directly used as the functional structures for the
products (direct NIL method), such as polymer microlens
and  grating,  as  shown  in Fig. 3(a)70,71.  Excellent  etching
properties  are  desired  to  achieve  better  pattern  transfer
when used as an etching mask. The residual layer thickness
control  and  the  ashing  completeness  can  also  be  critical.
When used directly as part of the final device, the proper-
ties  of  the  imprinting  resist,  including  refractive  index,
conductivity,  and  optical  transparency,  will  directly  influ-
ence the functionality of the final structure.
To achieve high-quality imprinting, several factors need
to  be  considered72.  First,  the  NIL  resist  should  be  highly
deformable  under  applied  pressure  and  have  sufficient
mechanical  strength  and  good  mold-releasing  properties.
Second,  the  adhesive  force  between  the  resist  and  the
substrate must be greater than the frictional force between
the resist and the mold. In this regard, adhesive promotion
coating  is  sometimes  necessary  to  form  a  stable  bond
between the resist and the desired substrate. The imprint-
ing  resists  are  considered  the  most  critical  elements  for
imprinting  systems,  and  most  of  the  NIL  foundries  have
their associated imprinting resist optimized for the tool and
process. Various resists have also been developed for appli-
cations,  such  as  thermally  curable  polymer71,73,  particle-
containing resin, fast-curing resist74, etc.
With the direct patterning feature, NIL can process mate-
rials that are difficult to pattern by traditional optical lithog-
raphy,  including  polymers,  metals,  and  nanomaterials73,75.
Intriguing devices can be built with a combination of func-
tional  polymers  and  nanoimprinting.  Lin  et  al.  demon-
strated  the  highly  sensitive  ultrasound  sensor  by  thermal
imprinting  optoelastic  polymers  to  form  microring
resonators,  as  shown  in Fig. 3(b-i)54.  Much  progress  has
been made since then. Lin et al. used soft NIL and a dama-
scene process to fabricate all-polymer high Q-factor micror-
ing resonators, with images shown in Fig. 3(b-ii)54. Such a
damascene  structure  can  allow  the  backfill  of  functional
materials  for  more  diverse  applications54,76.  Lin  et  al.  used
thermal  imprinting  to  form  a  template  and  ink-printing
electro-optic polymers to make a polymer E-O modulator77.
The light-emitting conjugated polymer was used as a gain
medium  and  was  shaped  into  a  laser  cavity  to  form
nanolasers78.  Ferroelectric  polymers  were  also  utilized  to
achieve non-volatile, low-voltage memory effects79.
The  development  of  non-organic  nanoimprinting  resist
is active in both academia and industry. One of the motiva-
tions  is  to  support  emerging  photonic  applications  and
overcome  the  low  refractive  index  limitation  of  polymer
materials,  thereby  achieving  versatile  functionalities  for
applications such as augmented reality and flat optics. One
common  strategy  is  to  incorporate  high  refractive  index
metal  or  metal-oxide  nanoparticles,  such  as  TiO280 and
ZrO281 particles,  into  the  polymer  resist  to  form  a  hybrid
composite  resin.  Based  on  the  formulation,  the  hybrid
composite resin can be spin-coated or inkjet-cast onto the
substrate  and  be  used  for  either  T-NIL  or  UV-NIL.  After
imprinting,  thermal  annealing  can  be  applied  to  further
solidify the structure. The drawback of the method is that
the refractive index is still limited due to non-full crystal-
lization  in  this  scheme82.  In  addition,  the  presence  of  NP
results in a non-smooth structural surface, causing strong
scattering80. A slight shrinking of the final structure can also
be observed.
Sol-gel synthesis is another commonly used method for
incorporating  metal,  inorganic,  and  metal  oxide  materials
into nanoimprinting structures83. In this method, a sol-gel
solution with a precursor is first prepared and stabilized in
the alcohol solvent. Then, a controlled amount of water is
added to initiate the formation of the colloidal solution. The
solution is then spin-coated and pressed with the patterned
soft  mold  at  an  elevated  temperature  to  perform  thermal
imprinting, drying, and crystallization. Since the solidified
sol-gel material may create stress on the mold, it is neces-
sary to use the soft mold. Elevating to a higher temperature
may  be  required  to  trigger  shrinkage  to  facilitate  the
demolding process. Kim et al. demonstrated that by imprin-
ting  TiO2 sol-gel  solution  followed  by  thermal  annealing
with different temperatures, the material phase of patterned
TiO2 and  the  refractive  index  can  be  tuned82.  It  is  worth
noting that the sol-gel-based method can result in substan-
tial structure shrinkage (~30%) after the structure is thor-
oughly dried. It is also possible to combine the nanoparticle
method and the sol-gel methods to form the new compos-
ite.  It  has  been  proven  that  a  high  percentage  of  NP  can
substantially reduce shrinkage, as shown in Fig. 3(c)80.
 Inkjet dispensing strategy
Spin coating can uniformly coat a resist layer on a substrate.
However, the material utilization is very low, with only 2%
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 5 of 27)

[Page 8]
of the resist remaining on the substrate after the spinning84.
Moreover, the non-uniform residual layer can happen after
imprinting,  degrading  the  pattern  density.  The  inkjet
dispensing  method  with  a  drop-on-demand  strategy  is
developed  to  solve  these  issues. Figure 3(d) shows  the
comparison with these two methods84. In the inkjet dispens-
ing method, the resist distribution can be adjusted based on
the structures and the pattern density to compensate for the
resist  loading  effect,  achieving  a  uniform  residual  layer
across the entire imprinted region. Additionally, the resist
filling  time  can  be  reduced  by  modifying  the  distribution
pattern,  such  as  breaking  larger  features  into  segmented
patterns to enhance filling speed45.
Despite its advantages, the inkjet dispensing process can
be time-consuming and requires specialized materials and
tools. The resist must have low viscosity at room tempera-
ture and be compatible with an inkjet printhead. The dedi-
cated  inkjet  dispensing  setup  requires  precise  machine
controls,  including  printing  position,  dispensing  volume,
filtering,  and  particle  management.  Due  to  the  high  costs
and  complex  setup,  inkjet  dispensing  is  mainly  used  to
produce  high-value  devices  requiring  precise  process
controls, such as metalenses, augmented reality waveguides,
and semiconductor devices86,87. This inkjet dispensing tech-
nology  has  been  integrated  into  high-end  imprinting
systems86,87.
 Imprinting method
 Plate-to-plate imprinting
Plate-to-plate imprinting is the first demonstrated nanoim-
printing method, as Fig. 4(a-i) illustrates88. In this method,
the  mold  and  imprinted  substrate  are  of  comparable  size
and are pressed together by two flat, rigid plates, followed
by UV curing or thermal embossing. This technique does
not  impose  many  restrictions  on  resist  dispensing  and  is
compatible with solid and soft molds, offering high process
compatibility  and  flexibility.  Plate-to-plate  imprinting  can
be implemented on a small scale for proof-of-concept stud-
ies. It can also be used to imprint an entire 300 mm wafer or
more  extensive  panel-size  substrate  for  manufacturing
purposes89. Additionally, it can be integrated with an align-
ment system to ensure < 1 µm overlay error. Plate-to-plate
imprinting  is  widely  used  in  the  industry  to  manufacture
wafer-level optical elements, such as lens arrays, followed by
wafer  stacking  to  form  compact  optical  modules90.  Many
advanced  tools  with  high-volume  manufacturing  records
are already available89,91.
Despite  the  simple  operation,  full  wafer  plate-to-plate
nanoimprint  lithography  has  a  few  significant  disadvan-
tages. First, directly fabricating a 12" or even larger template
through E-beam writing can be costly. Therefore, the step-
and-repeat  method  is  typically  required  to  make  a  large
working template. Second, as the imprinting size increases,
 
a
Imprint resist
i NIL+RIE
ii Direct NIL
NP/sol-gel resist
i Spin coaƟng
ii Inkjet coaƟng
i
ii
High RI material
Glass substrate
High Rl material
Glass substrate
Glass substrate
Substrate
PDMS
100/0 NP/Sol -As imprinted
100/0 NP/Sol-500 °C
°C
°C
500 nm
500 nm
500 nm
500 nm
500 nm
500 nm
80/20 NP/Sol-500 °C
0/100 NP/Sol-500 °C
80/20 NP/Sol -As imprinted
0/100 NP/Sol -As imprinted
SoŌ mold
h-PDMS
UV and pressure
UV resin
Dispensing
of resist
High speed
rotaƟon
On-demand inkjet system
Image
signal
Ink
Nozzle
Ink droplet
Heat or
piezo element
Solvent
evaporaƟon
Solvent
evaporaƟon
UV resin
TiO2NP
Glass substrate
1 μm
3 μm
c
d
b
Fig. 3 | Imprinting resist in NIL. (a-i) Imprinting resist as the etching mask (NIL+RIE). (a-ii) Imprinting resist as the functional structure (direct NIL). (b-i) Poly-
mer microring resonator (MRR) fabricated by direct NIL. (b-ii) Polymer microring resonator fabricated by damascene NIL process. (c) Images of fabricated
nanogratings using NIL with inorganic resist composed of different percentages of sol-gel solution and nanoparticles. (d) Different types of resist dispens-
ing  methods.  Figure  reproduced  with  permission  from:  (a-i)  ref.85,  SPIE;  (a-ii)  ref.70,  (b-i)  ref.54,  (b-ii)  ref.54,  under  a  Creative  Commons  licences;
(c) ref.80, American Chemical Society; (d) ref.84, under a Creative Commons licences.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 6 of 27)

[Page 9]
NIL  becomes  more  susceptible  to  defects,  including
repeated defects from foreign particles and random defects
from air bubbles44. Ensuring uniform temperature and pres-
sure  control  over  the  imprinting  area  is  also  challenging.
The large contact area also requires larger forces to provide
a suitable imprint pressure, which may exceed 20 kN over
an 8-inch wafer52. To address this issue, soft molds are typi-
cally used in most modern imprinters for the whole wafer
plate-to-plate  imprinting.  Third,  the  alignment  to  the
underlying layer on the full wafer scale can be tricky since
parasitic overlay errors increase with the field size44. Fourth,
the full wafer plate-to-plate imprinting is not a continuous
process,  where  the  mold  needs  to  be  lifted  and  placed
during each cycle, limiting the imprinting throughput.
 Step-and-repeat imprinting
Instead of using a large mold to pattern the entire wafer, the
step-and-repeat imprint lithography utilizes a smaller tem-
plate that contains only a few dies to pattern the large wafer
by  imprinting  it  multiple  times,  as  shown  in Fig. 4(a-ii).
This method significantly reduced the cost of preparing the
mold. Moreover, a smaller area imprinting is usually easier
and
 allows
 for
 better
 defectivity
 and
 overlay
management94,95. The disadvantage is the lower throughput,
which requires multiple imprinting to cover a large wafer
fully.  The  step-and-repeat  method  has  been  extensively
used for working stamp preparation, where a large working
stamp can be obtained by imprinting multiple times on the
same wafer94.
Inkjet dispensing step-and-repeat imprint lithography is
a notable advancement. It combines the advantages of both
the  step-and-repeat  (smaller  master  mold,  better  quality
control)  and  the  inkjet  dispensing  method  (thin  and
uniform  residual  layer),  allowing  NIL  to  achieve  <  3  nm
overlay error and tight process control suitable for the most
critical  applications96.  However,  it  comes  with  a  more
complicated  system  than  plate-to-plate  imprinting.  To
enhance  the  throughput,  multi-field  dispensing,  resist
distribution  optimization,  and  resist  surface  energy  engi-
neering are being implemented.
 Roller-based nanoimprinting
Roller-based nanoimprinting is another widely used imprin-
ting method, which starts with a continuous coating of the
substrate with imprinting resist and then pressing the mold-
ing roller against the substrate for pattern formation10,52,97.
The resist is cured using heat or UV exposure before it is
finally  detached  from  the  mold  on  the  other  side  of  the
imprint roller. The main advantage of roller-based imprint-
ing is that it can achieve continuous imprinting by rotating
the roller without the pressing and lifting process, boosting
the  throughput19,98.  In  addition,  the  contact  area  between
the mold and the substrate is smaller, making it easier for
imprinting control. The roller-based imprinting system can
be  further  categorized  into  roll-to-plate  and  roll-to-roll
nanoimprinting, as shown in Fig. 4(b, c)88,98. In roll-to-plate
imprinting, the substrate is flat and is placed right in con-
tact with the imprinting cylinder. As the roller rotates and
the substrate moves forward with a corresponding speed, the
pattern on the roller can be transferred onto the substrate
coated with resist through the UV-NIL or the T-NIL with
continuity. As for the roll-to-roll NIL process, an imprinting
 
a
b
d
c
CoaƟng
i Plate-to-plate
Roll-to-plate
Roll-to-roll
ii Step-and-repeat imprinƟng
200/300 mm master
150 mm master
S&R imprinƟng
e
Fig. 4 | (a-i)  Schematic  diagram  of  plate-to-plate  imprinting.  (a-ii)  Step-and-repeat  imprinting.  (b)  Roll-to-plate  imprinting.  (c)  Roll-to-roll  imprinting.
(d) Pictures of the roll-to-plate imprinting setup and the imprinted structures. Figure reproduced with permission from: (a-i, b, c) ref.88, SPIE; (a-ii) ref.92,
SPIE; (d) ref.88, 93, American Chemical Society.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 7 of 27)

[Page 10]
roller with a patterned surface is used to imprint onto a flexi-
ble substrate on a supporting roller instead of a flat plate in
roll-to-plate  NIL  processes,  as  shown  in Fig. 4(c, d).  The
entire  process  is  based  on  the  roll-to-roll  manufacturing
concept, which has the advantages of high throughput and
provides  an  up-and-coming  solution  for  industrial-scale
applications.  It  was  reported  that  gratings  of  70  nm  lines
were  achieved  using  UV  roll-to-roll  NIL,  with  an  imprint
speed up to approximately 1,400 mm/min52.
Despite  the  advantages,  there  are  several  challenges  in
roller-based nanoimprinting. First, the mold is not flat, and
the  pattern  needs  to  be  engraved  on  a  cylindrical  surface,
incompatible with the traditional E-beam writing method.
The easiest way is to use a flexible mold to wrap around the
roller with sufficient flexibility, such as polyethylene tereph-
thalate (PET) with polyurethane structures or electroplated
Ni shim as a durable mold for large volume manufacturing.
Second,  the  imprinting  resist  is  usually  thick,  and  the
uniformity is difficult to control. To solve this problem, the
inkjet  dispensing  method  can  be  applied  to  allow  better
residual  layer  control98.  Other  concerns  include  the  mold
separation at the end of the imprinting process. The rela-
tive movement of mold to the imprinted patterns can cause
a shear force during the demolding process and, therefore,
is subject to pattern collapse defects for tall and high aspect
ratio structures.
 Challenges in NIL
 Residual layer
Residual  layers  can  pose  significant  issues  for  NIL,  espe-
cially for critical dimension (CD) control and optical appli-
cations86.  When  the  imprinted  structure  is  used  as  the
pattern transfer layer, the residual layer must be removed
via  plasma  etching,  which  usually  causes  CD  drift99.  The
final residual layer must be well controlled to achieve better
process control. Minimizing the residual layer is crucial for
photonic  devices  like  AR  waveguides,  metalenses,  and
photonic  integrated  circuits54,88.  The  performance  of  the
optical  devices,  including  conversion  efficiency,  viewing
angles, and quality factor, is highly contingent on the thick-
ness of the residual layer and requires close attention.
One  strategy  for  minimizing  the  residual  layer  is  using
the inkjet dispensing method, where the distribution of the
resist droplets can be precisely calculated to avoid excessive
resists that result in a thick residual layer86. As presented in
ref.100,  when  imprinting  patterns  with  varying  fill  factors,
such as slanted gratings with a nonlinear depth profile, the
resulting residual layer thickness is usually thick and non-
uniform.  The  measured  residual  layer  thickness  ranges
from 308 nm to 377 nm. On the other hand, by using inkjet
coating to create customized NIL polymer layers, the range
of the residual layer can be decreased to 47 nm to 60 nm.
Other  strategies,  such  as  self-assembly  through  heating76,
and  the  tape-assisted  method  to  selectively  peel  off  the
residual layer without affecting the imprinted structures are
also  actively  explored101.  Additionally,  residual  layer-free
imprinting  was  reported  by  using  fast  thermal-curable
PDMS102. Making the structural height much greater than
the  residual  layer  for  optical  devices  can  relieve  perfor-
mance degradation and potentially impart other concerns.
In  some  unique  designs,  the  residual  layer  is  used  as  an
anti-reflection layer59.
 Defectivity
The high defect density is one of the significant obstacles to
NIL  for  advanced  applications.  It  can  be  divided  into
repeated  defects  and  randomly  distributed  in  the  NIL
process44,103. Repeated defects arise from mold errors due to
mold  damages  or  fabrication  imperfections,  leading  to  a
repeatable error in each imprinting. Randomly distributed
defects  are  not  repeatable  regarding  location  and  mostly
happen  during  resist  filling  or  demolding.  To  tackle  the
repeated  defect  issue,  operating  NIL  in  a  clean  environ-
ment  is  necessary  to  prevent  particles  from  falling  on  the
surface. Resist filtering is needed to avoid the presence of
crystallization and solid pellets in the resist solution.
Random  defects  can  be  further  separated  based  on  the
defect morphologies and mechanisms, as shown in Fig. 5(a)
and Fig. 5(b), respectively44,95,103. i) shows the feature distor-
tion  defects  due  to  local  shear  stresses,  resulting  in  the
misalignment of the nanopillars. ii) demonstrates the cohe-
sive failure defects with local structural breakage or pattern
stripping from the demolding process. This occurs because
of the weak adhesion force to the substrate. iii) features the
collapse defects that are caused by low resist modulus, high
aspect ratio pillars, or minimal spacing between pillars; iv)
illustrates  large-scale  shear  defects  that  are  caused  by  fast
and  uncontrolled  separation  step,  resulting  in  non-local
resist delamination; v) shows incomplete filling defects that
arise because of insufficient imprinting time or low mobil-
ity  of  the  resists,  and  vi)  depicts  surface  contamination
voids defect with local dewetting spots, which is believed to
be caused by airborne organic vapors that adsorb onto the
adhesion layer44.
Efforts  have  been  made  to  study  and  alleviate  random
defect issues. Generally, the aspect ratio cannot be too high
to  avoid  feature  collapse.  The  imprinting  resist  should
maintain  high  mechanical  strength  and  adhesion  to  the
substrate.  Controlled  motion  is  necessary  during  the
demolding  process95.  The  imprinting  time  must  be  set
appropriately to ensure complete filling without sacrificing
throughput.  Imprinting  conditions,  such  as  purging  gas,
could  also  be  essential  in  controlling  void  defects104.  As
described in ref.95, the defectivity can be greatly reduced by
optimizing  the  resist  material  and  proper  imprinting
control  for  the  semiconductor  memory  applications.  By
simply  improving  the  material  strength,  including  the
tensile modulus, and reducing particulates in the resist, the
defect density can be reduced by more than two orders of
magnitude. By finely controlling the separation process and
performing resist filtration system, the defect density can be
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 8 of 27)

[Page 11]
decreased by another order. By storing wafers in a nitrogen
environment prior to printing and by adding carbon filtra-
tion  systems,  the  defect  density  can  be  further  brought
down by 60%.
 Alignment and overlay control
The precise alignment of the current layer to the previously
patterned ones is essential for making more advanced struc-
tures105,106.  However,  due  to  the  configuration  difference,
the alignment method used in optical lithography cannot be
applied to NIL, and a new alignment process must be devel-
oped. In the most advanced applications, the overlay error
must be less than 3 nm to ensure the correct final device
functionality and circuit connection for modern semicon-
ductor manufacturing96. To satisfy this need, the high-order
distortion, such as magnification errors resulting from the
shape  differences  between  the  mold  and  the  desired
imprinting pattern, must be adjusted to minimize the over-
lay errors further.
 Nanoimprinting for high-volume
manufacturing
After  30  years  of  development,  NIL  has  been  used  for
manufacturing  in  various  areas,  such  as  semiconductors,
augmented  reality,  biomedicines,  displays,  and  optoelec-
tronic  devices.  Compared  with  traditional  photolithogra-
phy utilized for mass production, it can achieve high-reso-
lution patterning with a simple implementation setup. The
CMOS-compatible  feature  also  allows  NIL  to  work  with
other  well-developed  patterning  technologies,  such  as  dry
etching and lift-off processes. In addition, it can be manu-
factured at a large scale by using roller-based imprinting for
relatively
 low-cost
 yet
 high-volume
 manufacturing
purposes. It can be realized on a non-flat surface, catering
to  special  needs  for  specific  applications.  The  defectivity
issue of NIL is one of the manufacturing concerns. These
defect types have been studied and addressed in the past 30
years. Many applications have recognized NIL's quality and
have been adopted in manufacturing.
As  advanced  applications  such  as  semiconductors  and
meta-optics continue to push into the sub-50 nm and even
sub-10  nm  regime,  high-resolution  lithography  has
emerged as one of the primary bottlenecks in manufactur-
ing. Among the available technologies, NIL, electron beam
(E-beam)  lithography,  and  extreme  ultraviolet  (EUV)
lithography are currently the only viable candidates capable
of  meeting  these  demanding  resolution  requirements.
While EUV lithography has been successfully implemented
in leading-edge integrated circuit (IC) production, it comes
with  significant  limitations.  The  high  cost  of  ownership,
driven
 by
 the
 need
 for
 complex
 and
 expensive
systems —including  high-power  light  sources,  multilayer
reflective mirrors, and vacuum chambers—remains a criti-
cal challenge. Additionally, EUV's energy consumption is a
major  concern.  According  to  ref.87,107,108,  the  power
consumption of EUV is 10× higher than the NIL and 2× the
cost per wafer in the patterning of 15 nm devices for semi-
conductor manufacturing109. In contrast, E-beam lithogra-
phy  offers  excellent  resolution  but  suffers  from  extremely
low throughput due to its serial patterning method, where
patterns are written point by point. This makes it more suit-
able for mask-making or research-scale prototyping rather
than  high-volume  manufacturing.  These  limitations  high-
light  the  growing  need  for  alternative  lithographic
approaches, such as NIL, which promises high resolution,
lower  energy  consumption,  and  greater  cost-efficiency  for
certain advanced applications.
 
a
b
i
iii
v
vi
iv
b
100 nm
200 nm
10 μm
10 μm
500 nm
ii
i
iii
v
vi
iv
ii
Fig. 5 | Defect images (a) and the mechanism (b) of common defect modes in the NIL. (i) Feature distortion, (ii) adhesive failure, (iii) feature collapse,
(iv) large-scale shear defects, (v) incomplete filling, and (vi) surface contamination void defects. Figure reproduced with permission from ref.44, under a
Creative Commons licences.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 9 of 27)

[Page 12]
 Nanoimprinitng in semiconductor manufacturing
Semiconductor  manufacturing  is  a  highly  complex  and
sophisticated  process  that  demands  exceptional  stability
and precision. For NIL to be viable in silicon IC production,
several  critical  requirements  must  be  met:  i)  imprinting
resolution  finer  than  the  critical  dimension  of  the  struc-
tures; ii) overlay error meeting the required error budget of
the application relative to the minimum half-pitch; iii) low
process  defectivity  to  ensure  an  acceptable  defect  density
based  on  the  applications;  iv)  high  throughput  with  >
80−100 wafers/hr for a 300 mm wafer to ensure an accept-
able run rate and a competitive cost of ownership of the tools.
In  the  early  2000s,  several  semiconductor  companies
attempted to adopt NIL for semiconductor manufacturing
due to its exceptional resolution. However, as the technol-
ogy  was  not  mature  enough,  the  defectivity,  overlay,  and
throughput  were  far  behind  the  semiconductor  manufac-
turing  requirements  and  were  not  considered  a  concrete
solution for advanced semiconductor manufacturing. After
decades of development, nanoimprinting suppliers, such as
Canon  Inc.,  have  made  significant  progress  in  improving
the  NIL  system  and  greatly  enhancing  the  NIL  quality  to
meet  the  stringent  requirements  of  the  semiconductor
industry. In 2023, Canon Inc. announced their first semi-
conductor-graded  nanoimprinting  tool  (FPA-1200NZ2C,
Fig. 6(a-i)) for 12" wafer patterning and has shipped the tool
 
a
b
d
e
c
i
i
i
i
ii Litho1
OpƟcal
litho.
NIL
NIL
Trench
Via
Etch1
Error
Etch1
Etch2
Litho2
ii
ii
iii
HODC/
Spread cam
TIM scope
Conjugate plane
MulƟ-funcƟonal
relay opƟcs
Illuminator
for UV exposure
Mask
Thick RLT
Wide CD
Thin RLT
Narrow CD
Wafer stage
Wafer
Etching condiƟon #1
100 nm
100 nm
Etching condiƟon #2
Post
NIL
22.0
21.5
21.0
20.5
SOC CD (nm)
20.0
19.5
19.0
18.5
14
16
18
RLT (nm)
20
22
22.0
21.5
21.0
20.5
SOC CD (nm)
20.0
19.5
19.0
18.5
14
16
18
RLT (nm)
20
22
Post
RLT
etch
Post
SOC
etch
Detect principal
Alignment illuminator
mulƟ-wavelength LDs
Moiré signal
Mask
Wafer
Array of
piezo actuators
Laser
HODC
No correcƟon
Mag. actuator
CorrecƟon by piezo actuators
CorrecƟon by heat
expansion
Large error
Residual error
Minimal error
Mask
shape
Shot
shape
Mag. actuator
+ HODC
DMD
Wafer
Mask mark
Wafer mark
−1st order
diﬀraƟon angle
−1st order
diﬀraƟon angle
ii
i
ii
Applied force
Imprint head
Cavity pressure
Template
Mesa
Wafer
Droplet
Wafer edge
Wafer structure
iii
INLINE
StaƟon B1
StaƟon B2
StaƟon A1
FOUP opener
SMIF-POD approach path
StaƟon A2
2017 Canon corporaƟon
FPA-1200 NZ2C
Water feeder
2830 mm
6600 mm
SMIF-INX
Console panel
4600 mm
Fig. 6 | The  first-ever  semiconductor-graded  nanoimprinting  tool  FPA-1200NZ2C  by  Canon  Inc.  (a-i)  The  appearance  of  the  imprinting  tool.  (a-ii)  The
imprinting mold. (a-iii) The 12" wafer patterned by FPA-1200NZ2C. (b-i) The alignment detection scheme. (b-ii) Misalignment can be measured by detect-
ing the 1st-order Moire fringe. (b-iii) Higher-order distortion can be compensated by pressing the stamp and applying laser heating to the wafer. (c-i) The
template is bowed to produce a parabolic contact with the imprinting resist. (c-ii) The sequential images of the separation process. (d-i) The NIL imprinting
and pattern transfer process schematic diagram. (d-ii) The etching condition and residual layer thickness (RLT) can effectively influence the CD of the
underlying SOC layer. (e-i) The semiconductor interconnect layer in the semiconductor back-end-of-line process. (e-ii) The comparison of the damascene
process by optical lithography and NIL. Figure reproduced with permission from: (a, c-i) ref.44, under a Creative Commons licences; (b) ref.96, (c-ii) ref.95,
(d) ref.99, (e) ref.110, SPIE.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 10 of 27)

[Page 13]
to the foundry customers in 2024. According to ref.87,109, the
tool  has  satisfied  the  20  nm  3D  NAND  requirements  for
both  resolution  and  overlay  requirements,  and  the  high-
volume manufacturing is under evaluation.
 Semiconductor-graded NIL tool
The FPA-1200NZ2C is the first semiconductor-graded tool
that  meets  the  industry's  requirements.  It  is  a  UV,  inkjet
coating  based  step-and-repeat  imprinter  targeted  to  work
on 12" wafer manufacturing. The master stamp is made by
Dai-Nippon Printing through E-beam writing on a 6" wafer
(Fig. 6(a-ii))44.  The  working  stamp  strategy  is  applied  to
extend  the  lifetime  of  the  master  mold.  The  nominal
imprinting linewidth is 14 nm, corresponding to 5 nm-node
for the advanced logic semiconductors, and is expected to
be  able  to  pattern  with  a  minimum  linewidth  of  10  nm,
corresponding to 2 nm-node. The patterning field size is 26
mm × 33 mm, matching the typical field size of the optical
lithography as shown in Fig. 6(a-iii)44. It is compatible with
the 12" semiconductor wafer with imprinting throughput of
20 wafers/station and 80 wafers/tool. The nominal overlay
accuracy is < 3 nm109. The reported average defect density of
the tool by using the device-like patterned mask with 20 nm
half-pitch  line  spacing  is  0.03  defects/cm2 87.  This  section
will  briefly  overview  how  the  first  semiconductor-graded
NIL was built and how improvements are made.
The alignment detection scheme of the FPA-1200NZ2C
system  is  based  on  the  interference  effect  where  the
imprinting mold and the alignment mark on the substrate
form special Moire fringes under a specific illumination set-
ting with multiple wavelengths, as illustrated in Fig. 6(b-i)105.
By detecting the first-order interference pattern through the
mask, mold misalignment can be detected with sensitivity
down to 1 nm in accuracy. As for the alignment process, the
coarse alignment with ~500 nm precision is done before the
contact  of  the  mold  and  the  substrate44.  After  contact,
adjustments are applied to fine-tune the rotation and lateral
alignment. The high-order distortion error compensation is
then  done  using  two  different  approaches  unique  to  NIL.
The magnification actuation system uses multiple actuators
that  apply  force  to  deform  the  mold  for  a  better  overlay.
The distortion errors are also remedied by the high order
distortion  control  (HODC),  where  the  DMD  mirrors  are
used  to  impart  a  laser  to  introduce  localized  heat  on  the
substrate to cause deformation on the field-to-field basis, as
shown in Fig. 6(b-ii). Other methods, such as mold tilting
and force management, are also applied to avoid distortion
errors96,105. So far, the average + 3 sigma matched machine
overlay with ASML ArFi scanner was 2.4 nm and 2.2 nm in
x and y.  For  the  single  machine  overlay  measurements
(NZ2C to NZ2C), the average + 3 sigma in x and y was 1.8
nm and 1.5 nm, meeting the requirement for the 3D NAND
flash market87.
The defectivity reduction of FPA-1200NZ2C is done by
reducing  the  repeated  and  random  defects5,78.  Ceramic
materials with unique treatments, such as polishing, coat-
ing, and heating, are used as chamber material to lessen the
particles generated by the tool and prevent sidewall degra-
dation95,103. Other tool parts, such as gas nozzles, undergo
mechanical and chemical polishing to flatten the surface. A
high-filtration air curtain system is adopted to blow puri-
fied gas from the moving stage across the imprinting area to
prevent particles from falling above the wafers6,7. Addition-
ally, to prevent particles from being attracted to the imprint
mask  by  the  accumulated  electrostatic  charge  during  the
demolding process, an electrostatic cleaning plate is used to
compensate for the electrostatic potential generated on the
imprint  mask103.  By  applying  these  methods,  the  average
repeat  defect  for  each  cycle  has  decreased  dramatically
from  10  pcs/wafer  in  2013  down  to  0.003  pcs/wafer  in
2024109,111.
The  dominant  random  defects  are  the  non-fill  defects
and the feature collapse. The non-fill defects can be mini-
mized by ensuring sufficient imprinting time and avoiding
trapping  the  air  between  the  mold  and  substrate.  As
depicted in Fig. 6(c-i), micrometer-scale parabolic deforma-
tion  of  the  template  is  generated  by  following  a  similar
method  in  ref.46 to  create  a  convex  contact  surface  to  the
resist  drops  during  imprinting,  resulting  in  a  contiguous
liquid  film  from  the  discrete  drops  without  forming
bubbles.  The  aspect  ratio  of  the  structure  is  limited  to
<2.5∶1 to avoid cohesive failure and pattern damage. The
separation process is also well controlled to ensure a consis-
tent  speed  during  the  process. Figure 6(c-ii) shows  the
authentic images of the separation process, demonstrating a
uniform and symmetric separation front throughout 0.30 s95.
In  all  cases,  random  defectivity  was  less  than  0.03
defects/cm2 and,  for  many  instances,  was  well  under  0.01
defects/cm2 87,109.
The low throughput of the step-and-repeat nanoimprint-
ing is always a problem95. FPA-1200NZ2C uses strategies to
address  this  issue,  including  improving  the  imprinting
material  wetting  property,  reducing  the  material  filling
time, improving the dispensing system, involving an inno-
vative dispensing system, etc. The wetting property for the
imprinting  resist  is  engineered  to  be  high  so  the  material
can spread and complete the resist filling quickly. Adjust-
ing  the  resist  dispensing  system  and  reducing  the  single
drop  volume  from  1.5  pL  to  1.0  pL  also  decreases  the
required  resist  filling  time45.  Sparse  patterns  tend  to  fill
more slowly because of the considerable distance between
resist drops. This problem can be addressed by filling the
area  with  dummy  patterns.  Over  the  years,  sophisticated
algorithms have been developed to search for the optimum
drop volume and resist pattern to minimize the filling time
and  potential  defects.  When  performing  nanoimprinting,
ambient  gas  can  be  trapped  at  the  interface  between  the
resist and the mold, forming micro-scaled bubbles. To facil-
itate  the  dissipation  of  bubbles,  a  gas  permeable  spin-on-
carbon  (GP-SOC)  is  used  in  the  resist  stack,  which  can
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 11 of 27)

[Page 14]
quickly take up the gas, resulting in a shorter spread time.
Changing the ambient gas from He to CO2 in the imprint-
ing  system  was  theoretically  and  experimentally  proven
effective to expedite the dissolving process.
The outstanding achievement of the FPA-1200NZ2C also
comes  from  the  establishment  of  a  nanoimprinting  eco-
system87,109,112.  As  an  example,  the  defect  control  of  NIL
relies on the defect inspection system to accurately identify
the defect failure modes and the source of failures113. The
repeated defects during the imprinting can be quickly iden-
tified using an in situ mold inspection system. Implement-
ing a master mold cleaning station can further reduce the
defect density. It is also known that the resulting patterns
transferred to the underlying layer depend on the nanoim-
printed structures, residual layer thickness, descum method,
and UV-curing dosage, as shown in Fig. 6(d). These factors
are required to be well characterized and can be invaluable
process  knobs  for  critical  dimension  control99.  The  wafer
flatness also plays a vital role in the imprinting quality. The
improvement also relies on the improvement of planariza-
tion.  Furthermore,  similar  to  that  in  the  current
photolithography, a design rule needs to be established so
that  the  engineers  can  design  the  layout  accordingly  to
avoid potential failures from happening.
 Semiconductor manufacturing status
The preliminary test data of NIL has met the standard for
3D NAND and DRAM applications in terms of defectivity,
overlay,  and  resolution87,109.  Several  companies,  including
Kioxia110,  Toshiba114 and  SK  Hynix115,  have  been  actively
studying the feasibility of using nanoimprinting to pattern
3D NAND structures. Micron, one of the DRAM manufac-
turing companies, recently also announced the initiative to
integrate  nanoimprinting  into  its  DRAM  production
processes, aiming to reduce production costs and enhance
efficiency116. As for logic devices, Canon Inc. is dedicated to
developing  NIL  technology  for  the  back-end-of-the-line
process at 12 nm half pitches and below for the metal inter-
connect process87,109. Due to the 3D patterning feature, NIL
is  expected  to  significantly  simplify  the  dual  damascene
process  for  via-and-trench  structure  from  several  pattern-
ing  steps  and  etching  down  to  single  patterning  and  one
etching, providing a 40% less cost reduction, as shown in
Fig. 6(e)110. Using NIL also intrinsically minimizes the over-
lay errors and the optical proximity correction issue due to
the one-step process83.
Even though NIL shows excellent potential for semicon-
ductor  applications,  most  of  the  reported  works  on  NIL
processes in semiconductor fabrication are still in the early
path-finding  phase,  primarily  aiming  to  evaluate  NIL's
process capability and compatibility. Therefore, continuous
efforts are still needed to improve the tool and the process
control. Cross-module cooperation is also necessary to opti-
mize the process. For example, the 3D damascene pattern-
ing shows that the thinner imprinting resist can reduce the
imprinting  bubble  defects117.  However,  this  relies  on  the
subsequent etching step to compromise for the thin resist. It
is  also  worth  noting  that  nanoimprinting  will  not  wholly
replace  optical  lithography  but  only  substitute  specific
layers that show advantages by NIL.
 Patterned magnetic nanostructures for hard disk drives
Conventional  hard  disk  drives  rely  on  granular  recording
media to store the information, but they increasingly suffer
from data loss due to thermal fluctuations as grain size is
reduced to achieve higher recording densities3. To address
this  limitation,  the  patterned  magnetic  nanostructures
(PMN)  approach  has  been  proposed,  in  which  a  continu-
ous  magnetic  layer  is  divided  into  an  array  of  discrete
magnetic dots—each representing a single bit. This strategy
enables
 ultra-high-density
 storage
 and
 significantly
improves  thermal  stability.  However,  the  key  challenge  in
realizing PMNs lies in fabricating these nanoscale dots with
feature sizes around 10 nm and at densities exceeding 100
Gdot/in², all at a scalable and cost-effective manufacturing
level11.
To  tackle  this  issue,  the  research  team  led  by  Stephen
Chou pioneered T-NIL to offer ultra-high resolution, high
throughput,  and  low-cost  fabrication  of  nanostructures12.
By using NIL, the team demonstrated a disc with a storage
density  of  400  Gbit/in²,  nearly  three  orders  of  magnitude
higher  than  that  of  commercial  disks  and  with  10  nm
features  and  40  nm  periodicity12,118.  Recognizing  NIL’s
promise  in  data  storage,  several  companies  have  initiated
efforts to adapt NIL for commercial devices. For instance,
Seagate Research Center has employed UV-NIL with inkjet
coating  to  achieve  dot  patterning  densities  exceeding  2
Tb/in², using features as small as 18 nm26. Toshiba has also
demonstrated  a  2.5  Tb/in²  bit-patterned  media  system
using a self-assembly method combined with UV-NIL27.
Despite  these  advancements,  significant  challenges
remain.  Mass-manufacturing  of  lithographically  defined
patterns requires precise control of pattern placement and
tight tolerances across multiple disks to ensure consistency
and  functionality.  Fabricating  the  NIL  master  mold  with
ultra-small  feature  sizes  and  high  density  is  particularly
demanding. Additionally, the pattern transfer process to the
magnetic materials often involves etching, where maintain-
ing size uniformity and structural fidelity becomes increas-
ingly  difficult  as  dimensions  shrink26.  These  technical
hurdles must be overcome to fully realize the potential of
NIL-based PMNs in next-generation data storage.
 Flat optics
Metalens has been one of the most exciting photonic tech-
nologies in recent years and is another leading force behind
the  development  of  nanoimprinting  lithography.  While
metalens are small, they can behave like traditional geomet-
ric  lenses.  They  can  potentially  replace  the  thick  optical
stacks in mobile phones, smart glasses, or even automotive
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 12 of 27)

[Page 15]
devices  to  realize  multiple  functionalities,  such  as  facial
recognition,  dot  projection  for  3D  sensing,  image  projec-
tion for lidar, image magnification, eye tracking, and ToF
measurement119.
As shown in Fig. 7(a-i), the metalens comprise arrays of
nanopillars  with  <  100  nm  feature  size  and  high  aspect
ratio. When light passes through the meta-atoms with deep
sub-wavelength  feature  sizes,  light  will  experience  a
propagation  phase  shift,  altering  the  field  distribution.
Precise  light  manipulation,  such  as  light  focusing,  can  be
achieved by carefully engineering the structure and spacing
of  the  pillars.  The  fabrication  of  metalens  must  satisfy
 
a
b
c
d
i
i
i
i
ii
iii
Anneal
Residual layer
500 nm
500 nm
ii
iii
iii
Mold
0%
80%
D=350 nm
D=400 nm
ii
ii
iii
iv
Si3N4
a-Si
Nb2O5
Low eﬃciency
High eﬃciency
2 μm
2 μm
500 nm
500 nm
500 nm
Width
Width
z
y
x
z
y
x
Length
Length
100 O: Measured eﬃciency
Conversion eﬃciency (%)
80
60
40
20
0 0
5
10
15
Thickness (nm)
20
25
30
Thickness
Period
Resin
2.1
2.0
1.9
RefracƟve index
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5400 500 600
Wavelength (nm)
700 800
2.0
(80, 1.94)
(60, 1.84)
(40, 1.72)
(20, 1.60)
(0, 1.53)
1.9
RefracƟve index
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.50
20
40
TiO2 weight raƟo (%)
60
80
Height
Height
ImprinƟng
Demolding
3.0
2.5
RefracƟve index
2.0
1.5
400
500
600
Wavelength (nm)
700
800 °C
600 °C
400 °C
200 °C
Thermal anneal
TiO2
Period
NPC
SiO2
SiO2
Soure: TEL
Fig. 7 | NIL for metalens manufacturing. (a) Metalens are made using the NIL + RIE method. (b-d) Metalens are produced by using the direct NIL process.
(a-i) SEM images of the metalens made by different high-index materials. (a-ii) The comparison of images captured by metalens with high/ low diffraction
efficiencies.  The  image  of  low-efficiency  metalens  shows  a  bright  dot  defect.  (a-iii)  The  smallest  camera  modules  using  metalens  produced  by  NILT.
(a-iv) The magnified image of a pumpkin seed was taken by an iPhone and installed with an image magnifier metalens by Moxtek. (b-i) The meta-element
formed by imprinting UV-curable resin mixed with nanoparticles. (b-ii) The refractive index can be tuned using different TiO2 weight ratios. (b-iii) The
surface roughness increases as the particle weight ratio increases. (c-i) The meta-element formed by UV-NIL followed by TiO2 deposition. (c-ii) The metal-
ens conversion efficiency increases as the deposited thickness of TiO2 film rises. (c-iii) This method can be fabricated at a large scale. (d-i) The sol-gel
imprinting process will be done with the post-annealing step. (d-ii) Higher annealing temperature results in higher refractive index due to the change of the
crystal state. (d-iii) The nanopillars' shrinkage must be considered when designing the metalens. The residual layer is of a negligible thickness. Figure repro-
duced with permission from: (a-i) ref.87, 121–122, SPIE; (a-ii, a-iii) ref.121, (a-iv) ref.123, SPIE; (b) ref.70, under a Creative Commons licences; (c) ref.124, Springer
Nature; (d) ref.82, under a Creative Commons licences.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 13 of 27)

[Page 16]
several requirements to attain efficient and tight focusing by
the  metalens.  First,  the  patterning  resolution  needs  to  be
high with tight variation control. As discussed in ref.120, a 5
nm  variation  in  the  nanopillars  with  100  nm  width  can
result  in  a  >20%  focus  efficiency  loss,  which  can  lead  to
imaging artifacts such as “bright spots”, as illustrated in Fig.
7(a-ii)121. Second, the pillar must be tall enough to complete
a 2π phase control. It is typically greater than 500 nm for
visible wavelength, and taller structures may be needed for
longer  wavelength.  Third,  the  meta-structure  composition
requires high refractive index materials with low optical loss
for
 better
 imaging
 conversion
 controllability.
 The
commonly  used  materials  are  amorphous  silicon  (a-Si),
Si3N4 for the NIR wavelength, Si3N4, TiO2, and Nb2O5 for
the  visible  wavelength,  and  ZrO281 for  the  UV  region.
Fourthly, metalens with an area > 1 cm2 are usually desired
for better imaging quality and applicability.
The  high  resolution,  high  throughput,  curved-surface
compatible, and low-cost properties make nanoimprinting
lithography one of the major technologies for manufactur-
ing  metalenses.  Both  the  NIL  +  RIE  and  the  direct  NIL
methods  can  be  used  for  mass  production  with  different
advantages. The benefit of the NIL + RIE method is its high
compatibility  with  the  imprinting  system  that  has  been
readily  developed  for  the  semiconductor  industry.  High
patterning quality can be achieved. The main drawback is
the  requirement  of  high  aspect  ratio  etching.  Since  the
pattern  density  across  the  whole  metasurface  can  vary
significantly,  the  loading  effect  can  greatly  influence  the
etching profile and depth. In this regard, there are typically
complete  design  rules  for  metasurfaces  design  to  avoid
layout issues. The residual layer thickness variation due to
the varying filling factor across the lens area must also be
considered. The deposition and etching of the thick (> 500
nm) high-index materials are usually time-consuming and
require  a  dedicated  method  that  may  limit  the  process
flexibility.
±
±
Several companies have verified the manufacturability of
the metalens by using the NIL + RIE method. NIL technol-
ogy  (NILT)  utilizes  plate-to-plate  NIL  on  a  full  wafer
followed by dry etching to fabricate the 500 nm height a-Si-
based meta-optical elements with excellent process control,
as shown in Fig. 7(a-i)125. The three-sigma process variation
of  the  fabricated  meta-atoms  with  varying  sizes  on  the
lateral  dimensions  is  5  nm.  As  for  the z-dimension,  the
height variation is  1 nm within the 2 mm field size and 
10 nm for an entire 100 mm substrate. This tight process
control  enables  the  fabricated  metalens  to  have  a  high
focusing  efficiency  of  >  80%  and  a  slight  variation  of  <
1.5%126.  Recently,  NILT  has  launched  a  series  of  compact
metalens  modules  targeting  different  applications.  The
small form factor of the imaging modules can significantly
benefit the wearable devices, as shown in Fig. 7(a-iii).
Moxtek  is  the  first  company  to  commercialize  metal-
enses  for  visible  wavelengths.  As  shown  in Fig. 7(a-i)122,
their metalenses consist of Nb2O5 nanopillars with a high
aspect ratio (> 12), tight peak-to-peak spacing (minimum =
70  nm),  and  a  pillar  height  of  820  nm.  The  NIL  process
involves soft conformal imprinting lithography on a 200-mm
glass  wafer,  followed  by  dry  etching122,123.  The  produced
metalenses exhibit an average of 86% focusing efficiency at
the  532  nm  wavelength  and  demonstrate  high  wafer-to-
wafer  consistency  across  multiple  wafers  (83%–90%)122.
Additionally, the metalenses outperform geometrical lenses
in  terms  of  MTF  when  tested  with  green  and  red  light.
Recently, Moxtek launched products such as mobile phone
magnification  lenses  and  expanded  its  metalens  foundry
market.  An  example  image  captured  with  the  magnifica-
tion lens on an iPhone is displayed in Fig. 7(a-iv)123.
On  the  other  hand,  the  direct  NIL  method  can  pattern
the imprinting materials into the final desired meta-struc-
tures  without  deposition  and  RIE  steps127.  One  primary
challenge is finding a suitable resist for imprinting, which
must have a high refractive index (n>2.0) and low optical
loss. Additionally, the structure must be physically stable to
prevent drastic dimensional changes and strong enough to
withstand  the  demolding  process  for  tall  structures.
Recently, several advancements have been made to address
issues regarding high scalability. Yoon et al. employed soft
mold  NIL  to  print  metalenses  functioning  in  the  near-
infrared region by mixing silicon nanoparticles with ther-
mally printable resin to enhance the refractive index of the
nanostructures128.  Similarly,  Einck  et  al.  and  Yoon  et  al.
enhanced the refractive index of NIL resists by incorporat-
ing TiO2 nanoparticles with UV-curable resin and success-
fully imprinted a meta-lens working in the visible spectrum,
as  illustrated  in Fig. 7(b)58,70.  Gong  et  al.  utilized  the
commercially  available  resists  composed  of  polysiloxane
matrix  and  TiO2 nanoparticles  to  fabricate  metalenses
working  in  the  visible  light  range  for  anti-counterfeiting
applications129. The use of polysiloxane instead of acrylate
as  the  matrix  provides  low  surface  tension  and  better
demolding  properties,  rendering  imprinting  patterns  with
aspect ratios exceeding 10∶1. Kim et al. reported the fabri-
cation  of  centimeter-scale  meta-lenses  on  a  12-inch  wafer
by depositing a thin layer of TiO2 to compensate for the low
refractive index of the resin, as shown in Fig. 7(c)124. Kim et
al. used thermal annealing to modify the crystallization of
the sol-gel structure, further increasing the refractive index
beyond 2.5, as seen in Fig. 7(d)82. Common issues related to
high-index materials include poor control over nanoparti-
cle surface chemistry and size, leading to inadequate disper-
sion and larger particle aggregates that result in light scat-
tering and haze. The shrinkage ratio of solvent-based resin
is approximately 15% and needs to be minimized83. Other
methods, such as patterning regular UV-resists followed by
metal  deposition,  were  also  used  to  fabricate  plasmonic
metasurfaces  for  structural  color  and  holographic  encryp-
tion130.  These  plasmonic  metasurfaces  can  also  be  imple-
mented on a curved surface at a large scale131.
Metalens through direct NIL is also actively developed in
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 14 of 27)

[Page 17]
industries to prepare for high-volume manufacturing. For
example, Myrias Optics manufactures metalens by imprint-
ing  the  TiO2 composite  resins  described  in  ref.58,80,132,133.
SolNIL is also actively developing a high-index imprinting
solution for sol-gel-based metalens nanoimprinting83.
 Diffractive nanograting for augmented reality
The  augmented  reality  (AR)  glasses  are  another  driving
force behind NIL development, as illustrated in Fig. 8(a-i)134.
In these AR glasses, a compact optical system is needed to
convey light from distant displays to the user’s eyes92,135. A
widespread  implementation  is  the  diffractive  waveguide
system that uses high index substrate as the optical waveg-
uide and the surface-relief gratings (SRG) structured on the
substrate  to  diffract  the  light  to  couple  in,  expand,  and
outcouple from the source, as depicted in Fig. 8(a-ii). The
typical SRGs include slanted and blazed gratings with ~100
nm feature sizes, tilted fins, and repeating periods of several
hundred nanometers, as shown in Fig. 8(c)136. To provide a
comfortable view, the area of the SRGs generally falls within
the range of several square centimeters to accommodate the
human eye boxes.
The key performance attributes of the diffractive waveg-
uides  include  image  contrast,  luminosity  uniformity,  and
field of view137,138. The material of the waveguide substrate
and the grating structure plays a crucial role. As illustrated
in Fig. 8(b-i)139, high refractive index materials for both the
waveguide  and  the  grating  structure  strongly  correlate  to
the display's field of view. The transparency of the waveg-
uide material is equally important. Fig. 8(b-ii)134 shows that
using  low-transparency  material  for  the  waveguide  can
reduce image contrast compared to using highly transpar-
ent  waveguide  materials.  Additional  factors  must  also  be
optimized, such as corner sharpness and side wall smooth-
ness. Although the feature size for the nanograting is not as
small as that in the metasurfaces, the process tolerance may
be  even  tighter  because  light  must  propagate  through  the
waveguide over a long distance. For instance, according to
 
i
i
ii
ii
Roll-to-plate
Low haze
High haze
Plate-to-plate
70
65
FOV horizontal
FOV diagonal
60
55
50
FOV (°)
45
40
35
30
25
1.5
1.6
1.7
RefracƟve index (nd)
1.8
1.9
2.0
n=1.5
H=337 nm
W=170 nm
P=350 nm
Θ=36°
H=130 nm
P=400 nm
Θ=64°.27°
n=1.89
Solvent free resin
Solvent-based resin
300 nm
500 nm
300 nm
500 nm
Ion beam etching
Before etch
StaƟc, Angled RIBE
20°
30°
45°
60°
a
b
c
e
f
d
Fig. 8 | Nanoimprinting lithography for AR diffractive waveguide manufacturing. (a) Images of the Magic Leap AR glasses (a-i) and the light propagation
within the AR glass (a-ii). (b) The refractive index and the transparency of the resin can influence the field of view (b-i) and the image contrast (b-ii). (c) The
SEM images of the fabricated gratings with the standard resin (left) and the high index resin with nanoparticle fillers (right). The images show high resem-
blance and low shrinkage. (d) The AR diffractive waveguides fabricated by roll-to-plate imprinting with high throughput. (e) The SEM images of the fabri-
cated gratings by roll-to-plate imprinting using solvent-free and solvent-based resin. (f) The etching method to fabricate the 3D slanted gratings. Figure
reproduced from: (a-i) ref.134, SPIE; (a-ii) Digilens, (b-i) ref.139; (b-ii) ref.134, SPIE; (c) ref.136, (d, e) ref.88, (f) ref.142, SPIE.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 15 of 27)

[Page 18]
current  industrial  standards,  the  manufacturing  tolerance
for  the  grating  period  is  on  the  scale  of  a  few  tens  of
picometers. For the tilted angle of the grating, it is on the
scale of a few tens of arcseconds137.
Multiple  companies  are  working  on  manufacturing  AR
glass  through  direct  NIL.  Imprinting  materials  with  high
refractive  indices,  low  haze  (0.1%),  high  transparency
(95%), and low shrinkage are under active development for
AR  diffractive  waveguide  applications140,141. Figure 8(c)
shows  the  fabricated  SRG  structures  using  plate-to-plate
NIL with an inkjet dispensing function136. The grating fabri-
cated  using  nanoparticle-doped  high-index  composite
resins  shows  similar  results  to  those  produced  using  UV
resin. Despite the presence of the nanoparticles, the grating
structures  and  the  edges  are  still  clearly  defined104.  The
residual  layer  is  also  thin,  with  ~30  nm.  The  diffractive
waveguides  are  also  manufactured  through  roll-to-plate
NIL88,137. Figure 8(d) shows a panel with 1100 mm × 1300
mm and 480 sets of waveguides in minutes using Morpho-
tonic's roll-to-plate method88. The measured process varia-
tion of the fabricated grating periods is 20 pm, and the stan-
dard deviation of the relative orientation is 5 sec with tight
process control. Despite the high throughput advantage, the
thick residual layer (4.6 μm) is one of the concerns for the
roll-to-plate imprinting, as illustrated in Fig. 8(e). This can
be  improved  using  lower  viscosity  solvent-based  resin  or
optimizing  the  resist  dispensing  strategy.  Pure  polymer
materials with a refractive index of 1.8 are also available on
the  market,  providing  high  transparency  in  the  visible
wavelength143. NIL + RIE methods are also used to manu-
facture  waveguide  grating  structures.  By  using  the  angled
reactive ion beam etcher to etch the high index substrate, as
shown  in Fig. 8(f)142,  3D  SRG  can  also  be  achieved.  The
benefit  of  the  NIL  +  RIE  method  is  that  it  can  be  more
compatible  with  high-index  substrates  such  as  SiC.
However,  it  requires  delicate  tools  and  will  limit  the
throughput144.
Magic Leap is one of the pioneering companies that has
successfully launched its AR glasses (Magic Leap 2) prod-
ucts, manufactured by NIL, as shown in Fig. 8(a-i). Magic
Leap utilizes the inkjet dispensing method, combined with
the roll-to-plate imprinting tool, to achieve high-through-
put  fabrication  of  SRGs  with  thin  residual  layers  (10-20
nm). It also optimizes its imprinting tools to achieve double
patterning on both sides of the waveguide glass. It uses up
to 32 distinct depths for diffractive optical element design
to  achieve  the  desired  functionalities.  By  optimizing  the
design and fabrication process, Magic Leap can achieve >90%
yield with >2.0 process capability index, marking an excep-
tional process control and high uniformity of their roller-
based  NIL  system.  The  resulting  Magic  Leap  AR  glasses
demonstrate a 7× improvement in eye box efficiency and a
2× increase in outcoupling area compared with its previous
version134.
 Wafer-level optics and wafer stacking
Manufacturing wafer-level optics for optical modules, such
as LiDAR, face-ID, and image sensors, is another essential
application for nanoimprinting lithography145,146. The basic
idea is to use nanoimprinting to fabricate individual optical
elements, such as optical diffusers, microlens, and diffrac-
tive  optical  elements,  at  the  wafer  level.  These  fabricated
wafers are then aligned and bonded through UV bonding,
forming  a  wafer  stack.  The  wafer  stack  is  then  packaged
with other elements, such as CMOS sensors and lasers, and
finally  is  diced  into  individual  devices.  Due  to  the  small
form  factors  and  lower  cost-to-performance  ratios,  wafer-
level  3D  sensors  and  imaging  systems  have  been  widely
used in automobile devices. Wafer-level UV imprinting of
micro-optical  components  has  become  the  first  high-
volume  manufacturing  application  of  nanoimprinting
lithography since its introduction in 1995147.
Microlens  array  is  one  of  the  most  widely  used  wafer-
level optics elements, as shown in Fig. 9(a, b-i) . High-qual-
ity, reliable, low-roughness microlens fabricated by UV-NIL
technology  have  been  commercialized  using  tailored  UV
resins for various applications148. The microlens array can
be  bonded  with  the  CMOS  sensors  with  high  alignment
accuracy to focus the incident light onto the active area of
each sensing pixel, effectively enhancing the camera sensi-
tivity. Diffractive optical elements and optical diffusers are
widely  used  elements  for  beam  shaping,  as  shown  in
Fig. 9(a, b-ii).  By  properly  designing  the  structure,  the
output  light  can  be  altered  into  different  shapes,  such  as
discrete 3D point clouds, uniform top-hat beams, or a non-
glare  uniform  illumination.  Because  the  light  conversion
efficiency  and  the  diffracted  angle  are  highly  related  to
structures of the diffractive elements, the NIL can provide
unique  advantages  of  3D  patterning  and  a  better  perfor-
mance. By incorporating the diffractive elements with opti-
cal elements, such as laser, spacer, wire-grid polarizer, and
filter,  a  compact  optical  module  can  be  obtained  for  3D
sensing, lidar, and ToF sensors149.
Recently,  NIL  has  been  extended  to  the  wafer-level  Si
photonics  packaging150,151.  As  shown  in Fig. 9(c-i),  a  3D
polymer  waveguide,  a  turning  mirror  (M1),  and  a  curved
mirror  (M2)  are  fabricated  through  UV-NIL  followed  by
metal deposition. The mirrors are used to direct the inci-
dent  light  to  focus  on  the  polymer  waveguide.  The
imprinted  polymer  waveguides  are  3D  tapered  from  a
cross-section of 11 μm × 11 μm to 5 μm × 2 μm and serve as
mode  converters  to  convert  the  large  input  beam  into  a
smaller size to match the mode of the Si waveguide. The 3D
tapered polymer waveguide is aligned along the underlying
Si  waveguide  with  sub-μm  precision  to  facilitate  the  light
transfer from the polymer waveguides to the Silicon ones, as
depicted in Fig. 9(c-ii).
 Display
Nanoimprinting lithography is used in display manufactur-
ing. One famous example is the moth-eye-like structure, a
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 16 of 27)

[Page 19]
 
a
b
c
i OpƟcal receiver
v Light guide
i Microlens array
iii Moth eye structure
vi LED prism structure
i
M1
M2
Waveguide
Imprinted
waveguide
Si channel
Silicon channel
ITPB waveguide
ii
vii Honeycomb structure
viii DFB laser
iv Al nanowires
v Lighguide coupler
200 μm
1.87 μm
2.88 μm
2.00 μm
200 μm
50 μm
10 μm
8 μm
M1
“3” “2”
“1”
M2
Waveguide
200
Al
SiO2
100 nm
500 nm
ii DiﬀracƟve opƟcal element
ii Wide-angle opƟcal diﬀuser
Light
direcƟon
LEDs
vi LED PSS
vii Photo-voltaic
ITO
SUNLIGH
MgF2
p-type Electrode
SiO2
InP
p-InGaAsP
p-InP
InGaAsP
AR ﬁlm
n-InGaAsP
GraƟng
(opƟcal diﬀracƟon)
n-type Electrode
ITO
ITO
SnOx
SnOx
MgF2 ARC
DeposiƟon
ImprinƟng
HONEYCOMB
SnOx
C60
Perovskite
PFN
PTAA
ITO
GLASS
viii DFB laser
Lens imprint
1
2
3
4
1
1
2
2
3
4
Spacer wafer
Glass wafer to sensor
Finished lens wafer stack
ii OpƟcal transmiƩer
Fanout
Incident light
TransmiƩance of
99% or more
TM
TE
E
E
ScaƩering and reﬂecƟon
TransmiƩance of 90%
No MOSMITETM
With MOSMITETM
Lightsource
iii AnƟ-reﬂecƟon coaƟng
iv Wire-grid polarizer
240 nm ITO
200 nmp-GaN
460 nm MQWs
3 μm n-GaN
1 μm GaN
430 μm Sapphire
Fig. 9 | NIL for micro-, nano-optical device manufacturing. (a) The schematic, and (b) the representative structures of these applications. These applica-
tions include (a-i) optical receiver modules, (a-ii) optical emission modules, (a-iii) anti-reflection coating, (a-iv) wire grid polarizers, (a-v) light guides, (a-vi) LED
patterned sapphire substrates, (a-vii) photo-voltaics, and (a-viii) DFB lasers. (c) NIL for wafer-level Si photonics packaging. (c-i) Nanoimprinted polymer
waveguide and two reflective mirrors (M1 and M2). (c-ii) The polymer waveguide is imprinted on top of the Si waveguide with sub-μm alignment accuracy.
Figure reproduced with permission from: (a-i, b-i) ref.148, SPIE; (a-ii, b-ii) NILT websites; (a-iii, b-iii) Mitsubishi Chemical Group152; (a-iv, b-iv) Moxtek153;
(a-v, b-v) ref.154–155, Springer Nature; (a-vi, b-vi) ref.90, under a Creative Commons licences; (a-viii, b-viii) Scivax156; (c) ref.118.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 17 of 27)

[Page 20]
bio-inspired  structure  containing  dense  pillars  with
100−200  nm  feature  sizes,  as  shown  in Fig. 9(a, b-iii) 152.
The moth’s eye structure can be used as anti-reflection coat-
ing,  substantially  suppressing  the  light  reflection  from  a
glass surface from 8.0%-10.0% down to less than 0.5% with
a broadband working wavelength. In addition, the unique
structure also repels water, resulting in an anti-fogging and
anti-water  surface.  These  structures  are  now  used  in
display,  automotive,  and  exhibition  windows  and  are
mass-produced
 by
 plate-to-plate
 and
 roller-based
imprinting152,157. Nanoimprinting  is  also  used  to  make  the
aluminum wire grid polarizer, where linear aluminum lines
with 50−100 nm pitches and 100 nm height are formed on a
transparent  substrate,  as  shown  in Fig. 9(a, b-iv)153.  The
wire grid polarizer can be manufactured through the roll-
to-plate or plate-to-plate method by patterning the etching
mask  and  then  etching  the  aluminum  nanowires  or  by
imprinting the polymer nanowires and then depositing the
aluminum  materials158.  Since  the  wire  grid  polarizers  are
reflection-based,  they  can  avoid  optical  loss  compared  to
other absorption-based polarizers and show broader work-
ing  wavelengths.  They  are  used  in  high-brightness  liquid
crystal  displays.  It  can  also  be  integrated  with  wafer-level
optics  and  bond  with  other  optical  elements  for  complex
imaging  applications159.  Nanoimprinting  is  also  used  to
fabricate structured light guide devices to create uniform illu-
mination  in  the  display  technology.  As  shown  in
Fig. 9(a, b-v)154,155, when the LED light enters the waveguide
through the edge, the light will be trapped inside the waveg-
uide until encountering the output coupling structures that
are  imprinted  on  the  surface  and  emitting  toward  the
display.  These  outcoupling  structures  are  typically  binary
diffraction gratings, prism-like mirrors with 3−5 μm feature
sizes.  A  thin  and  uniform-brightness  display  can  be
achieved by appropriately arranging the density and distri-
bution of the structures. This structured light guide device
has been adopted to illuminate displays, such as liquid crys-
tal (LCD) based tablets and electronic ink readers160.
 Optoelectronic devices
Nanoimprinting is used in optoelectronic devices, such as
light-emitting  diodes,  photovoltaic  solar  panels,  and
distributed feedback lasers. It has been shown that using a
patterned sapphire substrate (PSS) for the GaN LED fabri-
cation can substantially enhance light extraction efficiency
(>30%), facilitate the epitaxial growth of the GaN LED, and
enhance the yield161, as shown in Fig. 9(a, b-vi)90. However,
the  sapphire  substrates' rough  and  warpage  nature  make
them difficult to pattern through traditional photolithogra-
phy. These challenges can be significantly relieved by using
full  wafer-scale  plate-to-plate  imprinting  with  flexible
molds followed by dry etching. Nowadays, NIL tools dedi-
cated  to  patterning  the  PSS  have  been  available  and  are
gradually adopted in the LED manufacturing industry. NIL
has emerged as a practical method to enhance the perfor-
mance  of  photovoltaic  devices.  UV-NIL  has  been  used  to
replicate  periodic  light-trapping  geometries,  such  as  pyra-
mids, gratings, and meshes, on the front or rear electrodes
of the thin-film photovoltaics to increase the effective path
length  of  light  through  the  active  area  to  enhance  the
absorption and conversion efficiency of sunlight to electric-
ity, as shown in Fig. 9(a, b-vii) . The high throughput nature
of  NIL  can  be  an  ideal  tool  for  large-area  photovoltaic
devices. In addition to effectively increasing the absorption
path  length,  NIL  can  control  molecular  orientation/crys-
tallinity and enhance the deposition yield161. Nanoimprint-
ing  is  also  used  to  pattern  the  grating  structure  of  the
distributed feedback (DFB) laser, where the grating struc-
ture determines the feedback strength and the optical loss,
as shown in Fig. 9(a, b-viii)156. Recently, IQE announced the
adoption  of  using  NIL  to  fabricate  the  periodic  grating
structures  with  ~500  nm  period  and  low  roughness  and
high quality in the DFB lasers162.
 NIL for fiber optics
Besides  patterning  planar  structures  on  a  large  scale,  NIL
can create delicate patterns on tiny fiber tips (~10 μm for
the core diameter) with high efficiency and cost-effective-
ness. To pattern nanostructures on the fiber tips, an optical
fiber is immersed in the UV-curable resin and aligned with
the working mold through a piezo stage. After alignment,
UV  light  was  then  coupled  to  the  fiber  to  cure  the  resin,
followed  by  a  demolding  process163,164.  This  method  can
quickly transfer patterns such as campanile probes for near-
field  super-resolution  imaging165,  Fresnel  lens  for  light
focusing166,  top  hat  beam  shaper,  and  vortex  phase  plates
onto the optical fibers without dedicated tools, such as ion-
beam  milling,  2-photon  polymerization,  laser  processing,
etc.  This  fiber-based  nanoimprinted  technology  is  now
being developed in preparation for volume production167,168.
 Biomedical applications
In addition to photonics and semiconductors, the applica-
tion of NIL in the broader field of biomedical applications is
growing  rapidly,  especially  in  gene  sequencing169.  In
sequencing-by-synthesis  (SBS)  platforms,  NIL  repro-
ducibly  stamps  arrays  of  uniform  nanowells  (≈100  nm
diameter) into glass or polymer substrates, creating discrete
reaction  chambers  for  bridge-amplified  DNA  clusters.
During  sequencing,  fluorescently  labeled  nucleotides  are
incorporated one base at a time into each well, and high-
resolution  optical  imaging  records  each  incorporation
event.  NIL  also  underpins  the  fabrication  of  solid-state
nanopore  sensors:  it  patterns  20–50  nm  apertures  in  thin
membranes, which can be thermally or chemically shrunk
to  single-digit–nanometer  pores.  When  an  electric  poten-
tial drives single-stranded DNA through these pores, each
nucleotide  produces  a  characteristic  blockade  of  the  ionic
current; real-time analysis of these current fluctuations then
reveals  the  underlying  DNA  sequence.  Several  biomedical
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 18 of 27)

[Page 21]
companies, such as Illumina, have adopted NIL to manu-
facture DNA sequencing tools.
NIL  is  also  useful  for  drug  delivery  applications,  where
nanoparticles with specific shapes and sizes can be precisely
engineered. By using a precursor solution containing cross-
linkable  polymers  and  biomaterials  in  combination  with
predefined  molds,  highly  monodisperse,  enzymatically
responsive  nanoparticles  as  small  as  50  nm  can  be
fabricated170. NIL can also be used for immunoassay chips
and nanofluidic chips for biosensing and analysis171,172. As
an example, by precisely controlling the cross-section of the
nanofluidic channels from 300 nm × 700 nm to 75 nm ×
120  nm,  the  stretching  state  of  DNA  flowing  through  the
nanochannels  can  be  modulated173.  In  tissue  engineering,
NIL  is  being  explored  to  create  biomimetic  surfaces  that
guide  cell  growth  and  behavior174,175.  Other  applications,
including  direct  protein  patterning  at  the  nanoscale,  have
also been demonstrated176.
 Research development in academia
Besides industry and manufacturing dedicated to optimiz-
ing the imprinting system and process for volume produc-
tion,  academics  are  more  focused  on  exploring  new
nanoimprinting  applications  and  leveraging  NIL's  advan-
tages to improve the capability. Thanks to the fewer mate-
rial  constraints  of  NIL,  many  materials  can  be  patterned
with  NIL,  and  new  properties  can  be  found.  In  addition,
since NIL usually involves heating and pressing steps, func-
tionality  can  be  different.  Researchers  are  also  actively
investigating  methods  to  solve  the  intrinsic  challenges  of
NIL,  such  as  residual  layer  issues  and  demolding-induced
defects. Variations of NIL, such as ultrasound-assisted NIL,
are also leveraged to make NIL broadly applicable in differ-
ent areas.
 High-quality factor optical devices
One  significant  advantage  of  NIL  is  the  low  lithography-
induced edge roughness, which makes it suitable for fabri-
cating high-quality integrated photonic devices. In the opti-
cal waveguides, the optical scattering induced by the waveg-
uide  roughness  is  the  dominant  factor  that  causes  light
dissipation.  The  waveguide  roughness  can  be  generally
separated  into  line  edge  and  sidewall  surface  roughness.
The  former  usually  occurs  during  the  lithography  step,
where  the  dosage  fluctuation  or  insufficient  resolution  of
the  lithography  are  the  major  contributors.  The  latter
usually  results  from  the  etching  process,  causing  a  non-
smooth sidewall. Even though the feature size of the optical
waveguides is only a few hundred nanometers, the perfor-
mance of the photonic integrated circuits is sensitive to the
nm-scaled  roughness.  NIL  can  substantially  avoid  the
roughness issue because the fabrication of the NIL mold is
typically based on the E-beam writing, where the lithogra-
phy-induced roughness can be minimized. In addition, NIL
mold is typically fabricated on standard materials, such as Si
or SiO2, with mature etching technologies.
Using thermal imprinting with a highly smooth Si-mold,
Lin  et  al.  fabricated  polymer  microring  resonators  with  a
quality  factor  >  1.5  million  on  the  thin  polystyrene  films
(n= 1.58) on a full wafer scale54. Compared with other poly-
mer  devices,  the  quality  factor  is  1−2  orders  higher  when
using NIL. Nanoimprinting can also fabricate high-quality
factor  devices  through  NIL  +  RIE  methods.  Liu  et  al.
demonstrated that using the pattern transfer layer, the Q-
factor can reach higher than 10,000,000 for SiN microring
resonators.  The  fabricated  devices  have  been  used  for
nonlinear  optics  to  generate  a  high-quality  frequency
comb177.  The  NIL  can  also  be  used  for  high Q-factor  3D
devices.  Ofer  et  al.  used  direct  laser  writing  to  pattern  a
master  mold  of  micro-resonator  in  3D,  followed  by  dual
soft NIL with PDMS and SU8 curable resin to transfer the
pattern into the sol-gel materials178. To reduce the surface
roughness inherited from the direct laser writing, a thermal
reflow  step  was  performed  in  the  middle  of  the  dual
imprinting to smoothen the defects, as shown in Fig. 10(a-i).
The  thermal  reflow  technique  boosted  the  measured Q-
factor  from  110,000  to  over  3,000,000,  as  illustrated  in
Fig. 10(a-ii). This work demonstrates the high Q-factor 3D
nanophotonics devices by using simple apparatus.
 Molding-induced molecular alignment
NIL provides a unique manner to control chain alignment
and crystal orientation in semi-crystalline polymers. Cox et
al. and Aryal et al. demonstrated the capability of control-
ling  the  3D  chain  alignment  of  the  conjugated  polymer
poly(3-hexylthiophene)  (P3HT)  by  using  T-NIL75,179.
During  the  imprinting  process,  polymer  chains  tend  to
align along the polymer ﬂow direction. The P3HT molecu-
lar chains rotate during the high-temperature process and
turn toward the hydrophobic sidewalls of the mold due to
the interaction of the hydrophobic mold surfaces, as shown
in Fig. 10(b-i)179. By using different mold structures, such as
1D nanograting and nanopillars, the polymer chain can be
effectively modulated and aligned, as shown in Fig. 10(b-ii).
Since the polymer backbone is related to the carrier trans-
port property, this capability has recently been engineered
to  improve  the  performance  of  solar  cells  and  field  effect
transistors (FET).
Hu et al. demonstrated the capability of modulating the
orientation  of  ferroelectric  polymer  crystals  when  using
properly designed molds for T-NIL180. After imprinting, the
orientation of the chain axis that the dipole moment rotates
about  on  application  of  a  vertical  electric  field  is  aligned
parallelly to the substrate with high uniformity, leading to a
low-voltage  operation.  The  preferential  orientation  of  the
crystals  in  the  ferroelectric  nanocells  greatly  enhances  the
performance of the ferroelectric polymer memory devices,
enabling  them  to  compete  against  more  expensive  tech-
nologies such as flash memories.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 19 of 27)

[Page 22]
 Pressing for strain engineering
Strain  engineering  is  a  promising  method  to  modulate
material properties and device performance, such as carrier
mobility,  conductivity,  and  band  gap  modulation180.  The
nanoimprinting process, which involves pressing and heat-
ing,  can  effectively  engineer  materials  with  nanoscale
resolution. Wang et al. demonstrated that by stamping the
mold  with  periodic  gratings  onto  the  substrates  with  Te
nanowires, a periodic strain field can be induced, altering
the optical properties of the Te nanowires, as illustrated in
Fig. 10(c-i)181.  The  observed  Raman  spectra  reveal  the
strong  lattice  vibration  response  under  the  corresponding
strain conditions, suggesting the potential of 1D Te as a pro-
mising candidate for deformable optoelectronics and wear-
able sensors, as illustrated in Fig. 10(c-ii) and Fig. 10(c-iii).
Sun et al. demonstrated the capability of strain engineering
in  2D  materials  at  low  cost180.  Continuous  tuning  of  the
strain  magnitude  and  generating  various  strain  distribu-
tions of 2D materials were successfully achieved and evalu-
ated by scanning Raman spectroscopy. This strain engineer-
ing  method  is  compatible  with  standard  semiconductor
fabrication  processes,  providing  prospects  for  advances  in
broad nanoelectronic and optoelectronic devices.
 Different types of NIL
 Polymer fiber imprinting
Most nanoimprinting technologies are implemented on flat
or semi-flat substrates. Recently, a directly imprinting ther-
mal drawing (DITD) technique demonstrated the capabil-
ity  of  patterning  on  the  entire  fiber  surface  with  a  ten-
nanometer  resolution  and  a  large  scale,  as  shown  in-
Fig. 11(a)182.  In  this  process,  a  polymer  preform  (PVDF)
was fed into a furnace to elongate the preform into a thin
fiber.  It  is  then  passed  through  a  pair  of  rollers  with  the
desired  surface  structure  to  transfer  the  pattern  from  the
mold onto the fiber with high resolution. It is a continuous
process  that  enables  large-scale,  high-resolution  polymer
imprinting, such as grating structures. The plasmonic effect
can  be  observed  by  depositing  a  thin  gold  film  on  the
imprinted  nanorod  structures  on  the  fiber,  which  is
expected to be useful for biosensing applications. The tech-
nique also shows compatibility to pattern other functional
fibers  and  can  be  used  for  self-powered  wearable  multi-
point touch sensors.
 Laser nanoimprinting
Nanoimprinting  can  also  directly  pattern  hard  materials,
such as crystalline Si and metal with nanometer resolution.
 
Before annealing
AŌer annealing
#1
#2
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
635
636
Wavelength (nm)
Free spectral
range
Free spectral
range
Normalized transmiƫon (arb.u.)
Transmit t ion (arb.u.)
Q=3 020 000
Q=473 000
Q=113 000
No reﬂow
37 °C DSS-NIL
40 °C DSS-NIL
TheoreƟcal ﬁt
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Oﬀset frequency from resonance [GHz]
Side wall
Nano-cavity
Side wall
Grat ing direct ion
NanograƟng
Nanopillar
P3HT pillars
200 nm
200 nm
NanoimprinƟng
150 °C heat
3 μm
A1 Raman intensity
1 μm
8.0E+3
6.5E+3
5.0E+3
3.5E+3
2.0E+3
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
A1 mode
Linear ﬁƫng
Locall strain on 1D Te (%)
a
b
c
i
i
i
ii
ii
iii
ii
Fig. 10 | NIL imprinting in the research area. (a-i) SEM images of the 3D micro-resonator fabricated by NIL. By applying annealing, the defects on the
surface  can  be  reduced.  (a-ii)  the  measured  spectrum  under  different  annealing  conditions.  (b-i)  NIL  is  used  for  polymer  molecular  chain  alignment.
(b-ii) By using different molding structures, polymer molecular chain direction can be modulated. (c-i) Strain engineering is done by using T-NIL. (c-ii) The
induced strain can be seen using Raman spectroscopy. (c-iii) The Raman shift is proportional to the local strain. Figure reproduced with permission from:
(a) ref.178, under a Creative Commons licences; (b) ref.179, American Chemical Society; (c) ref.181, under a Creative Commons licences.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 20 of 27)

[Page 23]
Chou  et  al.  demonstrated  the  laser-assisted  direct  imprint
(LADI) method to pattern Si with sub-10 nm resolution183.
In this method, a single XeCl excimer laser pulse was used
to melt a thin surface layer of silicon. Subsequently, a mold
made of quartz was embossed into the low-viscosity molten
Si liquid layer and was separated after Si was solidified. The
low viscosity Si features render the intriguing characteris-
tics of LADI—sub-10 nm resolution, sub-250 ns processing
time, and excellent imprint of large, isolated patterns. Gao
et  al.  utilized  laser  shock  imprinting  (LSI)  to  achieve
high-resolution and smooth crystalline metal patterning, as
shown  in Fig. 11(b)184.  In  this  method,  a  high-power  ns-
pulsed laser was used to irradiate an ablation coating layer,
which  sublimated  and  generated  a  shock  wave  with  high
pressure  (0.85−1.83  GPa)  to  compress  metal  sheets  into  a
nano-patterned  silicon  mold  conformably.  LSI  doesn’t
suffer from the metal grain effect, and the patterning reso-
lution can thus be high (< 30 nm). Figure 11(b-ii) shows the
silver  nanopyramid  nanostructures  fabricated  by  LSI.  The
sharp  tips  of  the  nanopyramids  resulting  from  the  high
fabrication  resolution  of  LSI  are  directly  related  to  the
device's performance on Surface-enhanced Raman scatter-
ing (SERS). LSI is also suitable for patterning hard metals,
such as Ti, with a melting temperature of 1668 °C, as shown
in Fig. 11(b-iii).
 Ultrasound imprinting
Ultrasound imprinting is another method to pattern hard
 
Unpa erned
preform
Pa erned
ﬁber
50 μm
Pa erned
roller
Furnace
31 cm
33 cm
50 μm
50 μm
50 μm
Au
grain
Mold
Imprint ﬁlm
Ag2s
Ag2s
Solid-state super-ionic
electrochemical nanoimprin ng
Ag
Ti
5 μm
400 nm
ii
ii
iii
3 μm
Laser
pulse
Glass
Metal layer
Si mold
Lubricant layer
Graphite ableƟon layer
Si mold
Metal
Glass
Crystalline
smooth
nanostructures
a
b
c
d
i
i
ii
i
Fig. 11 | Different variations of NIL. (a) NIL for high throughput polymer fiber patterning. (b) Laser nanoimprinting. (c) Ultrasonic nanoimprinting. (d) Elec-
trochemical imprinting. Figure reproduced with permission from: (a) ref.182, (b) ref.184, (c) ref. 185, under a Creative Commons licences; (d) ref.186, American
Chemical Society.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 21 of 27)

[Page 24]
material,  like  crystalline  metal,  at  room  temperature  with
nano-scaled resolution185. The working principle is demon-
strated  in Fig. 11(c-i).  Like  a  jackhammer,  the  ultrasound
imprinting method uses a high-frequency ultrasonic strike
with  the  nanostructured  mold  to  deform  the  materials,
allowing the user to make nanostructures out of almost all
solid materials regardless of their melting points, chemical
reactivity, and ductility.
With ultrasound nanoimprinting, vertically aligned metal
nanowires  (Au,  Ag,  Sn,  and  Cu)  with  varying  lengths
(100  nm-10  μm)  and  diameters  (30  nm-300  nm)  can  be
obtained within 1 minute. The length of the nanowires can
be  tuned  by  adjusting  the  imprinting  force  and  vibration
amplitude. At the same time, the diameter is determined by
the  imprinting  mold.  Ultrasound  nanoimprinting  also
allows  for  the  fabrication  of  heterojunction  nanowires
composed of different materials with different properties, as
shown in Fig. 11(c-ii). A nanowire array with Sn-Au junc-
tions  can  be  made  regardless  of  a  significant  difference
between the melting points. Metal and plastic heterojunc-
tion was also demonstrated. As a demonstration, the fabri-
cated nanorods containing Ag-alumina-Ag heterojunctions
were used as a SERS platform for quorum sensing.
 Electrochemical nanoimprinting
Unlike the previously listed methods focusing on physically
pressing  and  molding,  electrochemical  imprinting  uses
chemical  reactions  to  achieve  patterning.  This  method
allows the direct patterning of rigid materials, such as semi-
conductor  materials  or  metals. Figure 11(d-i)186 illustrates
the  working  principle  of  electrochemical  imprinting.  A
patterned  stamp  made  of  a  superionic  conductor  with  a
mobile  cation  is  pressed  into  contact  with  the  metallic
substrate with pressure. After applying an electrical bias to
the  system,  an  electrochemical  reaction  is  triggered  and
oxidizes  the  silver  atoms  on  the  substrate,  progressively
forming  inverse  features  on  the  substrate.  This  method
allows the pattern of 200 nm circles, as shown in Fig. 11(d-ii).
Similar  ideas  can  be  used  to  pattern  the  semiconductor
materials187.  When  pressing  a  patterned  polymer  mold
coated with Pt thin film against an n-GaAs wafer with pres-
sure, an intrinsic electric field is formed at the Pt/n-GaAs
interface due to the difference in their work functions, trig-
gering  the  redox-catalyzed  dissolution  of n-GaAs  without
any external energy modulation.
 Conclusion
Nanoimprint  lithography  (NIL)  has  made  tremendous
progress over the past 30 years. Its advantages—high reso-
lution, high throughput, complex 3D structuring, and one-
step patterning—make it a unique technology suitable for
various applications. NIL is currently under active evalua-
tion by advanced semiconductor manufacturing foundries,
capitalizing on its high resolution and low cost of owner-
ship.  The  3D  capability  also  reduces  the  process  steps
required  for  manufacturing  metal  interconnect  layers  in
semiconductor production. NIL is crucial in emerging opti-
cal applications like flat optics and augmented reality (AR)
glasses.  Its  high-resolution  capability  enables  the  fabrica-
tion of high-efficiency metalenses, which have already been
successfully commercialized. Furthermore, the 3D pattern-
ing  feature  makes  NIL  an  ideal  solution  for  the  mass
production of diffractive waveguides in AR glasses. NIL is
also widely utilized in wafer-level optics, display technolo-
gies, optoelectronics, and biomedical applications. Notably,
applications  such  as  nanopatterning  on  curved  surfaces
benefit from NIL's flexible mold properties.
The long-standing defect issues in NIL have been signifi-
cantly  mitigated  over  the  past  three  decades.  Repeated
defects,  primarily  caused  by  mold  damage  from  foreign
particles,  which  resulted  in  continuous  imprinting  defects
at the same locations, have been addressed. Methods such
as  air  filtration,  soft  mold  imprinting,  and  using  working
stamps  have  been  widely  implemented  to  prevent  these
recurring defects. Random defects, typically arising from air
trapping and non-conformal contact between the mold and
substrate, have been minimized through strategies like high
surface-energy  resist,  substrate  conformal  imprinting,  and
air  cushions  for  pressing.  Specialized  companies  in  mold
fabrication,  resist  development,  imprinting  tools,  simula-
tion  toolboxes,  defect  detection,  and  application-related
intellectual property have established a comprehensive NIL
ecosystem.
In addition to its manufacturing advantages, NIL holds
significant research value. It enables the patterning of vari-
ous  materials,  including  polymers,  dielectric  sol-gel  solu-
tions,  composite  metals,  and  crystalline  metals,  providing
versatile functionalities. NIL also allows the modulation of
polymer molecular chain alignment using different molds,
enhancing device performance. The pressing process in NIL
can be employed to engineer strain during nanopatterning,
which aids in improving carrier mobility. Additionally, NIL
is ideal for manufacturing high-Q-factor optical devices due
to  its  high  resolution  and  low  lithography-induced  edge
roughness.
Looking ahead, many opportunities lie ahead for NIL. As
the industry matures, the cost of ownership is expected to
decrease  further.  The  continued  maturation  of  NIL  will
attract more attention and resources, further expanding the
application of NIL.
References 
 Chou SY, Krauss PR, Renstrom PJ. Imprint of sub‐25 nm vias
and trenches in polymers. Appl Phys Lett 67, 3114–3116 (1995).
1.
 Chou SY, Krauss PR, Renstrom PJ. Imprint Lithography with 25-
nanometer resolution. Science 272, 85–87 (1996).
2.
 Chou SY, Krauss PR, Kong LS. Nanolithographically defined mag-
netic structures and quantum magnetic disk (invited). J Appl Phys
79, 6101–6106 (1996).
3.
 Chou SY, Krauss PR, Zhang W et al. Sub-10 nm imprint lithogra-
phy and applications. J Vac Sci Technol B 15, 2897–2904 (1997).
4.
 Austin MD, Ge HX, Wu W et al. Fabrication of 5nm linewidth and
5.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 22 of 27)

[Page 25]
14nm  pitch  features  by  nanoimprint  lithography. Appl  Phys  Lett
84, 5299–5301 (2004).
 Chou SY, Krauss PR. Imprint lithography with sub-10 nm feature
size and high throughput. Microelectron Eng 35, 237–240 (1997).
6.
 Chou  SY,  Krauss  PR,  Renstrom  PJ. Nanoimprint  lithography. J
Vac Sci Technol B 14, 4129–4133 (1996).
7.
 Li MT, Chen L, Chou SY. Direct three-dimensional patterning us-
ing nanoimprint lithography. Appl Phys Lett 78, 3322–3324 (2001).
8.
 Sun XY, Zhuang L, Zhang W et al. Multilayer resist methods for
nanoimprint lithography on nonflat surfaces. J Vac Sci Technol B
16, 3922–3925 (1998).
9.
 Tan H, Gilbertson A, Chou SY et al. Roller nanoimprint lithogra-
phy. J Vac Sci Technol B 16, 3926–3928 (1998).
10.
 Chou  SY. Patterned  magnetic  nanostructures  and  quantized
magnetic disks. Proc IEEE 85, 652–671 (1997).
11.
 Krauss PR, Chou SY. Nano-compact disks with 400 Gbit/in2 stor-
age density fabricated using nanoimprint lithography and read with
proximal probe. Appl Phys Lett 71, 3174–3176 (1997).
12.
 Guo LJ, Krauss PR, Chou SY. Nanoscale silicon field effect tran-
sistors  fabricated  using  imprint  lithography. Appl  Phys  Lett 71,
1881–1883 (1997).
13.
 Wang J, Schablitsky S, Yu ZN et al. Fabrication of a new broad-
band waveguide polarizer with a double-layer 190 nm period met-
al-gratings using nanoimprint lithography. J Vac Sci Technol B 17,
2957–2960 (1999).
14.
 Austin MD, Chou SY. Fabrication of 70 nm channel length poly-
mer organic thin-film transistors using nanoimprint lithography. Ap-
pl Phys Lett 81, 4431–4433 (2002).
15.
 Cao  H,  Yu  ZN,  Wang  J  et  al. Fabrication  of  10  nm  enclosed
nanofluidic channels. Appl Phys Lett 81, 174–176 (2002).
16.
 Haisma J, Verheijen M, van den Heuvel K et al. Mold‐assisted
nanolithography: a process for reliable pattern replication. J Vac
Sci Technol B 14, 4124–4128 (1996).
17.
 Colburn M, Johnson SC, Stewart MD et al. Step and flash imprint
lithography:  a  new  approach  to  high-resolution  patterning. Proc
SPIE 3676, 379–389 (1999).
18.
 Ahn SH, Guo LJ. High-speed roll-to-roll nanoimprint lithography on
flexible plastic substrates. Adv Mater 20, 2044–2049 (2008).
19.
 Lebib A, Chen Y, Bourneix J et al. Nanoimprint lithography for a
large  area  pattern  replication. Microelectron  Eng 46, 319–322
(1999).
20.
 Heidari B, Maximov I, Montelius L. Nanoimprint lithography at the
6 in. wafer scale. J Vac Sci Technol B 18, 3557–3560 (2000).
21.
 LaPedus M. Nano-imprint lithography added to ITRS roadmap –
EE| Times.
https://www.eetimes.com/nano-imprint-lithography-added-to-itrs-
roadmap/.
22.
 McMackin  I,  Choi  J,  Schumaker  P  et  al. Step  and  repeat  UV
nanoimprint  lithography  tools  and  processes. Proc  SPIE 5374,
222–231 (2004).
23.
 Verschuuren MA, Megens M, Ni YF et al. Large area nanoimprint
by substrate conformal imprint lithography (SCIL). Adv Opt Tech-
nol 6, 243–264 (2017).
24.
 Li ZW, Gu YN, Wang L et al. Hybrid nanoimprint-soft lithography
with sub-15 nm resolution. Nano Lett 9, 2306–2310 (2009).
25.
 Yang  XM,  Xu  Y,  Seiler  C  et  al. Toward  1  Tdot/in.2 nanoimprint
lithography  for  magnetic  bit-patterned  media:  opportunities  and
challenges. J Vac Sci Technol B 26, 2604–2610 (2008).
26.
 Ootera  Y,  Yuzawa  A,  Shimada  T  et  al. Nanoimprint  process  for
2.5Tb/in2 bit  patterned  media  fabricated  by  self-assembling
method. Proc SPIE 7970, 79700K (2011).
27.
 Cheng  X,  Hong  Y,  Kanicki  J  et  al. High-resolution  organic  poly-
mer light-emitting pixels fabricated by imprinting technique. J Vac
28.
Sci Technol B 20, 2877–2880 (2002).
 Unno N, Mäkelä T. Thermal nanoimprint lithography—a review of
the  process,  mold  fabrication,  and  material. Nanomaterials 13,
2031 (2023).
29.
 Chao CY, Fung W, Guo LJ. Polymer microring resonators for bio-
chemical sensing applications. IEEE J Sel Top Quantum Electron
12, 134–142 (2006).
30.
 Guo JP, Shaw MJ, Vawter GA et al. High-Q microring resonator
for biochemical sensors. Proc SPIE 5728, 83–92 (2005).
31.
 Chao  CY,  Guo  LJ. Polymer  microring  resonators  fabricated  by
nanoimprint  technique. J  Vac  Sci  Technol  B 20, 2862–2866
(2002).
32.
 Tu X, Chen SL, Song CL et al. Ultrahigh Q polymer microring res-
onators  for  biosensing  applications. IEEE  Photonics  J 11,
4200110 (2019).
33.
 Chen SL. Optical microring resonators for photoacoustic imaging
and detection (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2012).
34.
 Guo LJ. Recent progress in nanoimprint technology and its appli-
cations. J Phys D Appl Phys 37, R123–R141 (2004).
35.
 Kwon B, Kim JH. Importance of molds for nanoimprint lithography:
hard, soft, and hybrid molds. J Nanosci 2016, 6571297 (2016).
36.
 Zhang C, Subbaraman H, Li QC et al. Printed photonic elements:
nanoimprinting  and  beyond. J  Mater  Chem  C 4, 5133–5153
(2016).
37.
 Cheng X, Guo LJ. One-step lithography for various size patterns
with a hybrid mask-mold. Microelectron Eng 71, 288–293 (2004).
38.
 Guo  LJ. Nanoimprint  lithography:  methods  and  material  require-
ments. Adv Mater 19, 495–513 (2007).
39.
 Pelloquin S, Augé S, Sharshavina K et al. Soft mold nanoImprint
lithography:  a  versatile  tool  for  sub-wavelength  grating  applica-
tions. In Proceedings of 2017 Symposium on Design, Test, Inte-
gration  and  Packaging  of  MEMS/MOEMS (IEEE,  2017).  doi:
10.1109/DTIP.2017.7984454.
40.
 Bhingardive V, Menahem L, Schvartzman M. Soft thermal nanoim-
print  lithography  using  a  nanocomposite  mold. Nano  Res 11,
2705–2714 (2018).
41.
 Pandey  A,  Tzadka  S,  Yehuda  D  et  al. Soft  thermal  nanoimprint
with a 10 nm feature size. Soft Matter 15, 2897–2904 (2019).
42.
 Barcelo S, Li ZY. Nanoimprint lithography for nanodevice fabrica-
tion. Nano Converg 3, 21 (2016).
43.
 Sreenivasan SV. Nanoimprint lithography steppers for volume fab-
rication  of  leading-edge  semiconductor  integrated  circuits. Mi-
crosyst Nanoeng 3, 17075 (2017).
44.
 Zhang W, Fletcher B, Thompson E et al. High throughput Jet and
Flash Imprint Lithography for semiconductor memory applications.
Proc SPIE 9777, 97770A (2016).
45.
 Wu W, Tong WM, Bartman J et al. Sub-10 nm nanoimprint lithog-
raphy by wafer bowing. Nano Lett 8, 3865–3869 (2008).
46.
 Gao H, Tan H, Zhang W et al. Air cushion press for excellent uni-
formity,  high  yield,  and  fast  nanoimprint  across  a  100  mm  field.
Nano Lett 6, 2438–2441 (2006).
47.
 Li  H,  Dong  BQ,  Zhang  X  et  al. Disposable  ultrasound-sensing
chronic  cranial  window  by  soft  nanoimprinting  lithography. Nat
Commun 10, 4277 (2019).
48.
 Zhang Y, Feng WJ, Zhu WK et al. Universal color retrofit to poly-
mer-based radiative cooling materials. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
15, 21008–21015 (2023).
49.
 Con C, Zhang J, Jahed Z et al. Thermal nanoimprint lithography
using fluoropolymer mold. Microelectron Eng 98, 246–249 (2012).
50.
 Williams  SS,  Retterer  S,  Lopez  R  et  al. High-resolution  PFPE-
based molding techniques for nanofabrication of high-pattern den-
sity,  Sub-20  nm  features:  a  fundamental  materials  approach.
Nano Lett 10, 1421–1428 (2010).
51.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 23 of 27)

[Page 26]
 Kooy N, Mohamed K, Pin LT et al. A review of roll-to-roll nanoim-
print lithography. Nanoscale Res Lett 9, 320 (2014).
52.
 Haslinger MJ, Moharana AR, Mühlberger M. Antireflective moth-
eye  structures  on  curved  surfaces  fabricated  by  nanoimprint
lithography. Proc SPIE 11177, 111770K (2019).
53.
 Lin  WK,  Liu  S,  Lee  S  et  al. High Q-factor  polymer  microring
resonators  realized  by  versatile  damascene  soft  nanoimprinting
lithography. Adv Funct Mater 34, 2312229 (2024).
54.
 Pina-Hernandez  C,  Kim  JS,  Guo  LJ  et  al. High-throughput  and
etch-selective  nanoimprinting  and  stamping  based  on  fast-ther-
mal-curing  poly(dimethylsiloxane)s. Adv  Mater 19, 1222–1227
(2007).
55.
 Thanner C, Eibelhuber M. UV nanoimprint lithography: geometri-
cal impact on filling properties of nanoscale patterns. Nanomateri-
als 11, 822 (2021).
56.
 Selinidis KS, Brooks CB, Doyle GF et al. Mask replication using jet
and flash imprint lithography. J Micro/Nanolithogr MEMS MOEMS
10, 043005 (2011).
57.
 Einck VJ, Torfeh M, McClung A et al. Scalable nanoimprint lithog-
raphy process for manufacturing visible metasurfaces composed
of  high  aspect  ratio  TiO2 meta-atoms. ACS  Photonics 8,
2400–2409 (2021).
58.
 Choi H, Kim J, Kim W et al. Realization of high aspect ratio metal-
enses  by  facile  nanoimprint  lithography  using  water-soluble
stamps. PhotoniX 4, 18 (2023).
59.
 Obducat. SINDRE® Integra.
https://www.obducat.com/products-foundry-services/sindre-2/.
60.
 EVG. EVG®770 NT.
https://www.evgroup.com/products/nanoimprint-lithography/uv-nil-
smartnil/evg770-nt.
61.
 Pina-Hernandez  C,  Fu  PF,  Guo  LJ. Ultrasmall  structure  fabrica-
tion via a  facile  size  modification  of  nanoimprinted  functional
silsesquioxane features. ACS Nano 5, 923–931 (2011).
62.
 Miebori  T,  Unno  N,  Taniguchi  J. Super  resolution  technique  for
sub-100  nm  nanoimprint  mold  via  mechanical  deformation
method. Microelectron Eng 123, 38–42 (2014).
63.
 Lee SH, Jang B, Guo LJ. Large-scale mold preparation for R2R
systems by a novel mold replication and global shrinking process.
In Proceedings  of  the  2021  International  Conference  on  Micro-
and Nano-Devices Enabled by R2R Manufacturing (2021).
64.
 Pina-Hernandez  C,  Guo  LJ,  Fu  PF. High-resolution  functional
epoxysilsesquioxane-based  patterning  layers  for  large-area
nanoimprinting. ACS Nano 4, 4776–4784 (2010).
65.
 Dundar Arisoy F, Czolkos I, Johansson A et al. Low-cost, durable
master  molds  for  thermal-NIL,  UV-NIL,  and  injection  molding.
Nanotechnology 31, 015302 (2020).
66.
 Ma PS, Xu Z, Wang M et al. Fast fabrication of TiO2 hard stamps
for nanoimprint lithography. Mater Res Bull 90, 253–259 (2017).
67.
 Zhang GM, Zhang J, Xie GY et al. Cicada wings: a stamp from na-
ture for nanoimprint lithography. Small 2, 1440–1443 (2006).
68.
 Nowduri B, Schulte S, Decker D et al. Biomimetic nanostructures
fabricated  by  nanoimprint  lithography  for  improved  cell-coupling.
Adv Funct Mater 30, 2004227 (2020).
69.
 Yoon G, Kim K, Huh D et al. Single-step manufacturing of hierar-
chical  dielectric  metalens  in  the  visible. Nat  Commun 11, 2268
(2020).
70.
 Zhang JZ, Hu X, Zhang J et al. A fast thermal-curing nanoimprint
resist based on cationic polymerizable epoxysiloxane. Nanoscale
Res Lett 7, 380 (2012).
71.
 Schuster C, Reuther F, Kolander A et al. mr-NIL 6000LT–Epoxy-
based  curing  resist  for  combined  thermal  and  UV  nanoimprint
lithography below 50 °C. Microelectron Eng 86, 722–725 (2009).
72.
 Yu CC, Chen HL. Nanoimprint technology for patterning function-
73.
al materials and its applications. Microelectron Eng 132, 98–119
(2015).
 Ready-to-use  Formulations  for  Thermal  &  Photo  (UV)  Nanoim-
print Lithography (NIL).
74.
 Cox LM, Martinez AM, Blevins AK et al. Nanoimprint lithography:
emergent  materials  and  methods  of  actuation. Nano  Today 31,
100838 (2020).
75.
 Das  Gupta  T,  Martin-Monier  L,  Yan  W  et  al. Self-assembly  of
nanostructured glass metasurfaces via templated fluid instabilities.
Nat Nanotechnol 14, 320–327 (2019).
76.
 Lin  XH,  Ling  T,  Subbaraman  H  et  al. Ultraviolet  imprinting  and
aligned  ink-jet  printing  for  multilayer  patterning  of  electro-optic
polymer modulators. Opt Lett 38, 1597–1599 (2013).
77.
 Wang Y, Tsiminis G, Kanibolotsky AL et al. Nanoimprinted poly-
mer lasers with threshold below 100 W/cm2 using mixed-order dis-
tributed  feedback  resonators. Opt  Express 21, 14362–14367
(2013).
78.
 Hu ZJ, Tian MW, Nysten B et al. Regular arrays of highly ordered
ferroelectric  polymer  nanostructures  for  non-volatile  low-voltage
memories. Nat Mater 8, 62–67 (2009).
79.
 Kothari R, Beaulieu MR, Hendricks NR et al. Direct patterning of
robust  one-dimensional,  two-dimensional,  and  three-dimensional
crystalline  metal  oxide  nanostructures  using  imprint  lithography
and  nanoparticle  dispersion  inks. Chem  Mater 29, 3908–3918
(2017).
80.
 Kim J, Kim W, Oh DK et al. One-step printable platform for high-
efficiency metasurfaces down to the deep-ultraviolet region. Light
Sci Appl 12, 68 (2023).
81.
 Kim J, Kim W, Choi M et al. Amorphous to crystalline transition in
nanoimprinted sol–gel titanium oxide metasurfaces. Adv Mater 36,
2405378 (2024).
82.
 Modaresialam M, Chehadi Z, Bottein T et al. Nanoimprint lithogra-
phy  processing  of  inorganic-based  materials. Chem  Mater 33,
5464–5482 (2021).
83.
 Rimböck J, Schuster P, Vsetecka L et al. UV nanoimprint lithogra-
phy—impact of coating techniques on pattern quality. Nanomanu-
facturing 4, 69–80 (2024).
84.
 Williams BR, Pierce J, Black K et al. Process repeatability in vol-
ume manufacturing of nanostructures utilizing nanoimprint lithog-
raphy. Proc SPIE 11467, 114670D (2020).
85.
 Achleitner  T,  Rimböck  J,  Vsetecka  L  et  al. Inkjet  coating  com-
bined with nanoimprinting for complex 3D patterns with progres-
sive  height  increase  and  low  residual  layer. Proc  SPIE 12956,
1295608 (2024).
86.
 Ifuku T, Yonekawa M, Nakagawa K et al. Nanoimprint lithography
performance  advances  for  new  application  spaces. Proc  SPIE
12956, 1295603 (2024).
87.
 Ballottin  M,  Jansen  N,  Scheidegger  A  et  al. Practical  considera-
tions for large-area nanoimprinted augmented reality waveguides.
Proc SPIE 12957, 129570J (2024).
88.
 EVG. EVG®7200 LA.
https://www.evgroup.com/products/nanoimprint-lithography/uv-nil-
smartnil/evg-7200-la.
89.
 Lan  HB.  Large-area  nanoimprint  lithography  and  applications.  In
Thirumalai  J. Micro/Nanolithography - A  Heuristic  Aspect  on  the
Enduring  Technology (IntechOpen,  2017).  doi: 10.5772/INTE-
CHOPEN.72860.
90.
 Obducat. Obducat´s product portfolio.
https://www.obducat.com/products-foundry-services/product-port-
folio/.
91.
 Thanner C, Dudus A, Treiblmayr D et al. Nanoimprint lithography
for  augmented  reality  waveguide  manufacturing. Proc  SPIE
11310, 1131010 (2020).
92.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 24 of 27)

[Page 27]
 Ahn SH, Guo LJ. Large-area roll-to-roll and roll-to-plate Nanoim-
print  Lithography:  a  step  toward  high-throughput  application  of
continuous nanoimprinting. ACS Nano 3, 2304–2310 (2009).
93.
 Thanner  C,  Bichler  A,  Feichtlbauer  F  et  al.  Step  and  repeat  im-
print lithography for wafer scale mastering of micro-and nanostruc-
tures. In Proceedings of 2022 International Semiconductor Confer-
ence 69–72 (IEEE, 2022).
94.
 Ye ZM, Luo K, Irving JW et al. Defect reduction for semiconductor
memory applications using jet and flash imprint lithography. Proc
SPIE 8680, 86800C (2013).
95.
 Yamamoto  K,  Wada  H,  Suzaki  Y  et  al. Nanoimprint  lithography
methods  for  achieving  sub-3  nm  overlay. Proc  SPIE 11855,
1185509 (2021).
96.
 Chen IT, Schappell E, Zhang XL et al. Continuous roll-to-roll pat-
terning  of  three-dimensional  periodic  nanostructures. Microsyst
Nanoeng 6, 22 (2020).
97.
 Ahn  SH,  Miller  M,  Yang  SQ  et  al. High  volume  nanoscale  roll-
based imprinting using jet and flash imprint lithography. Proc SPIE
9049, 90490G (2014).
98.
 Ogusu M, Ishida M, Tamura M et al. Nanoimprint edge placement
error elements and control. Proc SPIE 12054, 1205405 (2022).
99.
 Schuster P, Rimböck J, Vsetecka L et al. Inkjet coating combined
with nanoimprinting for complex 3D patterns with nonlinear height
and low residual layer. Proc SPIE 13414, 134140E (2025).
100.
 Park  Y,  Kim  J,  Yang  Y  et  al. Tape-assisted  residual  layer-free
one-step  nanoimprinting  of  high-index  hybrid  polymer  for  optical
loss-suppressed metasurfaces. Adv Sci 12, 2409371 (2025).
101.
 Pina-Hernandez C, Kim JS, Fu PF et al. Nonresidual layer imprint-
ing and new replication capabilities demonstrated for fast thermal
curable  polydimethysiloxanes. J  Vac  Sci  Technol  B 25, 2402–
2406 (2007).
102.
 Nakayama T, Yonekawa M, Matsuoka Y et al. Improved defectivi-
ty  and  particle  control  for  nanoimprint  lithography  high-volume
semiconductor manufacturing. Proc SPIE 10144, 1014407 (2017).
103.
 Ito T, Zhang W, Liu WJ. Reduction of non-fill defects in nanoim-
print lithography. Jpn J Appl Phys 63, 050804 (2024).
104.
 Takabayashi  Y,  Iwanaga  T,  Hiura  M  et  al. Nanoimprint  system
alignment and overlay improvement for high volume semiconduc-
tor manufacturing. Proc SPIE 10958, 109580B (2019).
105.
 Jin H, Qi YJ. Review of overlay error and controlling methods in
alignment  system  for  advanced  lithography. Proc  SPIE 12478,
1247843 (2022).
106.
 Torii H, Hiura M, Takabayashi Y et al. Nanoimprint lithography: to-
day and tomorrow. Proc SPIE 12054, 1205403 (2022).
107.
 Canon Global. FPA-1200NZ2C.
https://global.canon/en/product/indtech/semicon/fpa1200nz2c.
html.
108.
 Maruyama N, Sato K, Suzaki Y et al. Advances and applications
in nanoimprint lithography. Proc SPIE 12497, 124970D (2023).
109.
 Takeuchi  N,  Hasegawa  G,  Komukai  T  et  al. Fabrication  of  dual
damascene  structure  with  nanoimprint  lithography  and  dry-etch-
ing. Proc SPIE 12497, 124970E (2023).
110.
 Traub  MC,  Longsine  W,  Truskett  VN. Advances  in  nanoimprint
lithography. Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng 7, 583–604 (2016).
111.
 Tanaka H, Maruyama N, Hiura M et al. Establishing a nanoimprint
lithography ecosystem. Proc SPIE 12751, 127510D (2023).
112.
 Ifuku T, Hiura M, Takabayashi Y et al. Nanoimprint performance
improvements for high volume semiconductor device manufactur-
ing. Proc SPIE 12293, 122930E (2022).
113.
 Kono T, Hatano M, Tokue H et al. Half-pitch 14 nm direct pattern-
ing  with  nanoimprint  lithography. Proc  SPIE 10958, 109580H
(2019).
114.
 Kobayashi S, Yamashita K, Tsuda H et al. Design for nanoimprint
115.
lithography: hot spot modification through total NIL process simu-
lation. Proc SPIE 10584, 105840R (2018).
 Techovedas. Micron supports canon nano-semiconductor printing
for DRAM; threatening ASML monopoly.
https://techovedas.com/micron-supports-canon-nano-semiconduc-
tor-printing-for-dram-threatening-asml-monopoly/.
116.
 Mitsuyasu M, Takeuchi N, Hirose M et al. Preliminary qualification
of 3D nanoimprint process for dual damascene wiring. Proc SPIE
PC12956, PC129560G (2024). doi: 10.1117/12.3010093.
117.
 Chou SY. Nanoimprint technology for patterned magnetic nanos-
tructures: novel techniques for characterizing and preparing sam-
ples  nanomagnetism —application  and  characterization.  In
Kronmüller H, Parkin S. Handbook of Magnetism and Advanced
Magnetic  Materials (Wiley,  Hoboken,  2007).  doi: 10.1002/
9780470022184.HMM324.
118.
 Marigo L, Quaade U, Schmidlin M. Flat optics for compact integra-
tion and high performances. Proc SPIE 12402, 1240209 (2023).
119.
 Patoux A, Agez G, Girard C et al. Challenges in nanofabrication
for efficient optical metasurfaces. Sci Rep 11, 5620 (2021).
120.
 Mattinson F, Quaade U, Johansen VE et al. Latest advancements
at NILT on flat metalens based camera modules in near infrared.
Proc SPIE 12217, 1221707 (2022).
121.
 Williams BR, Bacon-Brown D, George M et al. Progress in com-
mercializing visible wavelength metalenses. Proc SPIE PC13109,
PC1310911 (2024). doi: 10.1117/12.3028131.
122.
 Williams  BR,  Bacon-Brown  D,  George  MCC  et  al.  NIL  enabled
mass  production  of  visible  meta-optics. Proc  SPIE PC12898,
PC128980U (2024). doi: 10.1117/12.3008763.
123.
 Kim J, Seong J, Kim W et al. Scalable manufacturing of high-in-
dex atomic layer–polymer hybrid metasurfaces for metaphotonics
in the visible. Nat Mater 22, 474–481 (2023).
124.
 Quaade  U,  Egede  Johansen  V,  Llinas  JM  et  al.  Highly  efficient
metalenses for imaging applications at infrared wavelengths. Proc
SPIE PC12010, PC1201012 (2022). doi: 10.1117/12.2624414.
125.
 Bilenberg  B.  Meta  optical  elements  produced  by  nanoimprint
lithography. Proc  SPIE PC12054,  PC120540W  (2022).  doi:
10.1117/12.2617835.
126.
 Yang WH, Zhou JX, Tsai DP et al. Advanced manufacturing of di-
electric meta-devices. Photonics Insights 3, R04 (2024).
127.
 Yoon G, Kim K, Kim SU et al. Printable nanocomposite metalens
for  high-contrast  near-infrared  imaging. ACS  Nano 15, 698–706
(2021).
128.
 Gong JT, Xiong LX, Pu MB et al. Visible meta-displays for anti-
counterfeiting  with  printable  dielectric  metasurfaces. Adv  Sci 11,
2308687 (2024).
129.
 Gong  JT,  Xiong  LX,  Zhang  F  et  al. Integrated  quad-color
nanoprinting  and  tri-channel  holographic  encryption  meta-marks
with  printable  metasurfaces. Laser  Photonics  Rev 19, 2401045
(2025).
130.
 Gong  JT,  Xiong  XL,  Pu  MB  et  al. High-throughput  fabrication  of
curved plasmonic metasurfaces for switchable beam focusing and
thermal infrared cloaking. Adv Opt Mater 11, 2300608 (2023).
131.
 Jung DE, Howell IR, Einck VJ et al. Refractive index tuning of all-
inorganic  TiO2 nanocrystal-based  films  and  high  aspect  ratio
nanostructures  using  atomic  layer  deposition:  implications  for
high-throughput fabrication of metalenses. ACS Appl Nano Mater
6, 2009–2019 (2023).
132.
 Eon Jung D, Einck VJ, Dawicki A et al. Full wafer scale manufac-
turing  of  directly  printed  TiO2 metalenses  at  visible  wavelengths
with outstanding focusing efficiencies. Adv Mater 2500327 (2025)
doi: 10.1002/ADMA.202500327.
133.
 Carden S. High performance at scale: unlocking waveguide pro-
duction for AR. Proc SPIE 12450, 1245012 (2023).
134.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 25 of 27)

[Page 28]
 Ding YQ, Yang Q, Li YNQ et al. Waveguide-based augmented re-
ality displays: perspectives and challenges. eLight 3, 24 (2023).
135.
 Achleitner  T,  Rimböck  J,  Vsetecka  L  et  al.  Inkjet  coating  com-
bined with nanoimprinting for complex 3D patterns with progres-
sive  height  increase  and  low  residual  layer. Proc  SPIE 12956,
1295608 (2024). doi: 10.1117/12.3009889.
136.
 Steiner S, Jotz M, Bachhuber F et al. Enabling mass manufactur-
ing  of  industry-standard  optical  waveguide  combiners. J  Opt  Mi-
crosyst 3, 033502 (2023).
137.
 Kress  BC. Optical  waveguide  combiners  for  AR  headsets:  fea-
tures and limitations. Proc SPIE 11062, 110620J (2019).
138.
 Photonics  Spectra.  Full-immersion  AR:  the  path  to  consumer-
friendly devices.
https://www.photonics.com/Articles/Full-Immersion_AR_
The_Path_to_Consumer-Friendly/a65320.
139.
 Tadros NJ, Krieg A, Cade J et al. PixNIL high index nanocompos-
ite materials with improved processability for large volume manu-
facturing. Proc SPIE 12913, 1291305 (2024).
140.
 McCoy JA, Verschuuren MA, Miles DM et al. X-ray verification of
sol-gel resist shrinkage in substrate-conformal imprint lithography
for  a  replicated  blazed  reflection  grating. OSA  Continuum 3,
3141–3156 (2020).
141.
 Souri M, Ip V, Falmbigl M et al. Reactive ion beam etch of highly
uniform slanted gratings for augmented reality applications. Proc
SPIE PC12913, PC129130M (2024). doi: 10.1117/12.3001026.
142.
 Pina-Hernandez C, Yamada K, Legacy A et al. Ultra-high refrac-
tive index materials for patterning diffractive optical elements with
nanoimprint lithography. Proc SPIE 12449, 1244905 (2023).
143.
 Lan S. Wafer level nano-optics solution for AR glasses. Proc SPIE
12914, 1291416 (2024).
144.
 EVG.  Wafer-level  micro-optics  fabrication  by  lens  molding  using
UV-curable polymers.
https://www.evgroup.com/fileadmin/media/downloads/2023/
White_Paper-EVG-DELO_Wafer-level_micro-optics-fabrication.
pdf.
145.
 Dannberg P, Wippermann F, Brückner A et al. Wafer-level hybrid
integration  of  complex  micro-optical  modules. Micromachines 5,
325–340 (2014).
146.
 Photonics  Spectra.  High-precision  wafer-level  optics  fabrication
and integration.
https://www.photonics.com/Articles/High-Precision_Wafer-
Level_Optics_Fabrication_and/a45233.
147.
 Brehm M, Ertl C, Pilottek I et al. UV curing materials for wafer lev-
el optics. Proc SPIE 11292, 112920I (2020).
148.
 Nakamura T, Yang Z, Ogawa D et al. “Better than DOE optics” so-
lution in ToF sensors for wearable XR device. Proc SPIE 12449,
1244911 (2023).
149.
 Israel A, Ulfan F, Pascar L et al. Photonic plug for scalable silicon
photonics packaging. Proc SPIE 11286, 1128607 (2020).
150.
 PIC Magazine News. Wafer-level nanoimprint technology for inno-
vative packaging.
https://picmagazine.net/article/115752/Wafer-level_nanoimprint_
technology_for_innovative_packaging_.
151.
 Mitsubishi  Chemical  Group.  Moth  eye-type  antireflective  film
MOSMITETM.
https://www.m-chemical.co.jp/en/products/departments/mcc/indus-
trial-medical/product/1201267_8054.html.
152.
 SCIVAX.  White  paper  :  wire  grid  polarizers  using  nanoimprint
lithography.
https://www.scivax.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/WGP_White-
Paper_English.pdf.
153.
 Schleunitz A, Schift H. Fabrication of 3D nanoimprint stamps with
continuous  reliefs  using  dose-modulated  electron  beam  lithogra-
154.
phy and thermal reflow. J Micromech Microeng 20, 095002 (2010).
 Schift H. Nanoimprint lithography: 2D or not 2D? A review. Appl
Phys A 121, 415–435 (2015).
155.
 SCIVAX. DFB laser diode.
https://www.scivax.com/en/application/dfb/.
156.
 Mitsubishi  Chemical  Group.  Allowing  over  99%  of  light  to  pass
through, making it virtually invisible. MOSMITETM is a new materi-
al used for art and automotive displays.
https://www.mcgc.com/english/kaiteki_solution_center/oursolution/
15.html.
157.
 Ahn SH, Yang SQ, Miller M et al. High-performance wire-grid po-
larizers  using  jet  and  FlashTM imprint  lithography. J  Micro/Nano-
lithogr MEMS MOEMS 12, 031104 (2013).
158.
 See the PossibilitiesTM. Pixelated wire-grid polarizers.
https://moxtek.com/optics-product/pixelated-polarizers/.
159.
 Hruska J. Amazon sheds new light on Kindle Paperwhite display.
https://www.extremetech.com/electronics/137158-amazon-sheds-
new-light-on-kindle-paperwhite-display.
160.
 Lee YC, Ni CH, Chen CY. Enhancing light extraction mechanisms
of GaN-based light-emitting diodes through the integration of im-
printing  microstructures,  patterned  sapphire  substrates,  and  sur-
face roughness. Opt Express 18, A489–A498 (2010).
161.
 Overton  G.  IQE  nanoimprint  lithography  technology  tapped  for
DFB laser production.
https://www.laserfocusworld.com/lasers-sources/article/
16571676/iqe-nanoimprint-lithography-technology-tapped-for-dfb-
laser-production.
162.
 Xiong  YF,  Xu  F. Multifunctional  integration  on  optical  fiber  tips:
challenges and opportunities. Adv Photonics 2, 064001 (2020).
163.
 Kostovski G, Stoddart PR, Mitchell A. The optical fiber tip: an in-
herently  light-coupled  microscopic  platform  for  micro- and  nan-
otechnologies. Adv Mater 26, 3798–3820 (2014).
164.
 Calafiore G, Koshelev A, Darlington TP et al. Campanile near-field
probes  fabricated  by  nanoimprint  lithography  on  the  facet  of  an
optical fiber. Sci Rep 7, 1651 (2017).
165.
 Koshelev A, Calafiore G, Piña-Hernandez C et al. High refractive
index  Fresnel  lens  on  a  fiber  fabricated  by  nanoimprint  lithogra-
phy for immersion applications. Opt Lett 41, 3423–3426 (2016).
166.
 HighRI Optics, Inc. Wavefront manipulation.
https://highrioptics.com/applications-and-industries/wavefront-ma-
nipulation/.
167.
 HighRI Optics, Inc. Super-resolution imaging.
https://highrioptics.com/applications-and-industries/super-resolu-
tion-imaging/.
168.
 Choi J, Lee CC, Park S. Scalable fabrication of sub-10 nm poly-
mer nanopores for DNA analysis. Microsyst Nanoeng 5, 12 (2019).
169.
 Fu XX, Cai JX, Zhang X et al. Top-down fabrication of shape-con-
trolled,  monodisperse  nanoparticles  for  biomedical  applications.
Adv Drug Deliv Rev 132, 169–187 (2018).
170.
 Chen JH, Zhou YL, Wang DH et al. UV-nanoimprint lithography as
a tool to develop flexible microfluidic devices for electrochemical
detection. Lab Chip 15, 3086–3094 (2015).
171.
 Tegenfeldt JO, Prinz C, Cao H et al. Micro- and nanofluidics for
DNA analysis. Anal Bioanal Chem 378, 1678–1692 (2004).
172.
 Guo  LJ,  Cheng  X,  Chou  CF. Fabrication  of  size-controllable
nanofluidic channels by nanoimprinting and its application for DNA
stretching. Nano Lett 4, 69–73 (2004).
173.
 Zandi Shafagh R, Shen JX, Youhanna S et al. Facile nanoimprint-
ing  of  robust  high-aspect-ratio  nanostructures  for  human  cell
biomechanics. ACS Appl Bio Mater 3, 8757–8767 (2020).
174.
 Cheng LJ, Kao MT, Meyhöfer E et al. Highly efficient guiding of
microtubule transport with imprinted CYTOP nanotracks. Small 1,
409–414 (2005).
175.
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 26 of 27)

[Page 29]
 Hoff JD, Cheng LJ, Meyhöfer E et al. Nanoscale protein pattern-
ing by imprint lithography. Nano Lett 4, 853–857 (2004).
176.
 Liu S, Lin WK, Zhang Y et al. Wafer-scale fabrication of ultra-low
loss Si3N4 photonic integrated chips through nanoimprint lithogra-
phy. Adv Funct Mater 7, 622–626 (2013).
177.
 Bar-On O, Brenner P, Siegle T et al. High quality 3D photonics us-
ing nano imprint lithography of fast sol-gel materials. Sci Rep 8,
7833 (2018).
178.
 Aryal  M,  Trivedi  K,  Hu  WC. Nano-confinement  induced  chain
alignment  in  ordered  P3HT  nanostructures  defined  by  nanoim-
print lithography. ACS Nano 3, 3085–3090 (2009).
179.
 Sun CY, Zhong JW, Gan ZF et al. Nanoimprint-induced strain en-
gineering of two-dimensional materials. Microsyst Nanoeng 10, 49
(2024).
180.
 Wang YX, Jin SY, Wang QX et al. Parallel nanoimprint forming of
one-dimensional chiral semiconductor for strain-engineered optical
properties. Nano-Micro Lett 12, 160 (2020).
181.
 Wang  Z,  Wu  TT,  Wang  ZX  et  al. Designer  patterned  functional
fibers  via  direct  imprinting  in  thermal  drawing. Nat  Commun 11,
3842 (2020).
182.
 Chou SY, Keimel C, Gu J. Ultrafast and direct imprint of nanos-
tructures in silicon. Nature 417, 835–837 (2002).
183.
 Gao H, Hu YW, Xuan Y et al. Large-scale nanoshaping of ultra-
smooth
 3D
 crystalline
 metallic
 structures. 
Science 
346,
1352–1356 (2014).
184.
 Ge  JY,  Ding  B,  Hou  S  et  al. Rapid  fabrication  of  complex
nanostructures using room-temperature ultrasonic nanoimprinting.
185.
Nat Commun 12, 3146 (2021).
 Hsu KH, Schultz PL, Ferreira PM et al. Electrochemical nanoim-
printing with solid-state superionic stamps. Nano Lett 7, 446–451
(2007).
186.
 Zhang  J,  Zhang  L,  Han  LH  et  al. Electrochemical  nanoimprint
lithography:  when  nanoimprint  lithography  meets  metal  assisted
chemical etching. Nanoscale 9, 7476–7482 (2017).
187.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the National Science Foundation for the partial
support  (NSF-2213684),  and  LJG  acknowledges  an  Emmett  Leith  Collegiate
Professorship for this writing.
Competing interests
 L. Jay Guo serves as an Editor for the Journal, and no other author has reported
any competing interests.
Open  Access This  article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative
Commons  Attribution  4.0  International  License,  which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and repro-
duction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original  author(s)  and  the  source,  provide  a  link  to  the  Creative  Commons
license, and indicate if changes were made. To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
©The Author(s) 2025.
Published by Editorial Office of Opto-Electronic Technology, Institute of Optics
and Electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
 
 
Scan for Article PDF
Lin W-K et al. Opto-Electron Technol 1, 250001 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.29026/oet.2025.250001
250001 (Page 27 of 27)
