# lian_2022
# Extracted from: 2022-Lian-Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication.pdf
# Total PDF pages: 314
# Page numbering: from PDF page labels
# ============================================================


[Page C1]
[empty page]

[Page 1]
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 2]
IEEE Press
445 Hoes Lane
Piscataway, NJ 08854
IEEE Press Editorial Board
Sarah Spurgeon, Editor in Chief
Jón Atli Benediktsson
Anjan Bose
Adam Drobot
Peter (Yong) Lian
Andreas Molisch
Saeid Nahavandi
Jeffrey Reed
Thomas Robertazzi
Diomidis Spinellis
Ahmet Murat Tekalp
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 3]
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication
A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing
Yaguang Lian
University of Illinois
Urbana, USA
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 4]
Copyright © 2023 by The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other
damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Applied for:
Hardback ISBN: 9781119867784
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © Den Rise/Shutterstock
Set in 9.5/12.5pt STIXTwoText by Straive, Chennai, India
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 5]
v
Contents
Author Biography
xi
Preface
xiii
1
Introduction to the Basic Concepts
1
1.1
What Is a Microchip?
1
1.2
Ohm’s Law and Resistivity
1
1.3
Conductor, Insulator, and Semiconductor
5
References
5
2
Brief Introduction of Theories
7
2.1
The Birth of Quantum Mechanics
7
2.2
Energy Band (Band)
11
References
15
3
Early Radio Communication
17
3.1
Telegraph Technology
17
3.2
Electron Tube
19
References
22
4
Basic Knowledge of Electric Circuits (Circuits)
23
4.1
Electric Circuits and the Components
23
4.2
Electric Field
26
4.3
Magnetic Field
28
4.4
Alternating Current
30
5
Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
33
5.1
Semiconductor Energy Band
33
5.2
Semiconductor Doping
36
5.3
Semiconductor Diode
42
References
46
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 6]
vi
Contents
6
Transistor and Integrated Circuit
47
6.1
Bipolar Transistor
47
6.2
Junction Field Effect Transistor
49
6.3
Metal–Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
52
6.4
Metal–Insulator–Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
55
References
60
7
The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
61
7.1
The Instruction of Semiconductor Products and Structures
61
7.2
A Brief History of the Semiconductor Industry
63
7.3
Changes in the Size of Transistors and Silicon Wafers
65
7.4
Clean Room
67
7.5
Planar Process
71
References
75
8
Semiconductor Photonic Devices
77
8.1
Light-Emitting Devices and Light-Emitting Principles
77
8.2
Light-Emitting Diode (LED)
82
8.3
Semiconductor Diode Laser
88
8.3.1
Resonant Cavity
89
8.3.2
Reflection and Refraction of Light
91
8.3.3
Heterojunction Materials
93
8.3.4
Population Inversion and Threshold Current Density
94
References
96
9
Semiconductor Light Detection and Photocell
97
9.1
Digital Camera and CCD
97
9.2
Photoconductor
100
9.3
Transistor Laser
101
9.4
Solar Cell
105
References
106
10
Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
109
10.1
From Quartzite Ore to Polysilicon
110
10.2
Chemical Reaction
113
10.3
Pull Single Crystal
115
10.4
Polishing and Slicing
116
References
123
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 7]
Contents
vii
11
Basic Knowledges of Process
125
11.1
The Structure of Integrated Circuit (IC)
125
11.2
Resolution of Optical System
128
11.3
Why Plasma Used in the Process
131
References
133
12
Photolithography (Lithography)
135
12.1
The Steps of Lithography Process
135
12.1.1
Cleaning
135
12.1.2
Dehydration Bake
136
12.1.3
Photoresist Coating
138
12.1.4
Soft Bake
141
12.1.5
Alignment and Exposure
141
12.1.6
Developing
145
12.1.7
Inspection
146
12.1.8
Hard Bake
147
12.1.9
Descum
148
12.2
Alignment Mark (Mark) Design on the Photomask
152
12.3
Contemporary Photolithography Equipment Technologies
156
References
159
13
Dielectric Films Growth
161
13.1
The Growth of Silicon Dioxide Film
162
13.1.1
Thermal Oxidation Process of SiO2
162
13.1.2
LTO Process
164
13.1.3
PECVD Process of Silicon Dioxide
166
13.1.4
TEOS + O3 Deposition Using APCVD System
167
13.2
The Growth of Silicon Nitride Film
168
13.2.1
LPCVD
168
13.2.2
PECVD Process of Silicon Nitride
171
13.3
Atomic Layer Deposition Technique
174
References
177
14
Introduction of Etching and RIE System
179
14.1
Wet Etching
179
14.2
RIE System for Dry Etching
182
14.2.1
RIE Process Flow and Equipment Structure
182
14.2.2
Process Chamber
184
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 8]
viii
Contents
14.2.3
Vacuum Pumps
186
14.2.4
RF Power Supply (Source) and Matching Network (Matchwork)
187
14.2.5
Gas Cylinder and Mass Flow Controller (MFC)
189
14.2.6
Heater and Coolant
194
References
196
15
Dry Etching
197
15.1
The Etch Profile of RIE
197
15.1.1
Case 1
198
15.1.2
Case 2
201
15.2
Etching Rate of RIE
203
15.3
Dry Etching of III–V Semiconductors and Metals
206
15.4
Etch Profile Control
207
15.4.1
Influence of the PR Opening Shape on the Etch Profile
208
15.4.2
The Effect of Carbon on Etching Rate and Profile
209
15.5
Other Issues
211
15.5.1
The Differences Between RIE and PECVD
211
15.5.2
The Difference Between Si and SiO2 Dry Etching
214
15.6
Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Technique and Bosch Process
215
15.6.1
Inductively Coupled Plasma Technique
216
15.6.2
Bosch Process
219
References
223
16
Metal Processes
225
16.1
Thermal Evaporation Technique
225
16.2
Electron Beam Evaporation Technique
227
16.3
Magnetron Sputtering Deposition Technique
231
16.4
The Main Differences Between Electron Beam (Thermal) Evaporation
and Sputtering Deposition
234
16.5
Metal Lift-off Process
235
16.6
Metal Selection and Annealing Technology
241
16.6.1
The Selection of Metals
241
16.6.2
Metal Annealing
242
References
243
17
Doping Processes
245
17.1
Basic Introduction of Doping
245
17.2
Basic Principles of Diffusion
246
17.3
Thermal Diffusion
247
17.4
Diffusion and Redistribution of Impurities in SiO2
248
17.5
Minimum Thickness of SiO2 Masking Film
250
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 9]
Contents
ix
17.6
The Distribution of Impurities Under the SiO2 Masking Film
251
17.7
Diffusion Impurity Sources
252
17.8
Parameters of the Diffusion Layer
255
17.9
Four-Point Probe Sheet Resistance Measurement
256
17.10
Ion Implantation Process
257
17.11
Theoretical Analysis of Ion Implantation
259
17.12
Impurity Distribution after Implantation
260
17.13
Type and Dose of Implanted Impurities
262
17.14
The Minimum Thickness of Masking Film
263
17.15
Annealing Process
264
17.16
Buried Implantation
266
17.16.1
Implantation through Masking Film
266
17.16.2
SOI Manufacture
267
References
270
18
Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
271
18.1
Dielectric Film Quality Inspection
271
18.2
Ohmic Contact Test
273
18.3
Metal-to-Metal Contact
274
18.4
Conductive Channel Control
277
18.5
Chip Testing
278
18.6
Dicing
279
18.7
Packaging
280
18.8
Equipment Operation Range
281
18.9
Low-k and High-k Dielectrics
282
18.9.1
Copper Interconnection and Low-k Dielectrics
283
18.9.2
Quantum Tunneling Effect and High-k Dielectrics
286
18.10
End
291
References
293
Index
295
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 10]
xi
Author Biography
Yaguang Lian is a research engineer in Holonyak
Micro & Nanotechnology Lab at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). In 1979, he
studied at the Department of Electronics, Hebei
University, China. In 1983, with a bachelor’s
degree, he worked on silicon epitaxy for a semicon-
ductor company for two years. Yaguang returned
to Hebei University as a graduate student in 1985.
In 1988, he got his master’s degree. From 1988
to 2001, he worked with Hebei Semiconductor
Research Institute (HSRI). In 2001, Yaguang
joined a start-up company at California as a senior
semiconductor process engineer. Two years later,
he worked in the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). From November
2004 till now, Yaguang works as research engineer at the University of Illinois.
With over 35 years of experience in the semiconductor field, Yaguang has
dealt with different processes for different kinds of semiconductors, such as Si
and GaAs. When he worked in HSRI in China, he was manufacturing GaAs
MESFET digital IC and designing circuits, and also managed a process flow from
implantation to packaging. In the company at California, he worked mainly in
the manufacture of silicon optical waveguide. At UCLA, Yaguang started the
equipment repair and maintenance, and users’ training, which he further evolved
at UIUC. He is also responsible for designing different recipes to meet the needs
of professors in different projects, such as dry etching of silicon, III–V materials,
dielectric films and metals, and deposition of silicon nitride film with different
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 11]
xii
Author Biography
stresses. He solves different types of process problems for students paving way for
their research.
Yaguang believes that to be a good engineer, one must have an important trait,
which is “it is not enough for you to know how to do it, you must know why
to do it.”
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 12]
xiii
Preface
“Semiconductor process engineer” is the label of my whole career. As a research
engineer, I have been working in Holonyak Micro & Nanotechnology Laboratory
(HMNTL) at the University of Illinois for nearly two decades. The core part of
HMNTL is the clean room with different types of equipment, which are used
to fabricate various semiconductor devices. The lab is open to the campus and
society. Up to now, I have trained thousands of users in using the lab machines.
Most users are doctoral students. These training experiences have given me the
opportunities to encounter various issues and solve different technical problems
with different kinds of users.
During my years of training, I have met students with different backgrounds.
Most of them have EE or ECE backgrounds, and some of them don’t have these
backgrounds. The student without EE or ECE backgrounds lack basic knowledge
of semiconductors and processing, while students majoring in EE or ECE need to
make up the working principles of manufacturing processes and the basic struc-
tures of equipment. Lack of adequate understanding of process and equipment
not only occurs in many doctoral students with backgrounds in EE or ECE, but
also in some postdoctoral researchers. An important reason for this phenomenon
is that they do not understand the process and equipment from the perspective
of physical and chemical principles. These issues and the encouragement from
students drove me to write this book.
We are using microchips to describe semiconductor devices and integrated
circuits (ICs). To meet the needs of readers without EE or ECE backgrounds,
this book includes the knowledge of semiconductor concepts, theories, histories,
and basic structures of microchips, which help to lay the foundation for them to
understand semiconductor manufacturing processes. To help the readers with
EE or ECE backgrounds better understand the process and equipment, this book
strives to clarify the principles of processes, the basic structures of equipment, and
the design of process recipes based on the physical laws, chemical reactions, and
electrical circuit theories. It not only shows readers how to do the process, but
also explains why the process is designed in such a way. It combines the processes
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 13]
xiv
Preface
with the actual machines used in the clean room at the University. Therefore, the
book will be very useful for readers with different backgrounds.
This is a handy book for many audiences as it starts with the basic concepts
and daily examples. It uses simple language to explain complicated concepts
and theories. The needs of various levels of audiences will be satisfied, such as
undergraduates, graduates, researchers, engineers, and professors. The book will
pave the ways for readers in their semiconductor research, process, and manufac-
ture. From this book, readers can find many valuable suggestions and solutions
to the problems that students or engineers often encounter in semiconductor
processing. These suggestions and solutions are based on my years of working
experience. Moreover, readers can also find some useful experimental results in
the book, which will help them in their processing work.
Nowadays, semiconductors are widely used in many fields. This book is
also written for those who are not majoring but interested in the research and
production of semiconductor microchips. Even those who do not have enough
knowledge of semiconductor and processes, as long as they have basic knowledge
of physics, chemistry, and circuit, after reading this book, can easily learn and
quickly grasp the principles, knowledge, and manufacturing processes of semi-
conductors. From this book, readers can obtain the fundamental concepts and
skills, which will be a necessity in the development of semiconductor processing.
They can apply all these concepts and skills in semiconductor technology to
improve their product quality or the project research.
I could not accomplish my book without HMNTL. In HMNTL, I have gotten
a good time with my colleagues. I would like to express my appreciation to my
excellent colleagues: Mr. John Hughes, Dr. Mark McCollum, Dr. Edmond Chow,
Dr. Glennys Mensing, Ken Tarman, Hal Romans, Michael Hansen, Lavendra
Mandyam, Karthick Jeganathan, Paul DiPippo. From them, I have learned more
about the layout and management of the clean room at the university. From them,
I also have gotten a lot of help in the equipment troubleshooting, recipe design, and
parameter testing. I am so glad that I have worked with them for so many years.
In writing this book, many friends have offered their support. Dr. Ruijie Zhao
gave me good advice at the beginning. Dr. Wenjuan Zhu reviewed the draft.
Dr. Anming Gao pushed me to write the book. Mr. Raman Kumar and Alvin
Flores provided me good suggestions on some theoretical issues, and some
students supplied me with nice images. I especially thank Tianyi Bai, my nephew,
a graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania, who has given me valuable
opinions in some areas. Finally, I would like to thank the Internet, which was
born from semiconductor technology. From the Internet, I can easily find the
information I need. Here, I deeply appreciate the companies and individuals who
agreed to let me use their images in the book.
February 12, 2022
Yaguang Lian
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 14]
1
1
Introduction to the Basic Concepts
1.1
What Is a Microchip?
Looking back on the development history of human society, it has gone through
different stages of civilization, from the primitive stone age to the modern infor-
mation age. The material used to support stone age was stone. The material used
to support information age is semiconductor. So contemporary society is essen-
tially a semiconductor era represented by silicon. This era began in the late 1950s
and early 1960s in the Bay Area of Northern California near San Francisco in the
United States. Later, people called this area “Silicon Valley,” the sign of high tech-
nology (abbreviated to high-tech), which have brought us into the information age.
Silicon and other semiconductors are the cornerstone of this era. If petroleum is
thought as the blood of modern society, semiconductor microchips can be regarded
as the brain. Semiconductor technology has been integrated by different indus-
tries to enhance their technical level, and it has also come into our households. A
microchip is a semiconductor device or an integrated circuit (IC). An IC is to make
a lot of tiny semiconductor devices onto a small flat piece of semiconductor (a die).
1.2
Ohm’s Law and Resistivity
Due to microchips are operated by electricity, so first, let us get to know what elec-
tricity is, and how electricity works. See Figure 1.1. It is a voltage converter for a
small household electronic product. The explanation of some technical words on
the converter are listed as follows:
●“VAC” means “Volts Alternating Current”
●“Hz-Hertz” is the frequency unit
●“W-Watt” is the unit of power
●“mA” means “milli-Ampere.” “Ampere-A” is the unit of electric current (abbre-
viated to current)
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 15]
2
1 Introduction to the Basic Concepts
Figure 1.1
A voltage converter for an
electronic product. Source: Harman
International Industries, Incorporated.
Among them, voltage, current, and watt are the three basic parameters used to
express the characteristics of electricity. Another basic parameter is resistance, we
will talk about it in Ohm’s law below.
Electricity is the set of physical phenomena. A physical phenomenon refers to a
process that does not produce new substances, such as the movement of objects,
the freezing and boiling of water, and so on. Corresponding to this is a chemi-
cal phenomenon, which refers to a process that can produce new substances. We
call this process a chemical reaction, for example, oxygen and hydrogen generate
water through a chemical reaction. There is also a nuclear phenomenon, which
is beyond the scope of this book and will not be discussed. Now, let us return to
the topic of electricity. Electricity is generated by the motion of matter that has a
property of electric charge. An electric charge can be positive or negative. Posi-
tive one is called “positive charge” and represented by “+.” Negative one is called
“negative charge” and represented by “−.” The movement of electric charges is
an electric current. In most cases, the current is produced by the movement of
electrons, which are negative charges. The unit of electric current, Ampere, is
named in honor of a French mathematician and physicist André-Marie Ampère
(1775–1836), who is considered the father of electrodynamics.
Electricity comes into our homes through electrical wires and then goes to vari-
ous electrical appliances. There are usually two kinds of electrical wires (abbrevi-
ated to wire) for household use. They are two-core wires, just like the wire attached
to the converter in Figure 1.1, and three-core wires. If we strip a three-core wire,
its structure is shown in Figure 1.2. “Cable Jacket” is the insulating sheath, “Wire
Insulation” is the insulating layer, and “Stripped Wire” is the wire exposed after
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 16]
1.2 Ohm’s Law and Resistivity
3
Figure 1.2
The basic structure of three-core
wire.
GROUND
HOT
Stripped
Wire
NEUTRAL
Wire
Insulation
Cable
Jacket
the insulating layer is stripped. The three wires are hot, neutral, and ground. Most
of the insulating sheathes and layers are made of rubber and plastic; the wire is
made of metal. In most cases, the metal is aluminum or copper. The kind of mate-
rials such as rubber and plastic are called insulators, in which, electrons cannot
move. Thus, current cannot flow in the insulators. We call aluminum and cop-
per, the type of materials, conductors, because electrons can move in them. Thus,
electrical current can flow in the conductors.
All materials are composed of atoms, and atoms will hinder the movement of
electrons, which means that all materials have resistance in the opposite direc-
tion of the current flow. This resistance is called electrical resistance (abbrevi-
ated to resistance), and the unit of the resistance is Ohm, which is represented by
“Ω.” Ω is named in honor of the German physicist Georg Simon Ohm (March 16,
1789–July 6, 1854). How do electrons move in a conductor to generate the current?
They are driven by the pressure of electricity. This special pressure is called voltage,
and the unit is volt, which is expressed by “V.” The voltage unit volt is to commem-
orate the Italian physicist Alessandro Volta (1745–1827), who invented voltaic pile,
the first electrical battery in the world. Now, we have three parameters related
to electricity: current, represented by “I”; resistance, represented by “R”; voltage,
represented by “V.” Sometimes lowercase letters are also used to indicate current,
resistance, and voltage. The relationship between them is the famous Ohm’s law:
I = V
R
(1.1)
Why can electrons flow in metal? It is because the metal has little resistance;
electrons cannot flow in the insulator because the insulator has large resistance.
Scientists use resistivity to express the resistance of a material per unit length.
“𝜌” is used to represent resistivity, its unit is ohm ⋅cm (Ω ⋅cm). The relationship
between resistance and resistivity is expressed by the following formula:
R = 𝜌L
A
(1.2)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 17]
4
1 Introduction to the Basic Concepts
A = area
L = length
R
R = ρ
=
L
A
ρ = resistivity
Figure 1.3
A diagram of a section of resistive material, current ﬂows along the length
direction. Source: Reproduced with permission of Physics LibreTexts.
See Figure 1.3, where “A” is the cross-sectional area, and “L” is the length of
a piece of material. To make more convenient for practical use, we introduce the
concept of conductance. The symbol of conductance is G, and the relationship
with resistance R is as follows:
G = 1
R
(1.3)
The unit of G is Siemens and is represented by the letter S to commemorate
Werner von Siemens (December 13, 1816–December 6, 1892). He was a German
scientist and founder of Siemens. Correspondingly, there is conductivity, expressed
by 𝜎, and the relationship with resistivity 𝜌is
𝜎= 1
𝜌
(1.4)
In practical application, we often use devices called resistors, which are shown
in the left of Figure 1.4, and the symbol is shown in the right of Figure 1.4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.4
The picture of resistors (a) and the symbol (b). Source: Reproduced with
permission of SparkFun Electronics.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 18]
References
5
1.3
Conductor, Insulator, and Semiconductor
Now, we use resistivity to distinguish conductors and insulators. In general, the
resistivity of a conductor is very low, and the resistivity of an insulator is very high.
For example, the resistivity of copper is 1.55 × 10−6 Ω ⋅cm, and for aluminum is
2.5 × 10−6 Ω ⋅cm [1], where 10−6 is one millionth. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is a
kind of plastic commonly used for making insulating materials, its resistivity is
2 × 1012–2 × 1014 Ω ⋅cm, nylon is 4.56 × 1016 Ω ⋅cm [2]. Mathematically, 102 means
there is a zero after 10, 103 means there are two zeros after 10, and so on. From
which, we can know that the resistivity of the above two insulating materials
has 11–15 zeros after 10. Conductors and insulators have the resistivities either
extremely small or extremely large. Does a material with resistivity between them
exist? Yes, this material exists, we call it a semiconductor. At room temperature, the
resistivity of silicon is 6.3 × 104 Ω ⋅cm, and the resistivity of germanium is 46 Ω ⋅cm
[1]. Silicon with the symbol Si is the most important material in the modern
semiconductor industry. That is why the Bay Area of Northern California is called
Silicon Valley. Germanium with the symbol Ge was used to make the first tran-
sistor in the world. Silicon and germanium are single-element semiconductors.
Another kind of semiconductors are compound semiconductors. The most used
one is gallium arsenide with symbol GaAs, which has a resistivity of 107–109 Ω ⋅cm
[3]. With such a high resistivity, we call this material a semi-insulator. Due to the
high resistivity, pure GaAs cannot be used to make a device. It must be changed
to a semiconductor by a process of doping. In fact, silicon also needs to be doped
to make devices. We will discuss doping process in Chapter 17.
So far, by using the resistivity, we have distinguished between conductors,
semiconductors, semi-insulators, and insulators. Generally, semi-insulating
materials represented by GaAs need to be converted into semiconductors before
they can be used to make devices. So, in the following discussion, we will classify
semi-insulating materials as semiconductors. It is too simple to distinguish
materials from resistivity. To really understand them, especially semiconductors,
we have to use quantum mechanics and energy band theory. It is necessary for us
to give a brief introduction of quantum mechanics and energy band theory.
References
1 饭田修一等, (1979). 物理学常用数表, [日]. 科学出版社, 133–135.
2 Fink, D.G. and Beaty, H.W. (1987). Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers,
12e, 4–153. McGraw-Hill Companies.
3 Soares, R., Graffeuil, J., and Obrégon, J. (1983). Applications of GaAs MESFETs,
17. Artech House.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 19]
7
2
Brief Introduction of Theories
This chapter is a brief introduction of quantum mechanics, and then energy band
theory. By using these theories, we can easily understand what is a conductor, an
insulator, and a semiconductor.
2.1
The Birth of Quantum Mechanics
At the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth cen-
tury, Newtonian mechanics, Maxwell’s theory of the electromagnetic field, and
Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics constituted what is now called classical physics that
ruled the physical world at that time. The physical quantities discussed in classi-
cal physics have two characteristics: continuity and controllability. However, there
were two problems that could not be solved by using the theory of classical physics.
One was blackbody radiation, and the other was Michelson–Morley experiment.
In 1900, Max Planck (April 23, 1858–October 4, 1947), a German theoretical physi-
cist proposed that in the radiation and absorption of electromagnetic field, the
energy appeared in a discrete rather than continuous form. This discrete energy
is called the quantization of energy. This assumption explains blackbody radia-
tion very well and is considered as the beginning of quantum mechanics. In 1905,
Albert Einstein (March 14, 1879–April 18, 1955) published the theory of special rel-
ativity to explain Michelson–Morley experiment. Since then, physics has entered
the post-Newtonian era of modern physics.
According to Planck’s assumption, each part of energy is proportional to the
frequency of electromagnetic radiation. We use E to represent the energy and 𝜈to
represent the frequency. The Plank’s equation is
E = h𝜈
(2.1)
The “h” here is called Planck’s constant. The frequency is the number of occur-
rences of a repeating event per unit of time. In most cases, frequency is represented
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 20]
8
2 Brief Introduction of Theories
by the letter “f.” However, in quantum mechanics it is represented by “ν.” “T” is
used to represent the period. It is the duration of time of one cycle in a repeating
event. The relationship between f and T is as follows:
f = 1
T
(2.2)
If we use seconds to express time, then unit of frequency is Hertz (Hz), named
after German physicist Heinrich Hertz (February 22, 1857–January 1, 1894). He
used the experiment to confirm the existence of electromagnetic waves. Electro-
magnetic waves were theoretically predicted by James Clerk Maxwell (June 13,
1831–November 5, 1879). The theory is well-known as Maxwell’s equations. The
experiment also proved that the light is electromagnetic waves that were predicted
by Maxwell.
Planck’s Eq. (2.1) plays a very important role in physics. It is one of key differ-
ences between classic physics and modern physics. In classic physics, the energy is
supposed to exist in the continuous form and is valid at a large (macroscopic) scale.
The Planck equation points out that at small (microscopic) scale, energy exists in
the discrete (quantum) form, which is one of the basic characteristics of quantum
mechanics. Therefore, when dealing with microscopic worlds such as atoms and
subatomic particles, we must use quantum mechanics.
In 1905, Einstein published four papers – photoelectric effect, Brownian motion,
special theory of relativity, and mass–energy equivalence. These four articles con-
tributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed people’s
views from beginning of history on space, time, mass, and energy. So this year is
also called the “miracle year” of physics. In the paper of mass–energy equivalence,
Einstein wrote down a well-known equation:
E = mc2
(2.3)
In this equation, E is energy, m is mass, c is the speed of light, c = 300 000 km/s.
Now, let us talk about photoelectric effect. The effect means that when light
beams shine on the surface of an object (mostly metal), and if the light frequency
is higher than a certain number, the electrons on the surface will be excited
and escape from the object. This phenomenon was first discovered by Hertz.
The escaped electrons are called photoelectrons. In the paper of photoelectric
effect, Einstein assumed that light travel through space, not in the form of waves
as described in the classical theory of electromagnetic field, but in discrete
“wave packets.” A wave packet is called a “photon.” A photon obeys Planck’s
equation and has energy of h𝜈. When the frequency (energy) of photons that are
illuminating the object reaches or exceeds a certain threshold frequency, electrons
will be emitted out of the surface of the object (see Figure 2.1).
In 1913, Niels Bohr (October 7, 1885–November 18, 1962), a Danish physicist,
and Ernest Rutherford (August 30, 1871–October 19, 1937), a British physicist born
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 21]
2.1 The Birth of Quantum Mechanics
9
Light rays
Electron
emission
Figure 2.1
The schematic diagram of photoelectric effect. Source: Reproduced with
permission of Science ABC. What is the Photoelectric Effect? ≫Science ABC.
in New Zealand, together proposed a model to describe atoms. This model states
that an atom contains small, high-density nucleus, surrounded by electrons. This
is like the structure of the solar system, except that this attraction comes from elec-
tromagnetic force rather than gravity. We call this model Rutherford–Bohr model,
or simply Bohr model. Figure 2.2 is Bohr model of a hydrogen atom. In this figure,
the nucleus is in the center, which is composed of a neutron and a proton. An elec-
tron rotates in outer orbits. Neutron is uncharged and proton is positively charged.
Since the number of protons in an atom is the same as the number of electrons,
–
Electron
Photon
(a)
–
+
–
Nucleus
Nucleus
Electron
Photon
(b)
–
+
Figure 2.2
Bohr model of a hydrogen atom. (a) A photon is absorbed and an electron
jumps from an inner orbit to an outer orbit. (b) An electron jumps from an outer orbit to
an inner orbit and a photon is emitted. Source: [1] Bertolotti / Taylor & Francis.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 22]
10
2 Brief Introduction of Theories
under normal circumstances, the atom is not charged and is neutral. The hydrogen
atom is composed of a nucleus and an electron.
In this model, the electron is usually on an inner orbit. This orbit has the lowest
energy and is called the ground state (level). But when the electron absorbs enough
energy, it jumps to an outer orbit (higher energy), as showed in (a). The outer
orbit is called an excited state. The excited state can have many states with differ-
ent energy orbits, and which orbit the electron jumps to depends on how much
energy it absorbs. The electron is unstable in the excited states. It will jump back
to the lower energy orbit and release its energy by emitting a photon, as showed in
(b). Sometimes, we can use ΔE = h𝜈to represent the emitted photon. “Δ” usually
means difference in mathematics. Figure 2.3 is a schematic diagram of the energy
levels of a silicon atom. Silicon is composed of 1 nucleus and 14 electrons. The
nucleus contains 14 protons with positive charge. The “shell” in the figure means
that the electrons move so fast that an electron cloud is formed around the nucleus,
just like a shell. Valence electrons are the electrons located in outermost orbit. Ion-
ized level refers to a state where an electron has absorbed enough energy to get rid
of the bondage of the nucleus and become a free electron. In this case, the neu-
trality of an atom is broken. The remaining atom becomes positive charge. Such
atoms are called positively charged ions (positive ions). The electrons in photo-
electric effect are ionized electrons. As mentioned above, electrons tend to occupy
the low-energy levels, which are the shell 1 and shell 2 as shown in the figure. They
are the inner shells. The electrons fully occupy the states in these two shells. The
+14
Excited level
Shell 1
Shell 2
Shell 2
Shell 3
Valence electrons
Ionized level
Silicon
Figure 2.3
Bohr model of a silicon atom. Source: Adapted from “HyperPhysics” of
Georgia State University.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 23]
2.2 Energy Band (Band)
11
electrons at these two levels are stable. In shell 3, the number of electrons is less
than the number of states in this level, so electrons cannot completely occupy the
states. The electrons in this level are valence electrons that determine the chem-
ical properties of substance. They participate in chemical reaction and are easily
excited to higher-energy states. Silicon has four valence electrons, and germanium
also has four.
Based on the works of Planck, Einstein, and Bohr, Erwin Schrödinger (August
12, 1887–January 4, 1961), an Austrian physicist, published Schrödinger equation
in 1926. So far, quantum mechanics had been initially established.
2.2
Energy Band (Band)
The photoelectric effect and Bohr model imply an important characteristic of elec-
trons, that is, they only occupy some special energy levels. In the case of a single
atom, these energy levels are discrete. But in a crystal material, such as silicon,
discrete energy levels become energy bands. Matter usually has three states, solid,
liquid, and gas. The branch of physics that is the study of solids is called solid-state
physics. If a solid has a periodic and repeating structure, it is a crystalline solid
(single crystal material). The semiconductors we are using to make microchips
are mainly crystalline solids. Silicon has a single-atom structure. In silicon crys-
tals, atoms are arranged periodically and orderly. Figure 2.4 is a schematic dia-
gram of silicon crystal structure. The small balls in the figure represent silicon
atoms, and X–Y–Z is the coordinate system. Because the atoms are very close in
the crystal, the valence electrons in an atom appear to be shared by other atoms.
Therefore, the discrete energy levels of electrons in a single atom become energy
Figure 2.4
Schematic
diagram of a silicon
crystal.
X
Z
Y
a
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 24]
12
2 Brief Introduction of Theories
bands in a crystal material. Using this view and extending quantum mechanics to
solid-state physics, one of the results obtained is energy band theory. By solving
the Schrödinger equation, the band structures of different crystalline solids can
be obtained.
Different crystal materials have different energy band structures, but they all
have one thing in common. Some energy bands allow electrons to occupy, and
some energy bands prohibit electrons to occupy. Energy bands that prohibit elec-
tronic occupation are called forbidden bands. Energy bands that allow electronic
occupation are divided into two categories: valance band (full band) and conduc-
tion band (empty band). According to the theory of solid-state physics, adjacent
atoms share valence electrons (Figure 2.3). A pair of valence electrons form a bond.
This is a covalent bond. As mentioned above, in a solid, the discrete energy levels
become energy bands. The energy band is composed of massive energy levels
with subtle differences. For valence electrons, this change is caused by the energy
level splitting of the valence electrons. In the structure of energy band, the band
generated by the energy level splitting of the valence electrons is called the valence
band. If the valence band is filled with electrons, this band is called full band.
Similarly, an excited state energy level will split to form an excited state energy
band. If there are no electrons in this excitation band, the band is called empty
band. Under certain conditions, some valence electrons will be excited to transit
into this band, and these electrons will generate electric current. At this time, the
band is called conduction band. In most cases, we do not mention full band and
empty band separately but classify them as valence band and conduction band.
Band theory and band structure clearly show the difference between conduc-
tors, insulators, and semiconductors. Figure 2.5 is a schematic diagram of the
energy band structure of these materials. In this figure, we can see valence band,
conduction band, and band gap. Band gap is also called the forbidden band.
E
Conduction band
Valence (full) band
E
(a)
E
Conduction band
Valence band
Band gap
(b)
Conduction band
Valence (full) band
Band gap
(c)
E
Conduction band
Valence (full) band
Band gap
Electrons
Holes
(d)
Figure 2.5
Schematic diagram of the energy band structure of a solid [2]. Source:
Chinese Technical Books. (a) Valence and conduction bands overlap (b) Valence band is
not full (c) Band gap is big (d) Band gap is small.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 25]
2.2 Energy Band (Band)
13
The figure shows that electrons are in the conduction band and holes are in
valence band. In Figure 2.5a, the top of valence band overlaps with the bottom of
conduction band. There is no forbidden band. Many electrons automatically reach
the conduction band and participate in conduction. This is a type of conductor.
Calcium is an example of such conductor. In Figure 2.5b, although there is a large
forbidden band, the valence band is not full, and electrons can easily flow in
the valence band to participate in conduction. This is another type of conductor,
and copper is one example of this kind of conductor. So according to energy
band theory, there are two types of metals. Figure 2.5c is a schematic diagram
of the energy band of an insulator. This structure has a very large forbidden
band. Under normal circumstances, electrons cannot reach the conduction band.
The conduction band is basically an empty band, while the valence band is full.
No electronic flow, no electric current is generated. Figure 2.5d is a schematic
diagram of the semiconductor energy band. This energy band has a forbidden
band, but the forbidden band is very narrow. At room temperature, some of the
electrons in the valence band will transit from the valence band to the conduction
band through thermal excitation. The transition of electrons will leave some
vacancies in the valence band, which are holes mentioned above. A hole is
positive charge. The electrons entering the conduction band will participate in
conduction, and the holes remaining in the valence band will also participate in
conduction.
From the energy band theory, we can clearly see the difference between con-
ductors, insulators, and semiconductors, as well as the difference of electric con-
duction between conductors and semiconductors. In a conductor, only electrons
contribute electric current. In a semiconductor, electrons and holes contribute
electric current. Although semiconductors have two types of charged particles
(positive and negative) that participate in conduction at the same time, since the
total charged particle concentration is less than the concentration of electrons in
the conductor, the conductivity of the semiconductor is smaller than that of the
conductor. In other words, the resistivity of the semiconductor is bigger than that
of the conductor.
We know that electric current is generated by the movement of electric charges
driven by voltage. In a semiconductor, the movement of electrons and holes create
the current. However, their movement velocities are different. We use mobility to
further describe this velocity. Mobility is defined as how fast charge carriers like
electrons move in a semiconductor driven by voltage. 𝜇is used to express mobility.
We will discuss it more in Chapter 5.
In Chapter 1, we said that atoms would hinder the movement of electrons and
generate resistance. We also said before that if the structure of a solid is periodi-
cally and orderly, this solid is a crystalline material. A solid is composed of atoms.
In order to visualize the arrangement of atoms in a crystalline material, an atom
can be simplified into one point, and these points can be connected by imaginary
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 26]
14
2 Brief Introduction of Theories
lines to form a spatial framework with obvious regularity. Figure 2.4 illustrates the
schematic diagram of silicon crystalline structure. This kind of spatial framework
representing the regular arrangement of atoms in a crystalline material is called
a lattice. Figure 2.4 shows the smallest structure of crystalline silicon (c-Si). This
smallest structure is called unit cell. c-Si is composed of this repeating unit cell.
The dimension of the unit cell is lattice constant labeled “a” in the figure. In a con-
ductor, as the temperature increases, the lattice vibration intensifies, the obstacle
to the movement of electrons increases, and the resistance increases. In semicon-
ductors, as the temperature increases, more electrons enter the conduction band,
which increases conductance and decreases resistance. This is in addition to the
difference in resistance magnitude, another difference between conductor and
semiconductor resistance.
Although Stephen Gray (December 1666–February 1736), a British scientist, dis-
covered conductors and insulators in 1729 and another British scientist Michael
Faraday (September 22, 1791–August 25, 1867) discovered semiconductor in 1833.
The real understanding of the mechanism and difference of these materials was
after the appearance of band theory.
In quantum mechanics, the unit of energy E is electron volt, and the symbol is
eV. In most cases, the unit of energy is Joule (symbol is J), which is a commemora-
tion of British physicist James Prescott Joule (1818–1889). 1 eV = 1.6 × 10−19 J. In
semiconductor manufacturing, SiO2 and Si3N4 are the two most used dielectrics
(insulators). At room temperature, the band gap of SiO2 is 9 eV, and that of Si3N4
is 5 eV. The band gap for Ge is 0.66 eV, for Si is 1.12 eV, and for GaAs is 1.42 eV [3].
In 1947, three American scientists, John Bardeen (May 23, 1908–January
30, 1991), Walter Brattain (February 10, 1902–October 13, 1987), and William
Shockley (February 13, 1910–August 12, 1989) used Ge to invent the world’s first
semiconductor transistor. The transistor is the cornerstone of modern electronics.
The invention led the world to enter the era of the IT – Information Technology.
Figure 2.6 shows the photos of the transistors we are using and the first transistor.
(b)
(a)
Figure 2.6
Transistors (a), the ﬁrst transistor and John Bardeen (b). Source: Alchetron;
Lucent Technologies Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 27]
References
15
Why did the scientists invent the transistor? To know the reason, we need to have
a preliminary understanding of early radio communication technology.
References
1 Bertolotti, M. (2004). The History of the Laser, 1e, 72. CRC Press.
2 童诗白主编. (1980). 模拟电子技术基础, 上册. 人民教育出版社, 4页∘.
3 Sze, S.M. (1985). Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2e, 850–852. Wiley.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 28]
17
3
Early Radio Communication
This chapter briefly introduces the early radio communication technology repre-
sented by wireless telegraphy and the invention of electron tube.
3.1
Telegraph Technology
In 1864, Maxwell solved the equations named after him – Maxwell’s equations.
He found that electromagnetic waves could propagate at the speed of light in free
space. One function of electromagnetic waves is to produce electric sparks in the
manner of “action at a distance.” The physical meaning of action at a distance is
that one object can affect another object through nonphysical contact (just like
mechanical contact), changing its motion or other characteristics. Beginning in
1887, Hertz began a series of experiments. He not only experimentally confirmed
the existence of electromagnetic waves but also verified that electromagnetic
waves propagate at the speed of light. He made oscillators (discussion later) by
using capacitor and inductor (discussion later) to generate and receive electric
sparks. One was used as a transmitter, and another was used as a receiver. This
experiment generated and received what we now call radio waves (see Figure 3.1).
The transmitter is made of a pair of copper wires with a small gap between them
and two hollow zinc spheres located at the ends. The spheres act as capacitors. A
battery connects to an induction coil to power the transmitter and create electric
sparks in the gap. The sparks cause the current pulses in the wires. The pulses
reach the zinc spheres and generate electromagnetic radiation (waves)-radio
waves. The transmitter is used as an “antenna.” After careful adjustment, the
oscillation frequency of the receiver is the same as that of the radio waves. This
phenomenon is called resonance. So the waves can create big current pulses and
the sparks jump across the small gap in the receiver. With this apparatus, Hertz
produced and detected radio waves for the first time in the world.
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 29]
18
3 Early Radio Communication
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1
Hertz’s ﬁrst radio transmitter (a) and one of Hertz’s radio receiver (b).
Source: [1], Rollo Appleyard (1927) / ITT Inc.
In Hertz’s experiment, the transmitter and receiver did not contact each other
and did not have interconnect wires between them. After Hertz demonstrated
the method of generating and detecting radio waves, inspired by this experiment,
an Italian inventor Guglielmo Giovanni Maria Marconi (April 25, 1874–July 20,
1937) started research on wireless telegraphy from the early 1890s. At that time,
there was already the technology of electric telegraph (wired telegraphy). By
improving the design of the antenna, using a new device (coherer) to replace the
gap of the receiver, in December 1894, Marconi developed a wireless telegraphy
(radio telegraphy) system based on radio waves, as shown in Figure 3.2. The
transmitter includes the induction coil, the antenna in the form of a copper sheet,
a spark gap, and a telegraph key. The era of radio communication began with
wireless telegraphy.
Figure 3.2
Marconi’s ﬁrst radio transmitter
(telegraph) [2].
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 30]
3.2 Electron Tube
19
Figure 3.3
International
Morse Code.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
To transmit the messages in the wires of electric telegraph, from 1836 to 1844,
Samuel Finley Breese Morse (April 27, 1791–April 2, 1872), an American inven-
tor and others jointly developed Morse code, as shown in Figure 3.3. Morse code
arranges two signals of different lengths into a standard sequence to compile and
decipher the text used. These two signals of different lengths are called “di” and
“da” (dits and dahs), and they can be used in the telegram. When Morse code was
accepted by the radio communication technology, “di” and “da” were transmitted
and received as pulse signals of different lengths. Telegram using Morse code had
been widely used all over the world until the invention of the Internet.
3.2
Electron Tube
In the early times, it was difficult to use Marconi’s telegraph for long-distance com-
munication such as transoceanic communication. An important reason was that
the original technology did not have the function of amplifying the transmission
signal. In 1904 and 1906, John Ambrose Fleming (November 29, 1849–April 18,
1945), a British inventor, and Lee de Forest (August 26, 1873–June 30, 1961), an
American inventor, created the electron diode and the electron triode. As they are
made by putting electrodes in a vacuum glass tube, they are also called vacuum
diode and vacuum triode. Mostly, we name this kind device as electron tube or
vacuum tube. The invention of electron tube started a new field of electronics.
The vacuum tube has an amplifying function, which can amplify the power
of radio signals to realize transoceanic radio communication (see Figure 3.4).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 31]
20
3 Early Radio Communication
Figure 3.4
Vacuum tubes.
Vacuum tubes are a very important invention. Replacing the primitive spark-gap
technology with vacuum tubes, we not only achieved the long-distance telegram
but also achieved transoceanic telephone. Vacuum tubes also brought radio and
television into the home. Another breakthrough was the realization of digital
computing. The computers had been made with vacuum tubes. These computers
Figure 3.5
First vacuum tube made general-purpose digital computer (ENIAC). Source:
Everett Collection Historical / Alamy Stock Photo.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 32]
3.2 Electron Tube
21
Figure 3.6
Jack Kilby and the invention of integrated circuit.
are called vacuum tube computers. This kind of computer is the first generation
of computers (see Figure 3.5). It is Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer
(ENIAC), the first programmable, electronic, general-purpose digital computer.
Vacuum tubes have two major problems: large size and high-power consump-
tion. Since the 1920s, many scientists had tried to replace vacuum tubes with a
new type of device. They wanted to develop this new type of device as a solid
device. After the invention of the semiconductor transistor in 1947, in 1958, Jack
St. Clair Kilby (November 8, 1923–June 20, 2005) and Robert Noyce (December
12, 1927–June 3, 1990) invented the integrated circuit, referred to as IC (see
the Figure 3.6). Packaged integrated circuit products are what we often call
“microchips” or “chips” now. Another well-known role of Robert Noyce was as
the cofounder of the two companies – Fairchild Semiconductor in 1957 and Intel
Corporation in 1968.
Since most of the electronic devices used today are made of silicon semicon-
ductors, which is a solid, modern electronics is also called solid-state electronics.
The use of solid-state devices instead of vacuum tubes has achieved two break-
throughs – small size and low-power consumption. These two breakthroughs
have realized the miniaturization and household using of electronic products.
PC – personal computers and mobile phones have become our daily ordinary
consumer goods. To know about electronics and semiconductor devices, we need
to understand the electric circuits and the components used in the circuits.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 33]
22
3 Early Radio Communication
References
1 Appleyard, R. (1927). Pioneers of electrical communication-Heinrich Rudolph
Hertz-V. International Standard Electric Corporation 63–77.
2 Marconi, G. (1926). Looking back over thirty years of radio. Radio Broadcast
Magazine, Doubleday, Page, and Co., New York, Vol. 10, No. 1, (November
1926), p. 31.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 34]
23
4
Basic Knowledge of Electric Circuits (Circuits)
This chapter will give a brief introduction of electric circuits and the components
used in the circuits, electric, and magnetic fields.
4.1
Electric Circuits and the Components
An electric circuit (circuit) usually includes a power supply (also called a
supply or a power source), such as a battery, wall power, etc.; a load, such as a
mobile phone, an electric light, etc.; electrical wires that are used to connect the
power supply and load; a switch used to turn on or off the connection between
the power supply and load. Figure 4.1 is a typical circuit diagram. In a circuit,
the power supply can be direct current – DC – or alternating current – AC. The
frequency of DC power source is zero, and the battery is DC supply. The frequency
of AC power source is not zero, and the wall power is AC supply. If the power
supply is a DC one, the electrical circuit is a DC circuit. If the power supply is
an AC one, the electrical circuit is an AC circuit. Figure 4.2 are the symbols of
DC and AC supplies. The long line of the DC supply is the anode “+,” which can
be simply considered as high-voltage side; and the short line is the cathode “−,”
which can be simply considered as low-voltage side. This voltage difference drives
the current to flow in the circuit and power the load. At the beginning, people
thought that the current was generated by the flow of positive charges, so the
current flowed from anode to cathode. Later, scientists discovered that in most
cases, the current was generated by the flow of electrons, and the direction of
the electron flow was from cathode to anode. But from the historical perspective,
we still say that the electrical current flows from the anode to the cathode. The
anode and cathode in a DC supply do not alternate, so the current flows in only
one direction. The anode and cathode in an AC power alternate periodically over
time, the current periodically reverse flow direction, so the anode and cathode are
not marked in the AC power. Figure 4.3 is the schematic diagram of the difference
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 35]
24
4 Basic Knowledge of Electric Circuits (Circuits)
Wire or cord
Switch
Load
Power supply
Figure 4.1
A simple circuit schematic.
(a)
(b)
+
–
Figure 4.2
DC power supply (a) and AC power supply
(b).
Voltage (V)
DC
AC
Time (S)
Period
λ
Figure 4.3
The difference
between DC and AC power
supplies. Source: Reprinted with
permission of Electrical
Academia.
between DC and AC supplies. AC is transmitted in the form of wave. The two
parameters of the wave are also marked in the figure, period (T – Eq. (2.2)) and
wavelength (𝜆). In a DC circuit, we consider the resistors (see Figure 1.4) only.
In an AC circuit, in addition to resistors, two other components also need to be
taken into consideration. They are capacitors and inductors. Resistors, capacitors,
and inductors are the most basic components that make up a circuit. They are
passive components. This corresponds to active components, which we will
discuss later. Figure 4.4 is the picture of capacitors and the symbol, and Figure 4.5
is the picture of inductors and the symbol. As shown in Eq. (1.1), we use “R” to
represent resistance and resistor, while capacitance and capacitor are represented
by “C,” and inductance and inductor are represented by “L.” Resistors are
power consumption devices, capacitors, and inductors are power storage devices.
Capacitors store electric field energy and inductors store magnetic field energy.
The electric energy we often talk about is expressed in the form of an elec-
tric field, so when a capacitor stores electric field energy, it stores electric energy.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 36]
4.1 Electric Circuits and the Components
25
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4
The picture of capacitors (a) and the symbol (b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5
The picture of inductors (a) and the symbol (b).
Magnetic energy is manifested in the form of a magnetic field, so when an inductor
stores magnetic field energy, it stores magnetic energy. The unit of capacitance
is farad, and the symbol is F to commemorate Faraday (Chapter 2). His greatest
contribution is the discovery of the law of electromagnetic induction (Faraday’s
law of induction) – the change in magnetic flux can generate electromotive force.
This law can be simply demonstrated as follows: when a closed wire moves along
the vertical direction of the magnetic field lines (cutting the magnetic field lines),
the electric current will be created in the closed wire. This is how modern power
generators work. The structure of a capacitor is two conductive plates are placed
close to each other with a nonconductive dielectric in between. The definition of
capacitance is:
C = Q
V
(4.1)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 37]
26
4 Basic Knowledge of Electric Circuits (Circuits)
The unit of inductance is Henry, and the symbol is H to commemorate the Amer-
ican scientist Joseph Henry (December 17, 1797–May 13, 1878). The structure of
the inductor is a coil, and the magnetic field can be generated by the current pass-
ing through the coil. The definition of inductance is:
L = Φ
I
(4.2)
In the capacitance formula (4.1), V is the voltage, Q is the electric charge. The
unit of charge is Coulomb, and the symbol is C, to commemorate French scientist
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (June 14, 1736–August 23, 1806). In the inductance
formula (4.2), I is the current, Φ is the magnetic flux. The unit of the magnetic flux
is Weber, and the symbol is “Wb,” to commemorate the German physicist Wilhelm
Eduard Weber (October 24, 1804–June 23, 1891).
To further understand how capacitors and inductors work, we need to briefly
introduce electric and magnetic fields.
4.2
Electric Field
A charged particle will exert a force on another charged particle without contact,
and this force is produced by what we call an electric field. We often say that the
phenomenon of like charges repelling each other and unlike charges attracting
each other is the manifestation of electric field. Similarly, the force of magnetism is
carried out through a magnetic field, and the combination of electric and magnetic
fields is an electromagnetic field. In mathematics, a variable is called a scalar if it
has only a quantity, without a change in direction. The mass is a scalar. If this
variable not only has a magnitude but also a change in direction, then it is called
a vector. Since the electric field has both a magnitude and a change in direction,
the electric field is a vector field. Similarly, the magnetic field is also a vector field.
Coulomb’s law describes the interaction of two stationary charged particles. If
the charges of the two particles are q1 and q2, and the distance between them is d,
then the interaction force F between them is:
F =
1
4π𝜀∘
q1q2
d2
(4.3)
The unit of force F in the formula is Newton, and the symbol is N, to com-
memorate the founder of classical mechanics, British scientist Isaac Newton
(1642–1727). The unit of charge is Coulomb (C) and the unit of distance is
meter (m). 𝜀∘is the permittivity of vacuum (free space), also called the absolute
permittivity, and its unit is farad/m (F/m). The force of formula (4.3) is called
Coulomb force or electrostatic force. Charged particles can be positively charged
or negatively charged. As we said earlier, like charges repel each other and unlike
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 38]
4.2 Electric Field
27
charges attract each other. Therefore, atomic nuclei can attract electrons because
the protons in the nucleus are positively charged, and electrons are negatively
charged. The attractive force in an atom can be thought of as electrostatic force.
For convenience, we divide by q2 in formula 4.3, and the expression will depend
only on electric charge. If we remove the number of this electric charge and replace
d in the formula with x according to the convention of mathematics, then we can
get the expression for electric field E:
E =
1
4π𝜀∘
q
x2
(4.4)
We now connect a capacitor to a DC power supply, as shown in Figure 4.6. In
the figure, “Positive electrode” is the plate of the capacitor that connects with the
anode of the supply. “Negative electrode” is the plate of the capacitor that connects
with the cathode of the supply. In this circuit, the anode of the power supply drives
the positive charges to the positive plate of the capacitor, and the cathode of the
power supply drives the negative charges to the negative plate of the capacitor. The
actual situation is that electrons are repelled by the cathode of the power supply to
the negative plate of the capacitor, causing the other plate to become positive due to
lack of electrons. In this way, an electric field directed from the positive plate of the
capacitor to the negative plate is established. The electric field cannot be stabilized
until the voltage between the two electrodes of the capacitor is equal to the voltage
of the power supply. The relationship between electric field and voltage is:
E = V
d
(4.5)
In the formula, V is the voltage and d is the distance between the two electrode
plates of the capacitor, please see Figure 4.7. Under the DC power supply, no
Figure 4.6
A capacitor connects with a DC
power supply.
Capacitor
DC power supply
Anode –
Cathode +
Positive electrode
Negative electrode
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
Electric field
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 39]
28
4 Basic Knowledge of Electric Circuits (Circuits)
d
E = d
v
v
– – – – –
–
– – – –
+ + + + + +
+ + + +
Figure 4.7
The relationship of electric ﬁeld and
voltage.
electric current flows through the capacitor until the voltage of the power supply
is very high, so that a breakdown occurs between the two plates, and then there
will be the current through the capacitor. This is how lightning occurs in a
thunderstorm. We can imagine that when an AC power supply is connected, the
polarity of the power supply periodically changes, causing electrons to flow back
and forth in the connected wires, as if there is electric current flowing through
the capacitor. The higher the frequency of the power supply, the bigger the
current flow. Maxwell named this kind of the current as displacement current.
The essence of displacement current is the change of electric field, which can
exist in conductors, dielectrics, and vacuum. Corresponding to displacement
current is conduction current which is what we are commonly talking about.
Conduction current can only flow in conductors. As the frequency of the power
supply is higher, the conductance of a capacitor becomes stronger. That is, at
low frequencies, a capacitor is open (circuit disconnected); at high frequencies, a
capacitor is short (circuit connected).
From the above discussion, we can see that a capacitor is a device associated
with an electric field, and an electric field energy is stored between two plates.
4.3
Magnetic Field
The magnetic field is generated by the flow of electric current. It is a vector field.
We can feel the presence of the magnetic field in our daily life. A compass needle
always points to the north and south poles of the earth. This is because the earth
has a magnetic field, and the compass needle is made of magnetic materials. A
magnet attracts iron. It has two poles – the south pole and the north pole. Similar
to electric charges, like poles repel each other and unlike poles attract each other.
Since the current is generated by the movement of electric charges, the magnetic
field is essentially generated by the movement of electric charges. An electric cur-
rent flowing through a wire can generate a magnetic field. The spin of a charged
elementary particle (such as an electron) can also generate a magnetic field. This
is how the magnetic field of a magnet is generated. Since a magnet always has a
magnetic field, such materials are called permanent magnets in the academic field.
We use fine iron particles to show the magnetic field lines of a magnet, as shown
in Figure 4.8, where “N” is the north pole and “S” is the south pole. The magnetic
field generated by the current passing through the wire obeys the right-hand rule.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 40]
4.3 Magnetic Field
29
Figure 4.8
The magnetic
ﬁeld lines. Source: Berndt
Meyer / Wikimedia
Commons.
Figure 4.9
The current
creates magnetic ﬁeld.
Source: Reprinted with
permission of Molecular-
Expressions.com at
Florida State University.
The rule is: when you extend the right hand, the thumb points to the direction of
the current, and the rotation direction of the remaining four fingers is the direc-
tion of the magnetic field. Please see Figure 4.9, where the current direction is
from the anode to the cathode, that is the direction of positive charge flow. The
right-hand rule is also used in our daily life. For example, the switch faucet is
designed according to the right-hand rule. A conductor coil with current passing
through can also generate a magnetic field, see Figure 4.10. The B in Figure 4.10
refers to the magnetic field. The unit of magnetic field strength is Tesla, and the
symbol is T to commemorate the American Serbian scientist Nikola Tesla (July 10,
1856–January 7, 1943).
When connected to an AC power supply, the current passing through the coil
changes, and the generated magnetic field also changes. This changed magnetic
field generates induced current. The magnetic field created by the induced current
always hinders the change of the flux of the original magnetic field that causes
the induced current. This is Lenz’s law, named after Russian physicist Emil Lenz
(February 12, 1804–February 10, 1865). As the frequency of the power supply is
higher, the hindering becomes stronger. That is, at low frequencies, the inductor is
Direction of
current
Direction
of magnetic
field
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 41]
30
4 Basic Knowledge of Electric Circuits (Circuits)
B
N
S
I
–
+
I
Figure 4.10
The
magnetic ﬁeld generated
by a coil. Source:
Reprinted with permission
of Brilliant.
short (circuit connected); at high frequencies, the inductor is open (circuit discon-
nected). An inductor is a device associating with a magnetic field, and magnetic
field energy is stored in a coil.
4.4
Alternating Current
Tesla’s most important contribution was the invention of AC technology. This was
also the main argument between him and the great American inventor Thomas
Edison (February 11, 1847–October 18, 1931). Edison promoted DC while Tesla
advocated AC. To understand this controversy, let us first talk about the power
of the current. Power is represented by P. Its definition is energy per unit time.
The unit of power is watt, and its symbol is W, to commemorate the British
scientist James Watt (January 19, 1736–August 19, 1819). His invention of the
steam engine started the industrial revolution. The relationship between power
unit and energy unit is:
W = J
S
(4.6)
The “S” in the formula is time (seconds). From the definition of power and
Ohm’s law, we can get the following formula:
P = E
t = IV = I2R = V2
R
(4.7)
In the formula, P is power, E is energy, t is time, I is current, V is voltage, and
R is resistance. It can be seen from the above equation that when the power is
constant, the higher the voltage, the smaller the current. A piece of wire with
resistance R will consume power and generate heat when the current is passing
through. Therefore, if we want to reduce the power consumption of the wire, we
must decrease the current. Due to geographical or other constraints, power plants
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 42]
4.4 Alternating Current
31
can only be built in certain places. Most power plants produce AC electricity. When
a power plant generates electricity, it must be transmitted to other places over long
distances through transmission lines made of Al or Cu wires. In the case of a cer-
tain power generation, in order to carry out long-distance power transmission, it is
necessary to try to reduce the power loss of the transmission lines. It is an effective
means to increase the transmission voltage and decrease the transmission current.
An important feature of AC is that the voltage can be changed by using a trans-
former, through which a low voltage can be turned into a high voltage, or a high
voltage can be turned into a low voltage. In this way, after a power plant generates
electricity, the transformer is used to increase the voltage for long-distance trans-
mission, and then the transformer is used to decrease the voltage before reaching
the user. This is the AC high-voltage line transmission technology. The DC did
not have this technology at that time. In the battle between DC and AC, Tesla
defeated Edison, and AC technology won. Figure 4.11 is a schematic diagram of
high-voltage power transmission technology.
The transformer is very important for the long-distance transmission of AC. It
is made of conductive coils. Please see the schematic diagram in Figure 4.12 and
the actual photo of the transformer.
In an AC circuit, Ohm’s law is:
I = V
Z
(4.8)
where Z is the impedance of the AC circuit:
Z = R + j(XL −XC)
(4.9)
In the above formula, R is resistance; XL is inductive reactance, which corre-
sponds to inductance; XC is capacitive reactance, which corresponds to capaci-
tance; j is an imaginary unit:
j =
√
−1
(4.10)
Electricity generation, transmission and distribution
Figure 4.11
The electricity from a power plant to a house. Source: EIA / Public Domain.
Power plant
generates electricity
Transmission lines carry
electricity long distances
Distribution lines carry
electricity to houses
Transformers on poles
step down electricity
before it enters houses
Neighborhood
transformer steps
down voltage
Transformer steps
up voltage for
transmission
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 43]
32
4 Basic Knowledge of Electric Circuits (Circuits)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.12
Transformers. Source: The image c is reprinted with permission of Parts
Express.
The imaginary unit is usually represented by i in mathematics. But in the circuit,
i is commonly used to represent the current. So, j is used to represent the imaginary
unit in electricity and electronics. In the DC circuit, inductance and capacitance
are not considered, and Z = R, at this time.
In an electric circuit, besides a power supply, it usually includes a resistor, a
capacitor, and an inductor. In fact, most of the circuit loads can be expressed by
these three basic components. Please see Figure 4.13. Because the circuit contains
an inductor and a capacitor, under the action of AC supply, the circuit will resonate
when certain conditions are reached. The resonant frequency is:
f =
1
2π
√
LC
(4.11)
In the experiments of Hertz and Marconi, the oscillators they made were based
on this formula.
Above, we have discussed some basic knowledges of the electric circuits, the
components, and basic concepts of electric and magnetic fields. In Chapter 5,
we will discuss semiconductors in depth and introduce the basic structure and
one of the preliminary applications of diodes.
Power supply
Figure 4.13
A typical structure
of an electric circuit.
High voltage
Low voltage
Iron core
Wire
coils
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 44]
33
5
Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
Below we will discuss the basic structure of actual semiconductor energy bands,
doping, and diodes.
5.1
Semiconductor Energy Band
Silicon is the most important material in the semiconductor industry and appli-
cations. Gallium arsenide is another widely used semiconductor material, which
is mainly used to make optoelectronic devices. Please look at Figure 5.1 of the
periodic table of elements. The table was invented by Russian scientist Dmitri
Mendeleev (February 8, 1834–February 2, 1907). Elements of silicon and germa-
nium used to make transistor are in group 14. They all have four valence electrons.
Arsenic is in group 15 and has five valence electrons; gallium is in group 13 and
has three valence electrons. So, GaAs is also known as the three–five (III–V) semi-
conductor material. Because it is a compound, it is sometimes called a compound
semiconductor material.
Now we further discuss the energy band structure of semiconductors. Figure 5.2
is a schematic diagram of the basic structure of semiconductor energy bands. The
actual energy band is much more complicated than this. In general, the valence
band of a semiconductor is full, and no current will be generated. If the electrons
absorb enough energy, this energy may come from photons or heat. Some electrons
on the top of the valence band jump to the bottom of the conduction band. These
negatively charged electrons are driven by the electric field (voltage). It will flow in
the conduction band, thereby generating the current. The positively charged holes
on the top of the valence band will also flow in the valence band and contribute to
the current. In this case, electrons and holes are also called charge carriers.
We introduced mobility 𝜇in Chapter 2, electric field E in Chapter 4, and charge
carrier here. Let us give a complete description of mobility. In Chapter 4, we knew
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 45]
34
5 Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
1s
2s, 2p
3s, 3p
3d, 4p
4s
4d, 5p
5s
5d, 6p
6s, 4f
6d, 7p
4f, 5d
5f, 6d
7s, 5f
1
H
2
He
3
Li
11
Na
19
K
37
Rb
55
Cs
87
Fr
4
Be
12
Mg
20
Ca
38
Sr
56
Ba
88
Ra
5
B
13
Al
31
Ga
49
In
81
Tl
113
(Uut)
* * *
6
C
14
Si
32
Ge
50
Sn
82
Pb
114
(Uuq)
* * *
7
N
15
P
33
As
51
Sb
83
Bi
115
(Uup)
* * *
8
O
16
S
34
Se
52
Te
84
Po
116
(Uuh)
* * *
9
F
17
Cl
35
Br
53
I
85
At
117
(Uus)
* * *
10
Ne
18
Ar
36
Kr
54
Xe
86
Rn
118
(Uuo)
* * *
3
IIIb
21
Sc
39
Y
57
La
89
Ac
4
IVb
22
Ti
40
Zr
72
Hf
104
Rf
5
Vb
23
V
41
Nb
73
Ta
105
Db
6
VIb
24
Cr
42
Mo
74
W
58
Ce
90
Th
59
Pr
91
Pa
60
Nd
92
U
93
Np
62
Sm
94
Pu
63
Eu
95
Am
64
Gd
96
Cm
65
Tb
97
Bk
66
Dy
98
Cf
67
Ho
99
Es
68
Er
100
Fm
69
Tm
101
Md
70
Yb
102
No
71
Lu
103
Lr
106
Sg
7
VIIb
25
Mn
43
Tc
75
Re
107
Bh
26
Fe
44
Ru
76
Os
108
Hs
9
VIII
8
10
27
Co
45
Rh
77
Ir
109
Mt
28
Ni
46
Pd
78
Pt
110
Ds
11
Ib
29
Cu
47
Ag
79
Au
111
Rg
12
IIb
30
Zn
48
Cd
80
Hg
112
Cn
*
**
*
**
2
IIa
13
IIIa
14
IVa
15
Va
16
VIa
17
VIIa
group
1
Ia
18
0
61
Pm
Figure 5.1
Periodic table of elements.
Conduction band
Indirect bandgap
Forbidden
energy gap
or band gap
Direct bandgap
The lowest point of conduction band
Valence band
The highest point of valence band
Holes
Electrons
Figure 5.2
Schematic diagram of semiconductor energy band.
that voltage is related to electric field. The movement of charges driven by voltage
(refer to Chapter 2) is actually pulled by an electric field. The charge carriers move
in a semiconductor when pulled by an electric field. The term carrier mobility
refers in general to both electron and hole. The average velocity of the carriers in
a semiconductor is called the drift velocity vd. The mobility is defined as follows
vd = 𝜇E
(5.1)
The unit of mobility is cm2/(V⋅s). Here, V is voltage and s is second. Through
mobility, we establish the relationship between the carrier drift velocity and
electric field. Mostly, the electron mobility is greater than hole mobility in
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 46]
5.1 Semiconductor Energy Band
35
semiconductors. For example, the electron mobility in silicon is 1500 cm2/(V⋅s)
and the hole mobility is 450 cm2/(V⋅s) [1]. This means that under the action of an
electric field, electrons can get a faster drift velocity than holes.
If electrons jump straight up and down between the valence band and the con-
duction band, such a semiconductor is a direct band gap semiconductor, other-
wise, it is an indirect band gap semiconductor. Please see Figure 5.2. “The highest
point of valence band” is the top of the valence band. When light hits the semicon-
ductor surface, the electrons in the direct band gap directly interact with photons,
and the photoelectric conversion efficiency is high. While the electrons in the indi-
rect band gap, in addition to interacting with photons, also interact with the crystal
lattice of the material, loss of some energy and low photoelectric conversion effi-
ciency. Figure 5.3 is the energy band diagrams of germanium, silicon, and gallium
arsenide. It is obvious from the figure that germanium and silicon are indirect band
gaps, while gallium arsenide is a direct band gap. Therefore, gallium arsenide is
widely used in the manufacture of optoelectronic devices. In addition, this figure
shows that the real energy band structure is much more complicated than the band
in Figure 5.2. The real energy band also contains many sublevel bands.
–4L
Г
X
[111]
[100]
–3
–2
–1
0
Energy (eV)
1
2
Condcution
electrons
Light and
heavy holes
Eg
Eg
Eg
3
4
5
6
Ge
L
Г
X
[111]
Wave vector
(b)
(a)
(c)
[100]
Si
L
Г
X
[111]
[100]
Goas
Upper
valley
Lower
valley
ΔE = O 31
Figure 5.3
The energy bands of Ge, Si, and GaAs. Source: [1] Sze / John Wiley & Sons.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 47]
36
5 Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
5.2
Semiconductor Doping
In most cases, pure semiconductor materials cannot be used to make devices and
must be doped. To understand the principle of doping, it is necessary to introduce
the basic concepts and constants of statistical physics. Statistical physics is a
branch of physics that uses the method of probability and statistics to study the
physical properties and laws of macroscopic objects composed of a large number
of microscopic particles. Classical statistical physics was developed by Maxwell
and Boltzmann. Maxwell was the physicist who proposed the electromagnetic
wave equations. Ludwig Edward Boltzmann (February 20, 1844–September 5,
1906) was an Austrian physicist. Based on Maxwell’s work, he proposed the
famous Boltzmann equation, which is widely used in thermodynamics, statis-
tical mechanics, and many other fields. Because of his important contribution
to classical statistical physics, an important constant in thermodynamics is
named after him-Boltzmann’s constant, with the symbol kB. After the birth
of quantum mechanics, according to the different properties of microscopic
particles, two statistical theories appeared. One was Fermi–Dirac statistics and
the other was Bose–Einstein statistics. The microscopic particles that obey the
Fermi–Dirac statistics are called fermions, and the microscopic particles that obey
the Bose–Einstein statistics are called bosons. Another physical quantity that
needs to be understood is absolute temperature, also called Kelvin temperature.
The symbol is K to commemorate a British scientist, William Thomson, 1st
Baron Kelvin (June 26, 1824–December 17, 1907). The unit of temperature we
use daily is degree Celsius, and the symbol is ∘C to commemorate a Swedish
astronomer, Anders Celsius (November 27, 1701–April 25, 1744). It defines the
boiling point of water at 1 atm (the standard atmosphere) pressure as 100 ∘C
and the freezing point as 0 ∘C. The two points are divided into 100 scales. In the
absolute temperature system, when the substance stops shaking, the absolute
temperature is zero, that is, 0 K. The relationship between absolute temperature
and degree Celsius is as follows:
0 K = −273.15∘C, 0∘C = 273.15 K
(5.2)
About absolute temperature, there is the third law of thermodynamics, which
says that the temperature cannot be absolute zero (0 K). The meaning of this law
is that substance will not stop moving. Knowing the Kelvin temperature K, then
Boltzmann’s constant is:
kB = 8.62 × 10−5 eV∕K
(5.3)
Pure semiconductors, are called intrinsic semiconductors, cannot be directly
used to make devices. We intentionally add some impurities (known as dopants) to
the semiconductor crystals. The atoms of dopants can replace the semiconductor
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 48]
5.2 Semiconductor Doping
37
atoms on the crystal lattice, change the resistivity, and other characteristics. The
process of adding impurities is called doping, and the semiconductors after doping
are called doped semiconductors. Commonly used methods are high temperature
(900–1200 ∘C) diffusion and ion implantation, which we will discuss later. In sili-
con, the most used dopants are phosphorus with the symbol P and boron with the
symbol B.
Let us take another look at the periodic table of the elements in Figure 5.1. We
can see that P is in group 15 and has five valence electrons. Boron is in group 13
and has three valence electrons. Silicon has four valence electrons and phosphorus
has five. After phosphorus is doped into Si, a phosphorus atom that replaces a
silicon atom only needs to take out four electrons to form a covalent bond with
the surrounding silicon atoms (see Chapter 2). The fifth electron of P will be free
from the bondage and become a free electron. This kind of negatively charged
electron conduction is called n-type semiconductor. Sometimes capital N is used.
n is the first letter of “negative.” Boron has only three valence electrons. When a
boron enters the silicon crystal to replace a silicon atom, the covalent bond formed
with silicon lacks one electron, and one adjacent valence electron can be attracted
by this incomplete covalent bond. This attraction procedure grabs one electron
from a neighbor Si atom and leaves a hole in the original position. The hole is
positively charged. This kind of semiconductor is called a p-type semiconductor.
Sometimes capitalized P is used. p is the first letter of “positive.” Phosphorus is to
provide electrons in silicon, it is called donor impurity. Boron is to accept electrons
in silicon, it is called acceptor impurity. Please see Figure 5.4.
Now let us discuss the band diagram of silicon after doping, please see
Figure 5.5. To understand this picture, we should introduce an important con-
cept, Fermi energy. Fermi energy is a concept of energy in solid-state physics and
to commemorate the American Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (September 29,
1901–November 28, 1954). In semiconductors, Fermi energy is used to describe
2-D Crystal lattice of silicon doped with  (a) phosphorous  (b) boron
Electron
Covalent bond
Hole
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
P
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
B
Si
Si
Si
Figure 5.4
Schematic diagram of the impurities of P and B in Si. Source: Reprinted from
Electrical 4U.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 49]
38
5 Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
Conductor band
n-Type semiconductor
Electrons
Ec
Eg
Valence band
p-Type semiconductor
EA
Holes
Ec
Ev
Eg
Intrinsic semiconductor
Ei
Holes
Ec
Ev
Eg
ED
Holes
Conductor band
Electrons
Conductor band
Electrons
Valence band
Valence band
Figure 5.5
Schematic diagram of intrinsic, n-type and p-type semiconductor energy
bands.
the energy level of electrons or holes and can be determined from the charge
neutrality condition, so it is more commonly called the Fermi energy level
(Fermi level) with the symbol Ef. In the energy band diagram of Figure 5.5,
“Ec” is the bottom energy of the conduction band, “Ev” is the energy at the
top of the valence band, and “Eg” is the forbidden band width. In intrinsic
semiconductors, the number of electrons and holes is equal, and they are called
electron–hole pair (EHP). The Fermi level is almost in the center of the forbidden
band, which is represented by Ei. In n-type semiconductors, ED represents the
ionization energy of donor doping. The number of electrons is more than holes,
Fermi level is close to the bottom of the conduction band. The higher the donor
concentration, the closer the Fermi level is to the bottom of the conduction
band. In p-type semiconductors, EA is the ionization energy of acceptor doping.
There are more holes than electrons, and the Fermi level is near the top of
the valence band. The higher the acceptor concentration, the closer the Fermi
level is to the top of the valence band. Figure 5.6 is the ionization energy level
distributions of impurities in germanium, silicon, and gallium arsenide. From
the figure, we can see that in silicon, the ionization energy of phosphorus is
0.046 eV and that of boron is 0.044 eV. The doped materials are called extrinsic
semiconductors [2].
To further understand the characteristics of intrinsic and extrinsic silicon, we
briefly introduce the distribution of electrons and holes in silicon crystal. The elec-
tron is a fermion, and it obeys the distribution of Fermi–Dirac statistics. A hole also
beys the distribution of Fermi–Dirac statistics. Let’s use ni to represent the intrin-
sic carrier density, n to represent the electron density in n-type and p to represent
the hole density in p-type. By solving Fermi–Dirac statistics, it can be obtained that
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 50]
Ge
0.66
Li
.0093
Gap center
Gap center
eV
Li
.033
Sb
.039
P
.045
As
.054
Bi
.069
.072
.045
B
Al
Ga
In
Tl
Pd
Na
Be
Zn
Au
Co
V
Ni
Mo
Hg Sr
Ge
Cu
K
Sn
W
Pb
O
Fe
.067
Te
.14
Ti
C
.21 .25
.35
D
Mg Se
Cr
Ta
Cs
Ba
S
Mn
Ag
Cd
Pt
Si
.25
.11 A
A
.006
Si
Ge
.006
S
.006
Sn
.03
Te
Se
O
.0058
.0059
.34
.17
.16
.25
.4
.41
.43
.32
.5
.5
.3
.43
.48 .53
.45
.42
.36
A
.2
A
.45
A
.55
.25
A
.34
A
A
A
A
.36
.3
.49
D
D
.19
D
.29
D
.53
D
.63
A
.67
D
.4
.35
D
D
.4
D
.31
D
.34 .37 .41
.27
.34
.3
D
D
D
D
.5
D
.5
D
.4
.26
.23
.33
D
D
.35
A
A
A
.38
A
.33
.31
.36
.28 .27
.26
.53
.24
.25 .22 .17 .16
.14
.51
.51
.3
.37
.55 .54
.49
.53
.35
.3
.33
.25
.4
.49
.26
.14
.3
Sb
.0096
P
.012
As
.013
S
.18
Se
.14
.28
Te
B
Al
Tl
Ga
In
Be
Zn
Cr
Cd
Hg
Co
Ni
Mn
Fe
Pt
.11
.3
Cu
A
Ag
.09
A
.2
A
A
A
.12
.2
.16
.04
.04
.04
.15
.3
.23
.3
.25
.23
.087
.13
A
.26
A
.27
D
.09
.055
.035
.02
.06
.16
.12
.07
A
.29
.31
.33
A
.28
A
D
Au
.04
Si
1.12
Gap center
GaAs
1.42
.011
.011
.01
.01
.01
.095
.026
C
.028
Bc
.028
Mg
.031
Zn
.035
Si
.035
Cd
.05
.023
Li
Ge
.07
.04
Au
.09
Ag
.11
Pb
.12
Co
Cr
.16
Ni
.21
Cu
.24
.14
.19
.023
.44
Fc
.52
.37
.17
Mn
.095
Figure 5.6
Ionization energies for various impurities in Ge, Si, and GaAs. The levels below the gap centers are from the top of the valence
band and are acceptor levels unless indicated by D for donor level. The levels above the gap centers are from the bottom of the conduction
band and are donor levels unless indicated by A for acceptor level. Source: [1] Sze / John Wiley & Sons.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 51]
40
5 Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
the carrier concentrations of intrinsic and n-type are as follows. The concentration
of p follows a similar rule as n [1]:
ni = (NCNV)1∕2e−Eg∕2kBT
(5.4)
n ≈
1
√
2
(NDNC)1∕2e−(EC−ED)∕2kBT
(5.5)
In the formula, NC is the effective density of states in the conduction band. NV
is the effective density of states in the valence band. ND is the concentration of
donor impurities. Eg is band gap, ED is ionization energy level of donor. e ≈2.72 is
natural constant, sometimes called Euler’s number, to commemorate the Russian
mathematician Leonhard Euler (April 15, 1707–September 18, 1783).
Sometimes formula (5.4) is also written as the following formula, same as for-
mula (5.5):
ni = (NCNV)1∕2 exp(−Eg∕2kBT)
(5.6)
Figure 5.7 is the relationship between intrinsic concentration and temperature.
From the figure, we can see that, the smaller the band gap, the higher the intrinsic
carrier concentration at room temperature. Assuming that the doping concentra-
tion is 1015 cm−3, the intrinsic carrier concentration in Ge will reach this number
when temperature is less than 100 ∘C, while Si must be about 300 ∘C, and GaAs
will be about 500 ∘C. When the intrinsic concentration equals the doping concen-
tration in extrinsic materials, the devices cannot work normally. This temperature
is called operating temperature. However, due the other material limitations, the
actual operating temperature is below 300 ∘C in most cases.
We generally assume that the room temperature is T = 27 ∘C ≈300 K. Using
Boltzmann’s constant (5.2), we can have:
kBT = 8.62 × 10−5 × 300 eV = 0.02586 eV ≈0.026 eV
(5.7)
According to Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics, the average energy of a microscopic
particle is 3
2kBT. So, to put it simply, we may think the electrons in donor impurities
can obtain 0.026 eV energy from heat sources at room temperature. In a solid, the
prime heat source is from lattice vibration.
Taking phosphorus as an example, add 0.046 and formula (5.7) in formula (5.5),
we can have:
e−(EC−ED)∕2kBT = 2.72−0.046∕2×0.026 ≈0.41
(5.8)
Mathematically, “=” is equal to, and “≈” is approximately equal to. This shows
that at room temperature, we can simply understand that more than 40% phos-
phorus doping are activated by thermal lattice vibration. These excess electrons
are ionized into the conduction band to become free electrons. The situation is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 52]
5.2 Semiconductor Doping
41
Figure 5.7
Intrinsic carrier
concentration for Ge, Si, and GaAs
as a function of inverse
temperature. The room temperature
values are marked for reference.
Source: [1] Sze / John Wiley & Sons.
1500
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
1014
1013
1012
1011
1010
1019
108
107
106
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1000/T (K
–1)
Si
Intrinsic carrier density ni (cm–3)
Ge
3.0
4.0
3.5
1000 500
200
100
27
0 –20
T(°C)
GOAS
similar for boron. This kind of impurity that can be ionized at room tempera-
ture is called shallow level doping, which corresponds to deep level doping. In
GaAs, we generally dope silicon. Si replaces gallium, becoming a shallow donor
impurity, making GaAs an n-type semiconductor. In semiconductors, these impu-
rities greatly change the characteristics of the material, for example, making GaAs
from semi-insulating to a real semiconductor material. According to needs, we can
change the doping concentration to make different semiconductors for manufac-
turing different devices.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 53]
42
5 Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
5.3
Semiconductor Diode
Let us use silicon semiconductor as an example. When a piece of n-type material
and a piece of p-type material are in close contact, the electrons in the n-type region
diffuse to the p-type region near the contact surface. At the same time, the holes
in the p-type region diffuse to the n-type region. After the movable charge carri-
ers diffuse, the immovable charged ions stay in the corresponding lattice position
close to the contact surface. The n-type region will remain positive ions, and the
p-type region will remain negative ions. The region lacking the carriers is called
the depletion layer (depletion region, depletion zone), and an electric field is built
up in this zone. This electric field is called the built-in electric field. With the diffu-
sion of more carriers, the built-in electric field will become stronger and stronger.
This enhanced electric field will prevent further diffusion of charge carriers and
finally reach dynamic equilibrium. Please see Figure 5.8. The Vbi in the figure is
called built-in potential. The depletion layer is called p–n junction.
(a)
Ec
EV
p-Type
n-Type
Ef
Ef
Electrons’ diffusion
Holes’ diffusion
(b)
p-Type
EC
Ei
Electron energy
Electron potential
Ef
EV
EC
qVbi
Ei
Ef
EV
Depletion
region
n-Type
Figure 5.8
Schematic
diagram of the energy
band structure of p–n
junction. (a) In the vicinity
of the interface between
p-type Si and n-type Si,
electrons diffuse from n
region to p region, and
holes diffuse from p
region to n region.
(b) Finally, the Fermi
levels of the p and n
regions are equal, and the
depletion region and
built-in potential are
established.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 54]
5.3 Semiconductor Diode
43
During the establishment of p–n junction, due to the mutual diffusion of elec-
trons and holes, the Fermi level of the n-type semiconductor and the Fermi level
of the p-type semiconductor eventually tend to be the same, and a built-in poten-
tial is established. For convenience, Ef is used to denote the Fermi levels in the
n-type region and p-type region in the figure. The potential energy of the diffu-
sion zone is the energy of a charge at a certain point in the electric field. Like the
introduction of an electric field, the potential is the potential energy divided by
the charge. The voltage between two points is the difference in potential between
the two points. In other words, the potential difference is the voltage. The estab-
lishment of electric potential in the depletion layer will hinder the diffusion of the
carriers, which is called a potential barrier. The p–n junction is vital to our under-
standing of modern electronics and semiconductor microchips. Metal electrodes
(metal–semiconductor contact) are placed on both ends of the p–n junction, and
then the device is packaged. This packaged diode is a product of a diode. We will
discuss metal–semiconductor contact later.
In the p–n junction, there is another type of charge movement called charge
carrier drift. Close to the depletion layer, a small number of electrons in the p-type
region will be attracted by the built-in electric field and drift from the p-type region
to the n-type region. Conversely, a small number of holes will be attracted by the
built-in electric field in the n-type region and drift from the n-type region to the
p-type region. If the diode is not connected to the battery, all the carriers’ move-
ment reaches dynamic balance, and no current flows in the p–n junction. When
the diode is connected to a battery, there are two situations:
(1) The anode of a battery is connected to the p-type zone, and the cathode is
connected to the n-type zone. In this scenario, the direction of electric field
of the external battery is opposite to the built-in electric field. The built-in
electric field is weakened, and the depletion layer becomes thinner, the
diffusion of charge carriers is not offset by the built-in electric field. The
diffused carriers flow in the p–n junction, the electrical current will flow
through the diode at this time. Please look at the top image of Figure 5.9. This
is called forward voltage.
(2) The anode of the battery is connected to the n-type zone, and the cathode is
connected to the p-type zone. In this scenario, the electric field of the external
battery is in the same direction as the built-in electric field. The built-in electric
field is strengthened, and the depletion layer becomes thicker. There are no
diffused carriers flowing through the p–n junction, only a small amount of
drift carriers flows through the p–n junction. At this time, only a small amount
of electrical current flows through the diode, as shown in the bottom image of
Figure 5.9. This is called reverse voltage.
The charge carriers that we often refer to are also divided into two categories:
majority charge carriers and minority charge carriers. In an n-semiconductor,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 55]
44
5 Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
n-type
p-type
n-type
p-type
Built-in electric field
External electric field from battery
Battery
(a)
(b)
Electron diffusion current
Hole diffusion current
Depletion region
Depletion region
Neutral p-region
Neutral n-region
Neutral p-region
Neutral n-region
Built-in electric field
External electric field from battery
Battery
Hole drift current
Electron drift current
Figure 5.9
The structure of diode. Forward voltage (a) and reverse voltage (b).
electrons are majority charge carriers and holes are minority charge carriers. In
a p-semiconductor, holes are majority charge carriers and electrons are minority
charge carriers. The battery voltage is assumed to be V. In case (1), the potential
energy becomes q(Vbi – V), the barrier becomes lower, the diffusion current
increases, and the diode turns on. This is called the diode with the forward
voltage. The forward voltage is sometimes called forward bias, and the current
is called forward current. In case (2), the potential energy becomes q(Vbi + V),
the potential barrier is increased, there is no diffusion current, and there is only a
small drift current. This is called diode with reverse voltage. The reverse voltage
is sometimes called reverse bias, and the current is called reverse leakage current.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 56]
5.3 Semiconductor Diode
45
Figure 5.10
Semiconductor diode. Source:
Reprinted with permission of Servodroid.ru.
Anode
(+)
Cathode
(–)
Figure 5.10 is the symbol and photo of the diode. From the discussion, we know
that the diode is unidirectional, so the symbol of the diode is in the form of an
arrow, indicating that the current is unidirectional in the diode, from the anode to
the cathode. This is completely different from resistance, which is bidirectional.
Figure 5.11 is the relationship curve between the current and the voltage of the
diode and the resistor, the curve is often called the I–V curve. The diode I–V curve
was measured from a real Si diode product [3]. When the forward voltage is big-
ger than around 0.6 V, the forward current begins to increase. This voltage is the
threshold voltage (VTh, also called offset voltage in other books [2], 0.3 V for ger-
manium and 0.2 V for Schottky). We will talk about Schottky diodes later. The
threshold voltage is expected to be approximately the potential barrier of the junc-
tion. Only when the applied voltage (battery) exceeds VTh, the current starts to
flow in the diode. At this time, the diode is called conduction. The reverse current
is very small compared to the forward current and is called leakage current. When
the reverse voltage is bigger than around 115 V, the reverse current is increased
significantly. This voltage is the breakdown voltage. Let us look at depletion layer
diagram with the reverse bias of the diode in Figure 5.9 and the I–V curve in
Figure 5.11. It shows that a diode with the reverse bias is a capacitor. The depletion
Voltage
Current
(b)
(a)
Voltage (V)
–120
–90
–60
–30
0
800
600
400
200
0.6 1.2
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
Current (mA)
Figure 5.11
The I–V curve of a diode (a) and resistor (b).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 57]
46
5 Further Discussion of Semiconductors and Diodes
V
I
V
I
Rectifier diode
Threshold voltage
Figure 5.12
Schematic diagram of electric signal before and after a rectiﬁer diode.
layer is equivalent to the dielectric. The regions of p-type and n-type are equivalent
to the electrode plates. In fact, the reverse-biased diode capacitor is a widely used
structure in the integrated circuit. An important application of diodes is rectifiers.
A rectifier diode allows only one-way current conduction, please see Figure 5.12.
References
1 Sze, S.M. Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2e, p. 849, p. 13, pp. 19–25.
2 Streetman, B.G. Solid State Electronic Devices, 4e, p. 66, p. 202.
3 模拟电子技术基础(上册), 童诗白主编, 人民教育出版社, 1980, 21页.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 58]
47
6
Transistor and Integrated Circuit
In Chapter 5, we introduced semiconductor diodes. One problem with the diode
is that it has no amplification function. Based on the diode, the semiconductor
transistor was invented. An important feature of the transistor is that it has an
amplification function and can replace the vacuum tube. Based on the transis-
tor, the integrated circuit (IC) was invented. Since then, mankind has entered the
chip era.
There are different kinds of transistors, including bipolar, junction field effect,
and metal–oxide–semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFETs). We will dis-
cuss these transistors in the following sections.
6.1
Bipolar Transistor
The earliest invented transistor is a bipolar transistor, which is made by com-
bining two p–n junctions. This kind of transistor has two structures, one is
n–p–n (N–P–N) and the other is p–n–p (P–N–P). Please see Figure 6.1, which is
a schematic diagram of the transistor structures and the corresponding symbols.
There are three terminals in a bipolar transistor. They are emitter, collector, and
base. IE is emitter current; IC is collector current; and IB is the base current.
In this transistor, two types of charge carriers-electrons and holes are involved
in the current conduction, so it is called a bipolar transistor, or bipolar junction
transistor. Let us take the n–p–n transistor as an example. Figure 6.2 is the basic
circuit diagram of a transistor in circuit use. In this circuit, the emitter provides
electrons and is the main provider of charge carriers. To make the carriers move,
the junction of B and E should be forward biased. During the manufacturing
process, the doping concentration of the base region is much lower than that
of the emitter. So, the hole current in the base region is much smaller than the
electron current in the emitter region. Applying a reverse bias to the junction of
B and C to collect electrons flowing through the base region [1]. In this figure,
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 59]
48
6 Transistor and Integrated Circuit
N
P
N
Base (B)
Emitter (E)
Collector (C)
Base (B)
Emitter (E)
Collector (C)
IB
IE
IC
B
C
E
P
N
P
IB
IE
IC
B
C
E
Figure 6.1
The basic structures of bipolar transistor and symbols.
RB
EB
Vi
RC
EC
Vo
ic
Ground
ib
Figure 6.2
The basic schematic
of an n–p–n transistor [1].
Source: Chinese Technical Books.
Vi is the input signal voltage, Vo is the output signal voltage, EB is used to control
the junction between the base and the emitter, and Ec is used to collect electrons’
current out of the emitter. A small Vi causes a small current ib to change, which
brings about a large change of the current ic, and finally gives a large output
voltage Vo. This is the amplification process of the transistor. Figure 6.3 is the I–V
curve of an n–p–n bipolar transistor, which can be used as an amplifier or switch.
If it works in amplification mode, it is an amplifier. If it works in saturation mode,
the switch is on, because the transistor is in a high current and low-voltage state.
If it works in cutoff state, the switch is off, because the transistor is at a high
voltage and low-current state.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 60]
6.2 Junction Field Effect Transistor
49
Figure 6.3
I–V curve of
an n–p–n bipolar
transistor. Source:
Reprinted from
ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING.
6.2
Junction Field Effect Transistor
Another kind of transistor is a field effect transistor (FET). In this transistor, there
are three main types: junction FET (JFET), metal–semiconductor FET (MESFET),
and metal-insulator-semiconductor FET (MISFET). All these FETs are unipolar
transistors because the current is only generated by the flow of majority carriers
that can be electrons or holes. In this section, we introduce JFET. Figure 6.4 is the
Figure 6.4
JFET structure and symbol. Top is N-channel and bottom is P-channel.
IC
Saturation mode
Amplification mode
IB5 > IB4
IB4 > IB3
IB3 > IB2
IB2 > IB1
IB1 > IB0
IB0
VCE
Cutoff mode
N
P
P
Drain (D)
Source (S)
Gate (G)
Gate (G)
P–N junction
Channel
P
N
N
Drain (D)
Source (S)
Gate (G)
Gate (G)
P–N junction
Channel
G
D
S
G
D
S
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 61]
50
6 Transistor and Integrated Circuit
JFET structure diagram and symbol. There are two types of JFETs, one is that the
carriers are electrons, and the other is that the carriers are holes. There are also
three terminals in the transistor. They are Drain, Source, and Gate. The upper pic-
ture in the Figure shows electron conduction, called N-channel. The lower picture
shows hole conduction, called P-channel. In addition, the width of the channel is
controlled by the change of the reverse bias of the P–N junction. Please refer to the
bottom one of Figure 5.9. So, this kind of transistor is called JFET. Below we use
N-channel JFET to discuss.
When connecting an adjustable voltage battery to an N-channel JFET, the cath-
ode of the battery is connected to the gate, and the anode is connected to the drain
and source (VDS = 0). Please see Figure 6.5. If the gate–source voltage is VGS = 0,
the channel is as shown in Figure 6.5a. At this time, the channel is the widest
and can pass the maximum electrical current. Figure 6.5b shows that when the
reverse voltage increases, VGS < 0, the depletion layer becomes wider and the chan-
nel becomes narrower, and the current that can pass becomes smaller. Continue
to increase the reverse voltage, and finally the two depletion layers contact each
other, see Figure 6.5c. The current channel is cut off and no current will flow
through the device. At this time, VGS = VP is called pinch-off voltage. The bat-
tery must be connected in the reverse bias mode of the P–N junction as shown
in Figure 6.5. It cannot be connected in the forward bias mode. In this case, the
P–N junction is turned on and the current will flow through the P–N junction at
both sides. The current channel in the middle cannot be adjusted. In the figure,
“No contact” means that the point is not in contact, and an arrow drawn on the
battery means an adjustable voltage battery.
Let us connect the battery to the D and S terminals, D is connected to the
anode of the battery, and S is connected to the cathode of the battery, as shown
Figure 6.5
The change of JFET P–N junction vs. V GS (a) V GS = 0, the channel is the
widest, (b) V GS < 0, the channel becomes narrow, (c) V GS = V P, the channel is cut off. [1].
Source: Chinese Technical Books.
N
P
P
G
G
D
S
N
P
P
G
G
D
S
(a)
(b)
(c)
N
P
P
G
G
D
S
Not contact
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 62]
6.2 Junction Field Effect Transistor
51
(a)
(b)
(c)
N
P
P
G
G
D
S
S
S
Not contact
N
P
P
G
G
D
N
P
P
G
G
D
Figure 6.6
The change of JFET P–N junction vs. V DS (a) V DS = 0, the channel is the
widest, (b) V DS > 0, the channel becomes narrow unevenly, (c) V DS = −V P, the channel at
D is cut off [1]. Source: Chinese Technical Books.
in Figure 6.6. The change of the current channel is similar to the situation in
Figure 6.5, but there are some differences. The voltage distribution in Figure 6.5
is uniform, so the channel changes uniformly. But in Figure 6.6, the voltage of
D is higher than that of S. As the voltage of VDS increases, the depletion layer at
D (the upper part of the figure) meets first. The transformation of the channel is
shown from 6.6a to c. The current flowing through the channel initially increases
with the increase in voltage. When the depletion layers touch each other, the
current will not increase anymore and basically stabilizes at a value, which is
called the saturation current. The I–V curve of a typical N-channel JFET is shown
in Figure 6.7. In the figure, IDSS is the maximum saturation current when the bias
voltage of G–S junction is zero.
Figure 6.7
N-channel JFET I–V
curve. Source: Reprinted with
permission of Nuts & Volts
magazine.
Drain current, ID (mA)
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
5
10
Drain-to-source voltage
VDS (volts)
20
25
15
VGS = 0 V
VGS = –1 V
VGS = –2 V
VGS = –3 V
VGS = –4 V
IDSS
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 63]
52
6 Transistor and Integrated Circuit
6.3
Metal–Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
Now let us look at how a MESFET works. To understand MESFET, the
metal–semiconductor contact should be known first. Before discussing the
metal–semiconductor contact, we introduce two concepts: work function and
electron affinity. Work function is the energy difference between the vacuum level
and the Fermi level. For metals, it is represented by qFm, the unit of Fm is volt.
The definition of electron affinity is the energy difference from the bottom of the
conduction band to the vacuum, expressed by q𝜒, and the unit of 𝜒is also volt [2].
Aluminum (Al), gold (Au), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), titanium (Ti), platinum (Pt),
and chromium (Cr) are the most used metals in semiconductor production. Please
see their work functions in Table 6.1. Silicon, germanium, and gallium arsenide
are the most used semiconductors. Their electron affinities are listed in Table 6.2.
Figure 6.8 is a schematic diagram of the energy band structure before (a) and
after (b) of the metal and n-type semiconductor contact. In the figure, qVbi is the
potential energy of the depletion region, and qFBn is the height of the barrier.
“B” means potential barrier and “n” is n-type, W is the width of the depletion
layer. When an external electric field E is applied, the barrier height will become
lower. This phenomenon is called the Schottky effect, to commemorate the
German physicist Walter H. Schottky (July 23, 1886–March 4, 1976). The barrier
is called the Schottky barrier, please see Figure 6.9. Metal–semiconductor contact,
also called Schottky contact, can be used to make diodes, which are called
Schottky diodes. As mentioned in Chapter 5, the threshold voltage of a Schottky
diode is approximately 0.2 V.
Metal–semiconductor contact, besides Schottky contact, there is also an impor-
tant type of contact-ohmic contact. Because the resistance of the semiconductor is
Table 6.1
The work functions of the metals most used in the semiconductor.
Metal
Al
Au
Cu
Ni
Ti
Pt
Cr
Work function (eV)
4.06–4.26
5.1–5.47
4.53–5.1
5.04–5.35
4.33
5.12–5.93
4.5
Source: [3] Lide / Taylor & Francis.
Table 6.2
The electron afﬁnities of three most used
semiconductors [2].
Semiconductor
Si
Ge
GaAs
Electron affinity (eV)
4.05
4.0
4.07
Source: [2] Sze / John Wiley & Sons.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 64]
6.3 Metal–Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
53
Vacuum
E
qϕm
EV
EC
EF
qχ
qVn
(a)
Vacuum
E
qϕm
qχ
qϕBn = q(ϕm – χ)
EF
EC
EV
qvbi
W
(b)
Figure 6.8
The band structure of metal and n-type, (a) before contact and after (b) after
contact. Source: [2] Sze / John Wiley & Sons.
Figure 6.9
Schematic diagram of the energy band
of the Schottky effect.
Vacuum
E
qϕm
qϕBn
EF
EC
EV
W
much bigger than the resistance of the metal, we need to make metal electrodes
on the surface of the semiconductor device to draw out the electrical signals. In
the basic structure diagrams from Figures 6.1–6.6 in this section, the short thick
black lines at the electrodes of base, gate, etc., represent metal electrodes. Metal
is also needed to connect different devices together. This is the concept of inte-
grated circuits. On a semiconductor substrate, metals are used to connect different
devices in different places, we will explain this technology in detail later. In this
case, the metal–semiconductor contact must be an ohmic contact. We have said in
this section that Schottky contact is a diode, and its I–V characteristics is shown
on the left in Figure 5.11, while the I–V curve of ohmic contact should be the same
as the one on the right of Figure 5.11. We introduce ohmic contact resistance Rc
here. In order to meet the requirements of Figure 5.11 on the right, in the case of
donor doping that is the most used ohmic contact doping, Rc needs to follow the
relationship below [2]:
Rc ∼exp
[
Rc0
(
FBn
√
ND
)]
(6.1)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 65]
54
6 Transistor and Integrated Circuit
In the formula, Rc0 is a constant related to the semiconductor material, ND is the
donor doping concentration, and ∼is the meaning of satisfaction relation.
It can be seen from the formula (6.1) that in order to achieve a small ohmic
contact resistance, heavy doping is required. When ND ≥1019 cm−3, it meets the
requirement of ohmic contact. When ND ≤1017 cm−3, it does not meet the require-
ment of ohmic contact at all [2]. In the formula, “≥” is the sign of greater than or
equal to, “≤” is the sign of less than or equal to and cm−3 is the unit of volume-per
cubic centimeter. Let us take 1019 cm−3 as an example, it means that there are
1019 impurities per cubic centimeter. To have a concept of doping concentration,
we list the atomic concentration of the main semiconductor crystals for compar-
ison. The unit is the number of atoms per cubic centimeter [2]: Si = 5.0 × 1022,
Ge = 4.42 × 1022, and GaAs = 4.42 × 1022. In addition, the formula also shows
that in order to have a small ohmic contact resistance, the barrier height should
also be small.
Schottky contact is the basic structure used to make MESFET. Figure 6.10 is the
basic structure diagram of an n-channel MESFET. The gate (G) is Schottky con-
tact, and the source (S), and drain (D) are ohmic contacts. “Insulating substrate”
in the figure is usually semi-insulating GaAs. n+ refers to heavily doped n region
(p+ refers to heavily doped p region). The working principle of MESFET is like that
of JFET. As the reverse voltage VGS increases, the thickness of the depletion layer
increases, the current channel becomes thinner, and electric current decreases.
When the thickness of the depletion region occupies the entire channel, the cur-
rent cannot flow. With the increase of VD, the thickness of the depletion layer of
the D electrode is bigger than that of the S electrode. Until the depletion layer of
the D electrode contacts the insulating substrate, the current then enters the satu-
ration region. Figure 6.11 is the I–V curve of a MESFET. GaAs devices and ICs are
mainly made by using this structure. GaAs used for devices and ICs are usually
n-type material.
Insulating substrate 
Depletion layer
n-channel
n+
n+
S
G
D
VGS
VDS
Figure 6.10
The basic structure of a
MESFET.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 66]
6.4 Metal–Insulator–Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
55
Figure 6.11
The I–V curve of a
MESFET. Source: [2] Sze / John Wiley &
Sons.
ID
VDS
No gate
VGS = 0
VGS< 0
6.4
Metal–Insulator–Semiconductor Field Effect
Transistor
Now let us discuss MISFETs. Before discussing MISFET, let us talk about
metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS). Figure 6.12 is a schematic diagram of the
basic structure of MIS. The working principle of MIS can be understood through
the metal–semiconductor contact, but the existence of the insulator cuts off the
current path between the metal and the semiconductor. Therefore, according to
the different situations, VG can be positive voltage or negative voltage. The struc-
tures of the current channel are different related to the direction of the bias. VG
is equivalent to the voltage V applied to the metal electrode in Figure 6.12. The
electric field generated by this voltage is coupled to the semiconductor through
the insulator. The electric charges are created in the semiconductor surface close
to the insulator. It is to control the current channel. The device is also called
a charge-coupled device. If the insulator is silicon dioxide (SiO2, oxide), the
MISFET becomes a MOSFET. The semiconductor used for MOSFET is mainly
Figure 6.12
The basic structure of MIS.
Source: [2] Sze / John Wiley & Sons.
Semiconductor
v
Ohmic contact
Metal
Insulator
d
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 67]
56
6 Transistor and Integrated Circuit
silicon, which is the basic structure of large-scale integrated circuits. The core
components in a computer–Microprocessor (μP) or CPU (Central Processing
Unit) and memory are large-scale integrated circuits. Since the number of devices
in modern CPUs and memories is so large (we will talk about them later), we
prefer to call them (ultra) very large-scale integrated circuits.
If we want to make a MOSFET usable, the electrodes should be put on the
gate, source, and drain. There are four different kinds of MOSFETs, please see
Figure 6.13. From top to bottom, we call them Type 1, Type 2, Type 3, and Type 4.
Type 1 is an n-channel enhancement type, and this kind of MOSFET is a
normally off device. In this device, silicon is p-type. When the gate voltage is zero,
there is no current channel. If a positive voltage is applied to the gate, the holes
under the electrode will be driven away, attracting electrons, and forming an n-type
conductive channel. So, it is called n-channel enhancement type. In addition,
when the gate voltage is zero, there is no conductive path, thus it is normally close.
Type 2 is an n-channel depletion type, and this kind of MOSFET is a normally
on device. In this device, silicon is p-type. When the gate voltage is zero, there is
S
G
D
p
SiO2
Metal
S
G
D
p
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
Metal
S
G
D
n
Metal
n-channel
S
G
D
n
Metal
n-channel enhancement
(normally off)
n-channel depletion
(normally on)
p-channel enhancement
(normally off)
p-channel depletion
(normally on)
p-channel
n+
n+
n+
n+
p+
p+
p+
p+
Figure 6.13
The basic structures and symbols of MOSFET. Source: [2] Sze / John Wiley &
Sons.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 68]
6.4 Metal–Insulator–Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
57
already an n-type channel under the electrode. We need to apply a negative volt-
age on the gate to drive away electrons to form a depletion layer and reduce the
thickness of the channel. Finally, the channel is cut off, so it is called an n-channel
depletion type. In addition, when the gate voltage is zero, there is a conductive
path, thus it is a normally open.
Similarly, when silicon is n-type, there is a p-channel enhancement and nor-
mally off device, which is type 3. The other is a p-channel depletion and normally
on device, which is type 4.
The amount of voltage that must be applied to the gate to create an enough
conductive channel (i.e. to turn the MOSFET on) is the threshold voltage VTh of
MOSFET. For n-channel, the VTh is positive. For p-channel, the VTh is negative.
In the Figure 6.13, MOSFET has gate (G), source (S) and drain (D). There is also
an electrode connected to the substrate (Figure 6.12). This electrode can provide
a reference voltage to affect the operation of the device. The materials of the G, S,
and D electrodes can be metal, or heavily doped polysilicon and silicide (TiSi2) on
the top which is named as polycide. The basic device parameters are gate length
(channel length) L, which refers to the distance between two n+–p or p+–n junc-
tions, and the thickness d of SiO2. The other two parameters are the gate width
(channel width) Z and the substrate doping concentration NA (acceptor) or ND
(donor).
Figure 6.14 is schematic diagrams of the energy bands for different MOS struc-
tures. The diagram on the top of the figure shows metal and p-type semiconductor,
and the lower diagram shows metal and n-type semiconductor. Take the p-type
semiconductor in the above figure as an example. (i) When a negative voltage is
applied to the metal electrode, more holes will be attracted to the semiconduc-
tor surface, causing the holes to accumulate at the interface between the oxide
layer and the semiconductor. (ii) When a zero voltage is applied to the metal elec-
trode, the energy level will not change. The energy band is in a flat-band state.
(iii) When a small positive voltage is applied to the metal electrode, holes will be
driven away from the interface between the oxide layer and the semiconductor.
This is the depletion state (depletion). (iv) When the positive voltage on the metal
electrode is large enough, electrons accumulate at the interface between the oxide
layer and the semiconductor, causing the type of semiconductor at the surface to
be inverse, changing from p-type to n-type, and generating n-type current channel.
This is the type 1 FET mentioned above. The diagram on the bottom of the figure
shows n-type semiconductor that corresponds to the type 3 FET mentioned above.
The band diagrams do not correspond to Type 2 and Type 4 FETs. Figure 6.15 is
I–V curves of enhanced MOSFETs.
Based on MOS, complementary MOS is developed, which is abbreviated as
CMOS (complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor). CMOS uses two n-type
and p-type MOSFETs. Their operating characteristics are complementary to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 69]
58
6 Transistor and Integrated Circuit
Metal Oxide p-substrate
Metal Oxide p-substrate
Metal Oxide p-substrate
Metal
Ef
Ef
Ef
Ef
Ef
Ef
V = 0
Ef
q𝜙m
EC
Eg / 2
q𝜙p
q𝜓Bp
Eg / 2
qχ
q𝜙B
q𝜙m
q𝜙n
Ec
Ef
Ei
Ev
q𝜓Bn
qχ
qχi
qχi
Ei
Ef
Ev
q𝜙B
V = 0
Ef
Oxide p-substrate
Metal Oxide p-substrate
Metal Oxide p-substrate
Metal Oxide p-substrate
Metal Oxide
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
p-substrate
V > 0
V > 0
V > 0
V < 0
V < 0
V < 0
Figure 6.14
The schematic diagram of energy band of metal–oxide–semiconductor
(a) V < 0, holes accumulate at the interface (image above). V > 0, electrons accumulate at
the interface (image below), (b) V = 0, the energy band is in a ﬂat-band state, (c) V > 0,
holes are driven away from the interface (image above). V < 0, electrons are driven away
from the interface (image below), (d) V > 0 more, n-type channel is generated (image
above). V < 0 more, p-type channel is generated (image below). Source: Reprinted with
permission of IuE, TU Wien.
(a)
(b)
ID
VDS
VGS = 1.5V
VGS = 2.5V
VGS = 5V
Linear
Saturation
ID
VDS
VGS = –5V
VGS = –2.5V
VGS = –1.5V
Saturation
Linear
Figure 6.15
I–V curves of enhanced MOSFETs. (a) is n-channel, (b) is p-channel.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 70]
6.4 Metal–Insulator–Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
59
each other. For example, if the positive voltage of an electric signal is applied to
the gate of an n-type device, the negative voltage is applied to the gate of a p-type
device, or vice versa. Connect these two types of devices symmetrically to form a
CMOS. CMOS has two important characteristics – low power consumption and
easy to make logic gates, so it is widely used in the production of computer chips.
The MOSFET mentioned above is the basic structure of CPU and memory, and it
appears in the form of CMOS. To understand logic gates, we need to make a brief
introduction to binary operations.
Computers are based on binary operation. Our daily life is based on decimal
operation and watches use six decimals. The binary operation is used because it is
the most convenient way of operation for the computers. Logic gate is composed of
CMOS. When the gate is on, the output voltage is low, we assume it is “0.” When
the gate is off and the output voltage is high, we assume it is “1.” Or set “0” and
“1” in the opposite state. The numbers have only “0” and “1” in binary operation.
The decimal operation has 10 numbers: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The reason
why we use it is that people have 10 fingers, which is a natural choice. Binary
operation is called digital operation, or logical operation. The corresponding
technology is digital technology. Now the most electronic systems and equipment,
whether they are as large as communication systems, giant computers, or as
small as home computers, mobile phones, cameras, etc., use digital technology.
The calculating rules of binary operation are named Boolean algebra, which
was put forward by the British mathematician George Boole (November 12,
1815–December 8, 1864). Using Boolean algebra, we can easily use CMOS to
design basic logic gates. They are NOT gate, AND gate, OR gate, NAND gate,
NOR gate, Exclusive OR gate “XOR”, and Exclusive NOR gate “NXOR.” The CPU
used in a computer is composed of thousands of such basic logic gates. Since
the logic gates composed of CMOS only consider the two states of switching,
their anti-noise ability is strong. Easy to implement logic gates, low power
consumption, and anti-noise, these three characteristics make CMOS technology
to play an irreplaceable role in the IT field. Figure 6.16 is a logic gate-NOT gate
formed by CMOS.
The gate is composed of one n-channel enhancement MOSFET (T1) and one
p-channel enhancement MOSFET (T2). When the input Vin is low voltage, T1 is
off and T2 is on, the output Vout is high voltage (around Vdd). When the input Vin
is high voltage, T1 is on and T2 is off, the output Vout is low voltage (around 0).
This realizes the function of a NOT gate. Since the output signal of the NOT gate
is opposite to the input signal, a NOT gate is also called an inverter.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 71]
60
6 Transistor and Integrated Circuit
vdd
vout
T1
T2
vss
vin
Figure 6.16
CMOS NOT gate.
References
1 童诗白主编. (1980). 模拟电子技术基础(上册), 人民教育出版社, 43 页, 38 页,
64 页, 66 页.
2 Sze, S.M. Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2e, p. 246, p. 850, p. 247, p. 304,
p. 305, pp. 336–339, p. 363, p. 455.
3 Lide, D.R. (2008). CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 12–114.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 72]
61
7
The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
In the previous chapter, we briefly introduced different types of semiconductor
transistors and described integrated circuits. In this chapter, we introduce
semiconductor products, the development history of the industry, and clean
rooms.
7.1
The Instruction of Semiconductor Products
and Structures
The abovementioned CMOS NOT gate is just a simple integrated circuit. When a
transistor or diode is completed, package them to become a product of transistor
(Figure 2.6) or diode (Figure 5.10) seen on the market. After opening a package,
we can see a die (chip) inside, please see Figure 7.1, and refer to Figure 6.1.
The case is used as the collector of the transistor. A single transistor and diode
cannot work normally. They need to cooperate with other devices to be used
as a circuit. Figure 6.2 is a simple diagram of transistor circuit. The circuit can
be built on a circuit board (see Figure 7.4) to realize the circuit function. But
the circuit board has a problem-it is bulky. Now we may ask, can transistors,
diodes, resistors, and capacitors be implemented on one chip so that a small
chip can have the function of a huge circuit board? The answer is yes. Based on
this idea, Jack Kilby and Robert Noyce invented the integrated circuit in 1958
(refer to Chapter 3). The IC is to put transistors, diodes, resistors, and capacitors
onto a small piece of semiconductor to realize the function of the circuit. The
invention of the integrated circuit truly realized the small size and low power
consumption of the circuit, and the world has entered the IT era since then.
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 73]
62
7 The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
Emitter
Transistor die
Collector
(case)
Base
Figure 7.1
An unpackaged transistor. Source: Reproduced with permission of
muzique.com.
IC die
Figure 7.2
Silicon wafers with IC dies on them. Source: Unknown Source / Wikimedia
Commons / CC BY-SA 3.0.
Figure 7.2 shows wafers of different sizes (described later) and IC dies on a wafer.
Figure 7.3 shows a packaged CPU product and the CPU dies after opening the
shell. Figure 7.4 is a computer motherboard. The motherboard is a circuit board,
and the CPU is installed on it.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 74]
7.2 A Brief History of the Semiconductor Industry
63
(a)
(b)
CPU chip
Figure 7.3
A packaged CPU (a) and an unpackaged CPU (b). Source: (a) Intel Corporation,
(b) Reproduced with permission of gmx.at.
Figure 7.4
A mother board of computer and a CPU on it.
7.2
A Brief History of the Semiconductor Industry
The semiconductor industry originated in Silicon Valley. After inventing the
transistor, William Shockley left Bell Labs to California in 1953. After three
years of working at the California Institute of Technology in Southern California
near Los Angeles, he went to Mountain View of Northern California near San
Francisco in 1956. Here, he established the Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory.
Dissatisfied with Shockley’s management method, the eight engineers working
in the laboratory left there and founded Fairchild Semiconductor. Shockley called
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 75]
64
7 The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
them “traitorous eight.” Later, in 1968, two of them, Robert Noyce and Gordon
Moore, left Fairchild to form Intel Corporation [1] (refer to Chapter 3).
In 1974, Intel developed the world’s first widely used microprocessor-Intel 8080,
please see Figure 7.5. In 1975, Bill Gates and Paul Allen designed programs based
on the Intel 8080 for MITSs (Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems),
which began the course of Microsoft Corporation [2].
Figure 7.5
Microprocessor Intel 8080. Source: Konstantin Lanzet / Wikimedia
Commons / CC BY-SA 3.0.
Figure 7.6
The number of transistors on IC chips. Source: Reproduced with permission of
OurWorldData.org.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 76]
7.3 Changes in the Size of Transistors and Silicon Wafers
65
In 1965, Gordon Moore published an article in which he described that the num-
ber of devices contained in an integrated circuit would double every year. In 1975,
he revised his prediction, turning one year into two years, that is, the number
of devices that can be accommodated on an integrated circuit will double about
every two years. This is Moore’s Law. As the number of devices increases on a die,
the performance of chips will be greatly improved. Until now, the semiconductor
industry still follows the predictions of Moore’s Law. The law also guides long-term
planning in this field and the setting of R&R projects.
Figure 7.6 shows the change in the number of transistors on integrated circuit
chips from 1971 to 2020. The horizontal coordinate of the figure is year, and the
vertical coordinate is the number of transistors. The company and product names
in the figure do not need to be concerned. It can be seen from the figure that in
1971, the number of transistors on a chip was about 1000. By 2020, the number of
transistors on a chip was nearly 50 billion!
7.3
Changes in the Size of Transistors and Silicon
Wafers
As the number of transistors contained on a die increase, the size of the tran-
sistors becomes smaller and smaller. We use a word to mark the size of the
transistor-feature size. The larger the feature size, the larger the size of the transis-
tor. The smaller the feature size, the smaller the size of the transistor. In addition
to the small size of a transistor, there are also two important characteristics: fast
speed and low power consumption. At the beginning, the feature size was marked
by the gate length (L or LG) of the field effect transistor, refer to Figure 6.13. Since
the gate length is the smallest size in a transistor, the feature size is sometimes
called the “minimum feature size,” please see Figure 7.7. Due to the manufac-
turing process, the gate length and the channel length of the gate are sometimes
inconsistent. Figure 7.7 illustrates this difference clearly. The “Poly” in the figure
Figure 7.7
The schematic
diagram of gate length of a
MOSFET Source: Reprinted
with permission of http://
vlsi-soc.blogspot.com.
Gate
Drain
Source
Channel length
Diffusion length
Gate length
Poly
p-Substrate
Channel length = Gate length – 2 × (Diffusion length) 
n+
n+
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 77]
66
7 The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
Figure 7.8
The
meaning of a pitch,
the hp is half of a
pitch. Source:
Adapted from Inter-
national Technology
Roadmap for Semi-
conductors 2002
Update.
refers to the polysilicon gate. Later, the half pitch (hp) of
dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) was used as the
minimum feature size for many years, please see Figure 7.8.
After that, the industry used other device sizes as feature
size. In short, the feature size or minimum feature size is
used to identify the size of the device.
By using of feature size, the International Technology
Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRSs) provides guidance
and assistance for the semiconductor manufacturing pro-
cess and design specifications involved in the Technology
Node of the semiconductor industry in different periods.
Technology node, sometimes it is called process node,
process technology, or simply node. Different node means
different generation of the circuits and structures. Gener-
ally, small technology node represents small feature size. In
recent years, the feature size has lost its original meaning
in some semiconductor fabs or foundries. For example, the
process nodes in some nm chips only represent a specific
generation of chips made in a particular technology. The
nm here is nanometer, and the length is one billionth (10−9)
of a meter. To give readers an idea of this size, the lattice
constant of silicon is written here for reference: it is about
0.54 nm [3]. At the atomic level, we also commonly use a
unit of length-Angstrom (Å), to commemorate the Swedish
physicist Anders Jonas Ångström (August 13, 1814–June 21, 1874). 1 Å = 0.1 nm,
so the lattice constant of silicon is about 5.4 Å. The driving force of the tech-
nology node is the Moore’s Law. Figure 7.9 is an example of the development
blueprint. In this figure, “Transistor Density Mtr/mm2” refers to the transistor
density, in the unit of million/mm2. “HVM” is the abbreviation of “High-volume
manufacturing.” It can be seen from this figure that at the 10 nm node, more
than 100 million transistors are made on an area of one square millimeter. Now,
IBM has introduced 2-nm node chip [5]. Compared with the lattice constant,
we can know how small this size is! It is conceivable that the density of 2 nm is
higher. The paper says IBM could put 50 billion transistors onto a chip the size
of a fingernail, and 2-nm-node chips could be rolling out of fabs as early as 2024.
From these data, we can see how tiny the transistors in the contemporary chips
are. The difficulty in the manufacture is very, very big.
As the number of transistors contained on a chip increase, the size of a chip
becomes larger and larger. At the meantime, the size of the silicon wafer becomes
larger and larger. Figure 7.10 shows the wafer sizes from the early 1960s when the
semiconductor industry started to the present. We also use inches to indicate the
size of the wafer, 1 in. = 25.4 mm. The size of silicon wafers has grown from 1 in.
in early 1960 to 12 in. in 2001. 12 in. Si wafer is still used by most companies.
Metal
DRAM
Pitch
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 78]
7.4 Clean Room
67
100
10 nm
14 nm
Intel
22 nm
32 nm
45 nm
100.8
37.5
15.3
7.5
3.3
MTr/mm2
10
1
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
HVM Wafer Start Date
Transistor
Density
(MTr/mm2)
2015 2016
2017 2018
2019
2020
Figure 7.9
Technology development blueprint, MTr is million transistors [4].
Figure 7.10
Silicon wafer size changes with the year Source: Copyright©2015 Tokyo
Electron Limited, All Rights Reserved.
7.4
Clean Room
The transistors on the chip are getting smaller and smaller. Compared with the
transistors, human hair is like a big mountain. The diameter of human hair is
around 100 μm. 1 μm is one millionth (10−6) of a meter. Figure 7.11 shows the
sizes of some natural things. The size classification in the figure is from the
perspective of semiconductor technology. The scale of the macroworld is much
larger than that, and the size above 1 cm also belongs to the macroworld. So, when
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 79]
68
7 The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
Natural things
Dust mite
~200 μm
Human hair
dia ~100 μm
Red blood cell
~2–5 μm
Virus ~50 nm
Protein ~4–10 nm
DNA~2–1/2 nm
0.1 nm
Soft X-ray
0.01 μm = 10 nm
0.1 μm = 100 nm
Ultraviolet
Visible
Infrared
microwave
0.01 mm = 10 μm
1cm = 10
millimeter (mm)
10–2 m
10–3 m
10–4 m
10–5 m
10–6 m
10–7 m
10–8 m
10–9 m
10–10 m
0.1 mm = 100
micrometer (μm)
1 μm = 1000 nm
1 mm = 1 000 000
nanometers (nm)
1 nanometer(nm)
Nanoworld
Microworld
Macroworld
Ant ~5 mm
Figure 7.11
The scale of things-Macroworld to nanoworld.
we make semiconductor microchips, most of the work is done in the clean room.
Please see Figure 7.12, which shows a clean room and an engineer wearing clean
garment. The cleanliness of the air in the clean room follows the standards. One
standard is Federal Standard 209E (FED-STD-209E) which was published by the
Institute of Environmental Sciences and Technology (IEST) on September 11,
1992. FED-STD-209E had been widely used in the world, and it is still used in
many places. In this standard, the cleanliness of air in the clean room is classified
by “Class-X.” For example, “Class-10” means that in each cubic foot of the air,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 80]
7.4 Clean Room
69
Figure 7.12
A clean room and an engineer wearing clean room garment.
total particles greater than 0.5 μm in size should be less than 10. Terms such
as “Class-10” and “Class-100” are indelibly imprinted on our minds and in our
speech. However, FED-STD-209E was canceled and superseded on November
29, 2001 [6], and replaced by the standards by International Organization for
Standardization (ISO): International Standards for Cleanrooms and associated
controlled environments, ISO 14644-1 Part 1: Classification of air cleanliness.
Table 7.1 is ISO 14644-1 cleanroom standards [7].
Table 7.1
ISO classes of air cleanliness by particle concentration.
Maximum allowable concentrations (particles/m3) for particles ≥the
considered sizes, shown below “×” Particles in low concentrations
make classiﬁcation inappropriate
ISO class number
0.1 𝛍m
0.2 𝛍m
0.3 𝛍m
0.5 𝛍m
l 𝛍m
1
10
×
×
×
×
2
100
24
10
×
×
3
1000
237
102
35
×
4
10 000
2370
1020
352
83
5
100 000
23 700
10 200
3520
832
6
1 000 000
237 000
102 000
35 200
8320
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 81]
70
7 The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
Figure 7.13
Ultra-high purity oxygen used in the process.
Figure 7.14
The resistivity of DI water with the unit of MΩ⋅cm.
In addition to the clean room, the entire process uses high-purity gases, chem-
icals, and other materials. Figure 7.13 is the oxygen used in semiconductor pro-
cessing. The ultra-high purity (UHP) is 99.999%. The water used is deionized (DI)
water. Figure 7.14 shows the resistivity of DI water. For comparison, the resistiv-
ity of pure water is about 18.2 MΩ⋅cm at room temperature [8], the resistivity of
distilled water is around 500 kΩ ⋅cm, and the resistivity of tap water is around
1–5 KΩ ⋅cm [9].
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 82]
7.5 Planar Process
71
7.5
Planar Process
Let us look at the first transistor in Figure 2.6, and the structure diagrams of
the Figures 6.1, 6.4–6.6. They are all three-dimensional structures. This kind
of structure is complicated to manufacture. Let us look at the real chips from
Figures 7.1–7.3, they are all planar two-dimensional structures. It makes the
production of transistors and integrated circuits simple. This manufacturing
technology is a planar process (technology). In the process of making ICs, planar
technology is first used to make individual devices, such as transistors and diodes,
on a silicon wafer. After individual devices are completed, they are connected
with metals (interconnection process). Please see Figure 7.15 for a schematic
diagram of the planar process. This technology was invented by Jean Amédée
Hoerni (September 26, 1924–January 12, 1997), one of the “traitorous eight.” He
applied for a planar process patent while working at Fairchild Semiconductor.
In this figure, Hoerni drew the processes that included wafer, dies, oxidation,
diffusion, openings by photoresist techniques, etching, and Ohmic contacts.
All these processes have established the foundation of modern semiconductor
manufacturing technology. We will discuss them later. Figure 7.16 is an early
integration circuit made by Fairchild using planar technology. Figure 7.17 is a
partial photo of a contemporary computer chip.
In Chapter 4, we mentioned passive components – resistors, capacitors,
and inductors, which are used in an electrical circuit. But in an electronic
circuit, besides the passive ones, there are active components – transistors and
diodes. Among these five kinds of components, transistors and diodes, resistors
and capacitors are easily integrated in the circuit through planar technology.
Figure 7.15
Schematic diagram of the planar
process [10].
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 83]
72
7 The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
Figure 7.16
An IC chip made by Fairchild Semiconductor. Source: Robert
Baruch / Wikimedia Commons / CC BY-SA 4.0.
Figure 7.17
A partial photo of a contemporary computer chip. Source: Reproduced from
“ExtremeTech.”
The development of various technologies is mainly for the manufacture of
transistors and diodes. The resistors can be made by metals, doped polysilicon
and alloy, or a certain doping area of silicon. MOS and reverse-biased diodes
are capacitors, so they are not difficult to fabricate. However, it is not easy to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 84]
7.5 Planar Process
73
Figure 7.18
A spiral inductor for Si RF ICs. Source: [11] Jun Bo et al. 2002 / with
permission of IEEE.
50 μm
Figure 7.19
A transformer with μm size. Source: [12] Huang et al. 2018 / with
permission of Springer Nature.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 85]
74
7 The Development History of Semiconductor Industry
make an inductor because it is a coil structure and three-dimensional. Although
there are many attempts to make an inductor, it is still difficult to integrate with
the mainstream CMOS process. Figure 7.18 is a spiral inductor used in Si RF
ICs. RF is the abbreviation of radio frequency. This inductor is made of metal
microstructures and the manufacturing process is CMOS-compatible. In 2018,
Xiuling Li and Huang Wen et al. used the self-curling characteristic of a stressed
silicon nitride film, a μm tube or even nm one was made. A thin metal film
was deposited on the inner wall of the tube, thus forming a μm or even smaller
inductor coil. By making metal coils of different turns on a silicon nitride tube, a
tiny transformer could be formed, see Figure 7.19. Although the transformer is
currently used in RF circuits, it is hoped that in the near future, this transformer
can be used for chip voltage conversion of small household appliances, so that
these small appliances can be directly connected to the power socket on the wall
instead of requiring a voltage converter (Figure 1.1).
The concept of RF was introduced above, which is a part of the electromagnetic
spectrum. The frequency range (spectrum) of electromagnetic waves is very large.
1022
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
1014
1013
1012
1011
1010
109
108
107
106
105
104
103
Frequency (Hz)
Longwave radio
Shortwave radio
AM radio
TV/FM radio
Radio spectrum
Optical spectrum
Microwave
Infrared
Visible light
Ultraviolet
X-ray
Gamma-ray
Cosmic-ray
Figure 7.20
Electromagnetic
spectrum.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 86]
References
75
We use different names to indicate the different ranges. Please see the electro-
magnetic spectrum in Figure 7.20. The frequency range from TV to amplitude
modulation (AM) at the bottom of the figure is classified as a RF range. The radio
we use is divided into three frequency ranges: medium wave (MW), that is AM
broadcast. AM is followed by short wave (SW) and then TV/FM radio. FM is the
abbreviation of frequency modulation. The wavelength of SW is shorter than that
of AM. FM is shorter than SW. In the spectrum, electromagnetic waves in the
RF and microwave ranges are widely used in radio communication and detection
(radar) technology. The concept of electromagnetic spectrum is very important.
We will continue to use it in Chapters 13–15.
References
1 Williams, J.B. (2017). The Electronics Revolution Inventing the Future, 104.
Springer Praxis Books.
2 Microsoft Visitor Center Information for Students. Key Events in Microsoft
History.
3 Sze, S.M. (1985). Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2e, 850. Wiley.
4 Mistry, K. (2017). 10 nm Technology Leadership, Technology and Manufacturing
Day. Intel.
5 Johnson, D. (2021). Big blue gets small > IBM’s 2-nanometer chip is a world’s
first. IEEE Spectrum, (August 2021), p. 7.
6 FED-STD-209 (2001). Notice of Cancellation FED-STD-209 Notice 1.
The Institute of Environmental Sciences and Technology (IEST).
7 ISO 14644-1 (2015). International Standard, 2e. International Organization for
Standardization (ISO).
8 Light, T.S., Licht, S., Bevilacqua, A.C., and Morash, K.R. (2005). The funda-
mental conductivity and resistivity of water. Electrochemical and Solid-State
Letters 8 (1): E16–E19.
9 Wiater, J. (2012). Electric shock hazard limitation in water during lightning
strike. Electrical Review 52–53.
10 Hoerni, J.A. (1959). Method of manufacturing semiconductor devices,
US Patent 3 025,589, filed May 1, 1959.
11 Jun-Bo Yoon, Yun-Seok Choi, Byeong-Il Kim, Yun Seong Eo, Euisik Yoon,
“CMOS-compatible surface-micromachined suspended-spiral inductors for
multi-GHz silicon RF ICs”, IEEE Electron Device Letters, Vol. 23, No. 10
October 2002, P. 591–593
12 Huang, W., Zhou, J., Froeter, P.J. et al. (2018). Three-dimensional
radio-frequency transformers based on a self-rolled-up membrane platform.
Nature Electronics 1: 305–313.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 87]
77
8
Semiconductor Photonic Devices
In the previous chapters, we discussed semiconductor microchips that deal with
electrical signals. The characteristic of these microchips is that the input is an elec-
trical signal, and the output is also an electrical signal. The protagonist of photonic
devices is photons. Their main feature is that the input is electrical signals (energy)
and the output is optical signals (radiation). Or on the contrary, the input is optical
signals, and the output is electrical signals. Photonic devices can be divided into
three categories: (i) convert electrical energy into optical radiation, (ii) detect opti-
cal signals through electronic technology, and (iii) convert optical radiation into
electrical energy [1]. To understand this kind of device, we need to understand the
basic characteristics of light and the principles of luminescence. In this chapter, we
introduce these basic characteristics and principles, the difference between spon-
taneous emission and stimulated emission, and related devices.
8.1
Light-Emitting Devices and Light-Emitting
Principles
Photonic devices, sometimes they are called optoelectronic devices. In this type of
devices, photons play a key role. It can be seen from Figure 7.20 that although light
is also a part of electromagnetic waves, its frequency is much higher than those of
RF and microwave used for radio communication and radar. Because photons have
short wavelengths and high energy, they will produce some special phenomena in
semiconductors.
The use of light by humans can be traced back to ancient times. Torches,
candles, and oil lamps have accompanied humans for thousands of years as
lighting tools. But the true generation of optoelectronic technology is the inven-
tion of electric light. Thomas Alva Edison (February 11, 1847–October 18, 1931)
invented the incandescent lamp (electric light bulb) in 1879, which opened the
era of converting electrical energy into light radiation. Figure 8.1 shows picture of
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 88]
78
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
Figure 8.1
Incandescent lamps.
some of our commonly used incandescent lamps. In 1960, Theodore H. Maiman
(July 11, 1927–May 5, 2007) and Gordon Gould (July 17, 1920–September 16,
2005) invented the world’s first laser – ruby laser, please see Figure 8.2. Although
both incandescent lamp and laser convert electrical energy into optical radiation,
their light-emitting mechanisms are different. Incandescent lamp is spontaneous
radiation and laser is stimulated radiation. From the perspective of energy level
or energy band, luminescence is an electron jumping from the high-energy level
of the excited state to the low-energy level, emitting a photon with energy equal to
the difference between the two energy levels, see Figure 2.2. An electron is excited
to transit from a low-energy level to a high-energy level, which can be done
by the thermal shock of the crystal lattice, or by absorbing the energy of a photon.
When an electron jumps to a high-energy level, if it jumps back to a low-energy
level spontaneously and emits a photon, this way of emitting light is called
spontaneous emission. When an electron is triggered by a photon with the energy
that is the same as the energy level difference and jumps back to a low-energy
level, two photons will be emitted at this time. This way of emitting light is
called stimulated emission, and the light emitted is laser light. From the point
of view of the laser emission process, the laser is a photon amplifier. In fact, the
word “laser” is the abbreviation of “light amplification generated by stimulated
radiation.” The photons emitted by the laser have the same or similar physical
properties. Such kind of light is called good coherence. Correspondingly, the
coherence of light emitted by spontaneous emission lamps is not good. Figure 8.3
is a schematic diagram showing the difference between spontaneous emission
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 89]
8.1 Light-Emitting Devices and Light-Emitting Principles
79
Figure 8.2
Ruby laser. Source: National Museum of American History / Heise Media.
E
(a)
(b)
(c)
E2
E1
E2
E1
E2
E1
E2
E1
E2
E1
E2
E1
Before
After
hv12
hv12
hv12
hv12
Figure 8.3
In the three transition processes of electrons between energy levels E1 and
E2. The black dot represents an electron. The one marked “Before” on the left is the initial
state, and the one marked “After” on the right is the transition state: (a) Absorb a photon;
(b) spontaneous emission; and (c) stimulated emission. Source: [1] Sze / John Wiley &
Sons.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 90]
80
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
and stimulated emission. The theory of stimulated emission was proposed by
Einstein in 1917.
As we mentioned earlier, the original intention of the invention of transistor was
to replace the vacuum (glass) tube with a solid-state device. After the semiconduc-
tor transistor was invented, people naturally asked: Can we use semiconductors to
make light-emitting devices? Can this device be used to replace an incandescent
lamp and make a smaller laser? The answer is yes. Later, many types of semicon-
ductor photonic devices were invented. At the beginning of this section, we divided
such devices into three categories. The first type is electro-to-light; such devices
include light-emitting diode (LED), diode, and transistor lasers. The second type
is detection of optical signals; such devices have photodetectors. The third type
is optical-to-electricity; such devices include photovoltaic devices and solar cells.
LEDs are basic devices used to replace incandescent lamps, to make display pan-
els and LED TVs. Please see Figure 8.4. Diode lasers are basic devices used in fiber
optic communication, laser printers, CD (Compact Disc), DVD (Digital Versatile
Disc), and laser pointers, please see Figure 8.5. Optical detectors are basic devices
used in CD players, digital cameras, and optical fiber communication. Please see
Figure 8.6. Photovoltaic devices and solar cells are the basic devices used to make
solar panels, please see Figure 8.7.
Figure 8.4
LED lamps.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 91]
8.1 Light-Emitting Devices and Light-Emitting Principles
81
Figure 8.5
Optical ﬁbers.
Figure 8.6
Digital cameras.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 92]
82
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
Figure 8.7
A solar panel.
8.2
Light-Emitting Diode (LED)
Please refer to Figures 5.2 and 5.3. There are two types of energy band structures
for semiconductors, one is direct band gap, and the other is indirect band gap.
An electron excited to the conduction band is unstable. It jumps back to the
valence band, combines with a hole, and emits a photon at the same time. This
process is called electron–hole recombination. Figure 8.8 is a schematic diagram
of the electron–hole recombination and photon radiation process in direct band
gap and indirect band gap semiconductors. In the figure, E is energy, k is wave
Photon
(a)
(b)
E
Phonon
Ec
EV
E
Ec
EV
k
k
Photon
Figure 8.8
Schematic diagram of electron–hole combination and photon radiation in
direct band gap (a) and indirect band gap (b). (a) An electron jumps directly from the
conduction band to the valence band, combines with a hole, and a photon is emitted,
(b) an electron collides with the crystal lattice, jumps indirectly from the conduction band
to the valence band, combines with a hole, and a photon is emitted. Source: [2] Kevin /
Cambridge University Press.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 93]
8.2 Light-Emitting Diode (LED)
83
number. The space formed by k is called k-space, which is a space unit commonly
used in solid-state physics:
k = 2π
λ
(8.1)
To further understand the recombination and radiation processes in the figure, it
is necessary to introduce the concept of momentum. Momentum is expressed by P.
In Newtonian mechanics, P is the product of mass m and velocity v:
P = m ⋅v
(8.2)
In a closed system, there is no exchange of matter and force between the system
and the outside world, and its total momentum is a constant, which is the law of
conservation of momentum. Figure 8.9 is a schematic diagram of the conservation
of momentum of two spheres. In the figure, the velocity is represented by u after
collision. If a ball hits a wall, within the range of 0–90∘of impact angle (θ), there
will be three situations, as shown in Figure 8.10. Scenario a is when the ball
hits the wall at a vertical 90∘angle, the momentum generated at this time is
the largest. Scenario b is when the ball hits the wall at a certain angle θ, the
momentum generated at this time becomes smaller. The smaller the θ, the smaller
the momentum. In case c, the impact angle is zero, the momentum in this case
Figure 8.9
The law of conservation
of momentum.
V1
m1
V2
m2
m1 m2
Collision
m1
m2
u1
u2
m1v1 + m2v2 = m1u1 + m2u2
Figure 8.10
Three situations when a ball hits a wall.
Wall
a
b
c
θ
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 94]
84
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
is also zero. Generally speaking, the larger the momentum, the larger the impact.
The smaller the momentum, the smaller the impact. The concept of momentum
is very important, and we will use it later in Sections 15.6.2 and 16.4.
In quantum mechanics, microscopic particles also have momentum. French
physicist Louis Victor Pierre Raymond de Broglie (August 15, 1892–March 19,
1987) pointed out that all matter has a wave-particle duality. In the microscopic
world, the momentum of a particle is expressed by the de Broglie relation:
p = h
𝜆
(8.3)
The wavelength of 𝜆is called de Broglie wavelength of the particle. By using
relation (8.1), de Broglie relation can be rewritten as follows:
p = ℏk
(8.4)
ℏis called reduced Planck constant. Its expression is as follows, and h is the Planck
constant:
ℏ= h
2π
(8.5)
In quantum mechanics, the momentum of microscopic particles is also con-
served. Let us look at Figure 8.8 again. Direct band gap semiconductors, such
as GaAs, InP, etc., whose energy band structure is a direct band gap. In this
structure, the lowest point of the conduction band and the highest point of the
valence band are the same, no change on the k-axis. The electrons excited to the
conduction band have the trend toward the lowest energy point of the conduction
band, which is shown in Figure 5.2. At this time, the electrons will jump directly
from the conduction band back to the valence band, recombine with the holes,
and emit photons. The luminous efficiency is high of this energy band structure,
as shown in Figure 8.8a. Indirect band gap semiconductors, such as silicon and
germanium, their energy band structure is a indirect band gap. In this structure,
the lowest point of the conduction band and the highest point of the valence band
are not same on the k-axis. An electron in the conduction band first collide with
the crystal lattice. Momentum is conserved, and some energy is lost. Then it enters
the same place as the highest point of the valence band on the k-axis, jumps back
to the valence band, recombines with a hole, and emits a photon. Because part
of the energy is lost by collision with the crystal lattice, the luminous efficiency of
the indirect band gap semiconductor is low, as shown in Figure 8.8b. In the figure,
“Phonon” is used to describe the collision of an electron with the crystal lattice.
As discussed in Chapter 5, an important feature of commonly used compound
semiconductors is that most of their energy bands are direct bandgap structures.
For this reason, this kind of semiconductor is widely used in the manufacture of
the first type of photonic deviceslight emitting devices, such as LEDs and lasers.
These two kinds of devices are now widely used in the society because of their
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 95]
8.2 Light-Emitting Diode (LED)
85
Figure 8.11
Nick Holonyak and the invention of LED.
low cost, high efficiency, wide frequency spectrum, relatively simple drive circuit,
high reliability, and long working life. LED was invented in the year 1962. At that
year, Nick Holonyak and S.F. Bevacqua developed an LED that emitted visible red
light [3]. Please see Figure 8.11.
The light emission of LED is a spontaneous emission. Its basic structure is
a diode. When a forward voltage is applied, electrons diffuse into the P region
and holes into the N region. The electrons that reach P region combine with
the holes and emit photons. The holes that reach N region combine with the
electrons and emit photons. This type of device converts electrical energy into
light radiation. Comparing with diode, there are some special considerations in
the design of LED. Its light emission mode is divided into surface emission and
edge emission, please see Figure 8.12. “n+, p+” are N-type and P-type heavily
doped (see Chapter 6). The LED chip is packaged in a dome-shaped plastic
package, please see Figure 8.13.
To further understand LED, we need to introduce the three primary colors
in television. They are red, green, and blue. Mixing these three colors can get
white color, as shown in Figure 8.14. That means if we want to use LEDs to
replace incandescent lamps, or use LEDs to make televisions, we need red, green,
and blue LEDs. Let us analyze the required semiconductor band gap from the
wavelength of light. The wavelength of red light is 620–750 nm, green light is
495–570 nm, and blue light is 450–495 nm. According to formula (2.1), and the
following relationship between wave velocity V, frequency f, and wavelength 𝜆:
V = 𝜆⋅f
(8.6)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 96]
86
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
n+
n+
n
p
p+
hv
hv
n+
n
p
p+
Contact
Contact
Surface-emitter LED
Edge-emitter LED
Figure 8.12
The basic structure of LED. Source: [2] Kevin / Cambridge University Press.
(a)
(b)
Emitted
light
Wire
LED diode
chip
Transparent
plastic case
Terminal pins
Figure 8.13
The products (a) and structure (b) of LED.
As mentioned in Chapter 2, the frequency in quantum mechanics is denoted
by 𝜈, and the speed of light is denoted by C. C is the first letter of “constant”
because light moves at a fixed (constant) speed C = 3 × 108 m/s to propagate in
vacuum. Combined with Planck’s constant h = 4.134 × 10−15 eV/s, we can have:
for red light, E = 2.00–1.65 eV; for green light, E = 2.51–2.17 eV; and for blue light,
E = 2.76–2.51 eV.
Pure III–V materials are not easy to make LEDs. Usually, the ternary materials
are grown on an III–V substrate used as the light-emitting region. For red
light and green light, the materials used to make LEDs are GaAs and GaP and
their corresponding ternary materials GaAs1−xPx. GaAs is a direct band gap,
Eg = 1.42 eV; GaP is an indirect band gap, Eg = 2.26 eV. As x changes from 0 to 1,
the Eg of GaAs1−xPx changes from 1.42 to 2.26 eV. When x = 0.45, the energy
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 97]
8.2 Light-Emitting Diode (LED)
87
Figure 8.14
The three
primary colors. Source:
Pko / Wikimedia
Commons / Public
domain.
band changes from a direct band gap to an indirect band gap [1]. In 1962, Nick
Holonyak used GaAs1−xPx to create a red LED. In 1967, George Craford, a student
of Holonyak, used GaAsP grown on GaAs substrates to make orange, yellow, and
green LEDs [4]. To improve the luminous efficiency of the GaP indirect band
gap, some special impurities should be added to this material to improve the
recombination rate of electrons and holes.
After the invention of red and green LEDs, blue LED research progressed slowly.
GaAs1−xPx could not meet the needs of blue light because its maximum band gap
is less than the energy corresponding to the blue wavelength. The ternary materi-
als InGaN (InxGa1−xN) based on gallium nitride (GaN) substrate are used to make
the light-emitting region of blue LEDs, which are made of a mixture of GaN and
InN. GaN and InN are direct band gaps. The band gap of InGaN can vary from
3.4 eV for GaN to 0.69 eV for InN, which spans the energy of blue light and can
meet the requirements of manufacturing blue LEDs. However, the preparation
of GaN material encountered many difficulties. Until the end of 1980 and the
beginning of 1990, three Japanese scientists, Shuji Nakamura, Hiroshi Amano, and
Isamu Akasaki, broke through the difficulties in the preparation of GaN substrate
and invented the GaN-based blue LED [5].
The invention of blue LED makes blue light, the last light source of the primary
colors to come out. It is possible to replace the incandescent lamp with solid-state
light source LED and develop a new type of TV-LED TV. The LED TV uses the
three-color ratio to adjust the color, while the LED bulb uses the light emitted by
blue LED to excite the fluorescent material in the bulb to emit light and convert
blue light of the LED into white light. The conversion efficiency of contemporary
white LED bulbs from electrical energy to light radiation can exceed 50%, while
the conversion rate of ordinary incandescent lamps is only 4%. The service life of
LED bulbs can reach 100 000 hours. Correspondingly, the life of fluorescent lamps
is 10 000 hours, while that of incandescent lamps is 1000 hours [6].
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 98]
88
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
8.3
Semiconductor Diode Laser
We discussed LED in the previous section. In this section, we will discuss the diode
laser(or laser diode). As mentioned earlier, the laser is a photon amplifier. It has
good coherence. To understand the coherence, it is necessary to make a brief intro-
duction to the coherence of light.
In physics, the good coherence for two beams of waves means that their
frequency and waveform are identical, and their phase difference is constant.
Figure 8.15 is a schematic diagram of the phase difference between two waves.
Figure 8.16 is a schematic diagram of coherent light and incoherent light. In
the figure, monochromatic means that light waves have same frequency. Laser is
monochromatic light.
As can be seen from Figure 8.3, to achieve laser emission, the population of elec-
trons in a higher-energy (excited) state should exceed that in a lower-energy state,
which is the population inversion. In addition, to achieve the coherence of the
emitted light, the device must have a resonant cavity. To ensure laser to occur,
the gain exceeds the total losses. This condition can turn on the current density
injected into the diode junction. There is a minimum current density necessary for
a semiconductor device to lase, which is threshold current density. These are three
conditions – population inversion, threshold current density, and resonance – that
need to be met to achieve semiconductor laser emission [2]. Resonance refers to
the phenomenon that the amplitude increases sharply when the frequency of the
external force is the same or close to the natural frequency of the system. Now let
us explain the three conditions one by one:
Amplitude
Phase
difference
Figure 8.15
The phase difference between two waves.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 99]
8.3 Semiconductor Diode Laser
89
Figure 8.16
Schematic
diagram of coherent light and
incoherent light.
Incoherent, monochromatic waves
Incoherent, multi-frequency waves
Coherent waves
8.3.1
Resonant Cavity
The resonant cavity in the laser can produce laser oscillation. The most used
structure is the Fabry–Perot resonator, also known as the Fabry–Perot inter-
ferometer. It was developed by French physicists Charles Fabry (June 11,
1867–December 11, 1945) and Alfred Perot (November 3, 1863–November 28,
1925) in 1899. The resonator is usually composed of two parallel transparent
plates plus reflective surfaces, or two parallel mirrors. Light forms a standing
wave through multiple reflections on two surfaces. The standing wave is a wave
confined to two parallel reflecting surfaces. It oscillates with time but does
not propagate in space. Correspondingly, the waves propagating in space are
traveling waves. Figure 8.17 is a schematic diagram of the Fabry–Perot resonator
structure. To further understand how it works, we should know the interference
Figure 8.17
The structure of
Fabry–Perot resonator. Source:
Reprinted with permission of http://
starkeffects.com.
Input light
Input light
Mirror surface
face each other
Mirror surface
face each other
At each angle, light
interferes, either
constructively or
destructively
At each angle, light
interferes, either
constructively or
destructively
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 100]
90
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
of waves. A wave is the propagation of vibration. When two waves meet on the
way of propagation, in the area where they meet, the amplitude of the wave
is strengthened in some places, and the amplitude of the wave is weakened in
some places. This is the phenomenon of interference of waves. Only when two
waves with the same amplitude and frequency meet, they can produce stable
interference, which are coherent waves. When the crest–crest and trough–trough
of the two waves meet, the two superimposed waves will have larger crests and
troughs. When the crest-trough and trough–crest of two waves meet, the crests
and troughs of the two superimposed waves disappear. Figure 8.18 shows these
two situations. The actual interference is much more complicated than these two
simple situations, and there are also coherence phenomena of multiple waves.
The phenomenon of wave interference can often be encountered in daily life.
Figure 8.19 was taken by a small lake. At that time, there were a few Canadian
Interference
Destructive
Constructive
Figure 8.18
Schematic diagram of the interference of two waves.
Figure 8.19
The interference of water waves.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 101]
8.3 Semiconductor Diode Laser
91
geese in the lake. The water waves caused by them had interference. It can be
seen clearly from the figure that the waves are strengthened in some areas and
are weakened in some areas. The Fabry–Perot resonator in Figure 8.17 is the
interference of coherent waves, but the second wave is the reflected wave. In other
words, the resonator is the interference of the incident wave and the reflected
wave. So, the Fabry–Perot resonator is also called the Fabry–Perot interferometer.
Here, we have talked about the reflection of light beams. In addition to reflec-
tion, another important characteristic of light is refraction. For reflection, what we
frequently encounter is mirror reflection. At the interface of different propagation
media, light beams can be reflected, and refracted as well. Let us discuss further.
8.3.2
Reﬂection and Refraction of Light
When light beams impinge on a surface, if the surface is an ideal mirror surface,
the light can be completely reflected from the surface; this phenomenon is called
total reflection of light. If the surface is smooth, but not an ideal reflected mir-
ror surface, such as a stationary water surface, some light beams are reflected by
the surface, while some light beams pass through the surface and enter the water.
Please see Figure 8.20. The light enters the water from the air. In physics, it is called
the light from the first transparent optical medium (air) to the second transparent
optical medium (water). Of course, the light can continue to pass through the third
transparent optical medium… Here, we use two transparent optical media of air
and water as examples to discuss the reflection and refraction of light.
When a beam of light hits the surface of water at an angle 𝜃1 with the normal to
the surface, 𝜃1 is called the incident angle. Part of the light is reflected by the water
surface and reflects to the other side of the normal to the surface with same angle,
Figure 8.20
The reﬂection and
refraction of light.
Θ1
Θ1
Θ2
Incident light
Reflected light
Refracted light
Normal to surface
n1
n2
Air
Water
V1
V1
V2
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 102]
92
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
which is the law of light reflection. Part of the light enters the water, the angle in
the water is 𝜃2, 𝜃1 ≠𝜃2, 𝜃2 is called the refraction angle, which is the refraction of
light. The speed of light in different media is different. If V1 represents the speed
in air and V2 represents the speed in water, then the propagation of light between
two different media satisfies the following formula:
sin 𝜃2
sin 𝜃1
= V2
V1
= n1
n2
(8.7)
The n1 and n2 in the formula are the refractive indices of light in air and water,
respectively. In general, the refractive index (index) is expressed by n. The com-
monly used indices are: 1 for vacuum, around 1.33 for water, and around 1.45 for
quartz [7]. The index of air is almost 1. This formula is called Snell’s law, in mem-
ory of Dutch astronomer Willebrord Snellius (June 13, 1580–October 30, 1626).
The sin 𝜃1 and sin 𝜃2 in the formula are sine functions of the incident angle and
refraction angle, respectively.
The index of water is bigger than that of air. So, water is called denser medium,
and air is called rarer medium. According to formula (8.6), 𝜃1 > 𝜃2. We can imagine
that when light is shot from water to air (denser medium to rarer medium), if the
angle of incidence 𝜃changes from small to large, the light refracted to the air tilts
toward the water surface until 𝜃exceeds a certain value, the beam of light will be
completely refracted into the water. In this way, although the water surface is not
an ideal mirror surface, total reflection can still occur. It is called total internal
reflection. The angle of incidence at which refracted light produces total internal
reflection is called the critical angle. Please see Figure 8.21.
In semiconductors, two methods are commonly used to make resonant cavities:
(i) Mirror resonance: The method of making mirrors is to cleave along the
direction perpendicular to the p–n junction. Cleavage means that the crystal
splits along a certain crystal direction under the action of external force. We
use the cleavage surface as a mirror surface; or polish the surface perpendicular
to the direction of p–n junction to make a mirror surface. (ii) Heterojunction
total internal reflection resonance: The method is to use a heterojunction to
Refracted light
Incident light
n2 Water
n1
Air
Change
Change
Θ
Figure 8.21
The critical angle of refracted
light.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 103]
8.3 Semiconductor Diode Laser
93
make a resonant cavity with total internal reflection in the interface between
two materials. These two materials have different refractive indices which are
used as denser medium and rarer medium to confine the light. In semiconductor
lasers, these two resonant cavities are used in combination. Now let us discuss the
heterojunction.
8.3.3
Heterojunction Materials
All devices we discussed above are made of homojunction materials, that is, the
devices use one material, such as silicon, gallium arsenide, etc. In fact, we also
use another technology to make devices, which is heterojunction technology. This
technology is widely used in III–V semiconductors. Heterojunction technology is
used to make two materials with different band gap widths together to form a p–n
junction, that is different from homojunction material. Please see Figure 8.22.
Heterojunction technology was first proposed by Herbert Kroemer. One of its
important advantages is the faster operation speed of the devices. Nowadays,
terahertz (THz, 1012 Hz) is frequently mentioned. The device for THz uses hetero-
junction technology. Another advantage is that the refractive indices of the two
materials are different, so that a Fabry–Perot resonant cavity can be made. Please
see Figure 8.23. The homojunction cannot make a resonant cavity due to the same
refractive index. The Fabry–Perot cavity in the figure has two heterojunctions,
so this structure is called a double-heterojunction (DH) laser. In this structure,
the light is restricted to the active region (denser medium). This structure is also
called a waveguide. The optical fiber (Figure 8.5) uses a waveguide structure.
Please see Figure 8.24. The core of the optical fiber is made of glass or plastic.
Figure 8.25 is a schematic diagram of a p–n double heterojunction laser, in which
the refractive index of AlGaAs is lower than that of GaAs.
We have discussed the simple structure of a semiconductor laser. Actual lasers
are much more complex than this. There are many structures, such as quantum
well lasers, quantum dot lasers, and vertical cavity surface emitting lasers. We will
not discuss them here.
Ec1
EF1
Eg1
Eg2
Ec2
EF2
Ec2
Eg2
Eg1
Ec1
Ev1
Ec2
Ev2
EF
Ev1
Figure 8.22
An example of p–n heterogeneous junction.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 104]
94
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
Inactive region
Inactive region
Active region
nactive
ninactive
ninactive
Light
nactive > ninactive
Figure 8.23
Schematic diagram of the basic structure of the Fabry–Perot cavity made
by heterojunction.
(a)
(b)
Jacket
Coating
Core
n1
n1 > n2
n2
Cladding
Figure 8.24
The structure of optical ﬁber (a) and a ﬁber optic cable (b).
8.3.4
Population Inversion and Threshold Current Density
We have just introduced the Fabry–Perot cavity, now let us talk about population
inversion. For diode lasers, the essence of laser generation is the charge carriers
flowing through the forward p–n junction and the combination of electrons and
holes. In thermal equilibrium, the number of the carriers (mostly electrons) in
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 105]
8.3 Semiconductor Diode Laser
95
Figure 8.25
Schematic diagram of
DH laser [2].
GaAs
hv
I
p-Type GaAs
p-Type AlGaAs
n-Type GaAs
n-Type AlGaAs
Metal contact
Active
region
Metal contact
the excited state is always less than the number of the carriers in the ground state.
The population inversion means that the number of carriers in the excited state is
more than the number of carriers in the ground state, please refer to Figure 8.3.
In this case, when the population is reversed, there are more electrons in the
excited state E2 than in the ground state E1. At this time, photons with energy
h𝜈12 are incident into the p–n junction, which will trigger these electrons to
jump back to the ground state and recombine with holes, thereby generate more
photons with energy h𝜈12. The number of photons of stimulated emission is more
than that of absorbed photons. This phenomenon is quantum amplification [1].
In diode lasers, this quantum amplification is performed in a Fabry–Perot cavity.
The lifetime of an electron in the excited state is very short, that is, the electron
can only stay in the excited state for a short time. To ensure population inversion
and quantum amplification, the current injected in the forward direction must be
large enough (see Figures 5.8 and 8.22), and the current must exceed a threshold
so that the photon gain is greater than the photon loss. We often use the thresh-
old current density Jth to express this threshold, where “th” means “threshold”.
Usually, the current density is expressed by J, which refers to the current passing
through a unit area. Please see Figure 1.3. The expression is shown in formula
(8.8). For the use of lasers, the smaller the Jth, the better the laser.
J = I
A
(8.8)
Now with the technologies of mirror reflection, heterojunction resonance, popu-
lation inversion, and threshold current density, a diode laser is made, as shown in
Figure 8.26. In this figure, the dotted line is the heterojunction interface, which is
parallel to the p–n junction. Vertical to these interfaces, one side is made of a fully
reflecting surface and the other is made of a partially reflecting surface, and the
laser is emitted from the partially reflecting surface (laser output). Compared to
Figures 8.17 and 8.26 has a similar structure.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 106]
96
8 Semiconductor Photonic Devices
Partially reflecting
surface
Laser output
N-type
P-type
Junction
Fully reflecting
surface
Battery
+
–
Free electron
Hole
Figure 8.26
A diode laser.
Source: Reprinted with
permission of http://physics-and-
radio-electronics.com.
References
1 Sze, S.M. (1985). Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2e. Wiley, p. 681, p. 707,
p. 690, p. 720.
2 Kevin F.B. (1999). The Physics of Semiconductors with Applications to
Optoelectronic Devices. Cambridge University Press, p. 492–493, p. 676,
p. 680–686, p. 689.
3 Holonyak, N. and Bevacqua, S.F. (1962). Coherent (visible) light emission from
ga (As1−xPx) junctions. Applied Physics Letters 1: 82.
4 Bush, S. (2010). 50 year history of the LED. Electronics Weekly. (22 September).
5 Nakamura, S., Mukai, T., and Senoh, M. (1994). Candela-class high-brightness
InGaN/AlGaN double-heterostructure blue-light emitting diodes. Applied Physics
Letters 64 (13): 1687–1689.
6 Diep, F. (2014). Why a blue LED is worth a Noble Prize. Popular Science
(7 October).
7 饭田修一, 大野和郎, 神前熙等. (1979). 物理学常用数表, [日], 科学出版社,
115–116 页。
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 107]
97
9
Semiconductor Light Detection and Photocell
As mentioned at the beginning of Chapter 8, semiconductor photonic devices are
divided into three categories: (i) convert electrical energy into optical radiation;
(ii) detect optical signals through electronic technology; (iii) convert optical radi-
ation into electrical energy. The semiconductor LEDs and lasers in Chapter 8 are
devices that convert electrical energy into light radiation. This chapter introduces
semiconductor photodetectors and photovoltaic cells (solar cells). What these two
types of devices have in common is the conversion of optical signals (power) into
electrical signals (power). The main application of light detecting devices is digital
cameras and fiber optic communications.
9.1
Digital Camera and CCD
Digital cameras do not use film, they use photon sensors and detectors to convert
light into electrical charges. In this chapter, we use “detector” to describe this type
of device. There are two main technologies that are used to make detector (image
sensor) for a digital camera, i.e. charge-coupled device (CCD) and CMOS. Here,
we use CCD as an example to discuss the technology of image sensor. With the
MOS structure, the granularity and spatial resolution of the camera depend on
the density of independent detector units. Each detector unit is called a pixel. The
pixel density is a key factor in determining the spatial resolution [1]. The granular-
ity we mentioned here is a concept taken from the past film camera. The coarser
the granularity of the film, the worse the effect will be after magnification. The
higher the spatial resolution, the smaller the details that can be seen. With finer
granularity and higher resolution, that is, more pixels, the quality of the photo is
higher, but the memory and disk space occupied will be larger.
A CCD is basically a MOS diode array very close in space. When using it, the
information is expressed in terms of the amount of charge (called a charge packet),
which is different from the other devices, because these devices use the magnitude
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 108]
98
9 Semiconductor Light Detection and Photocell
of current and voltage to express information. A deeply depleted MOS diode is the
basic unit of a CCD. There are two types of CCDs – surface channel (SCCD) and
buried channel (BCCD) [2]. We are going to use SCCD to explain the structure
and operation of a CCD in this section. In the SCCD, charges are concentrated
and transferred at the semiconductor surface.
Now let us take p-type silicon as an example to see how CCD works. As we
have said before, if the device is illuminated by light and the energy of the pho-
ton is equal to or bigger than the forbidden band width of the semiconductor,
the electrons will transfer from the ground state to the excited state, thus forming
electron–hole pairs. Please see Figure 9.1a, which is a schematic diagram of a MOS
diode. When a higher-positive voltage is applied to the gate metal, a deep depletion
region will be generated at the interface of SiO2 and Si, as shown in Figure 9.1b.
At this time, when photons irradiate the device, electron–hole pairs will be gen-
erated. The electrons will be attracted to the interface between SiO2 and Si by the
applied positive voltage, and the holes will be repelled away from the interface, as
shown in Figure 9.1c. The Qsig in the figure is signal charge. The stronger the light
p-Si
SiO2
Metal
VG
Metal
SiO2
SiO2
EF
EF
Ei
Ev
Ec
EF
Ei
Ev
Ec
Metal
EF
(a)
(b)
(c)
Qsig
Depletion
Depletion
hν
Figure 9.1
p-Type silicon CCD structure and
energy band diagram (a) a MOS diode, (b) a
higher positive voltage is applied to the gate
to create a deep depletion region, (c) after
illumination, electrons accumulate at the
Si–SiO2 interface. Source: [2] Sze / John
Wiley & Sons.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 109]
9.1 Digital Camera and CCD
99
is, the more the charges accumulated, the stronger the buildup of negative voltage
is, and the thinner the depletion region will be. Please compare Figure 9.1b,c.
As we mentioned earlier, a depletion layer is a capacitor, so we can use a MOS
capacitor array to represent a MOS diode array. When the light of an image illumi-
nates the capacitor array through the lens, each capacitor on the array will generate
a charge (in our case, electrons) accumulation. The accumulation of charge is
proportional to the intensity of the light irradiated here. The charge corresponds
to a part of the object being illuminated. Once the capacitor array is illuminated
by the image light, a control circuit will transfer the charge stored in a capacitor
to its adjacent capacitor. The last capacitor in the array will put the charge into a
charge amplifier, which converts the charge into a voltage. Repeating this process,
the control circuit will convert the entire content of the image stored in the
semiconductor capacitor array into a sequence voltage. In digital devices, these
voltages are sorted, digitized, and stored in memory. Figure 9.2 is a cross-sectional
view of a typical three-phase CCD. The basic device structure is to grow a dielec-
tric layer of SiO2 on a semiconductor substrate. On this continuous medium,
MOS diodes (capacitors) are arranged very close together. Figure 9.2a shows the
middle gate, which is connected to a higher-gate voltage and is used as charges
Figure 9.2
Cross-sectional view of a
three-phase charge coupled device.
(a) The high voltage at 𝜙2 is used for
charges storage. (b) Apply higher-pulse
voltage to 𝜙3 terminal for charges
transfer. Source: [2] Sze / John Wiley &
Sons.
Silicon dioxide
Silicon dioxide
p-type
𝜙1 = 5 V
𝜙3 = 5 V
𝜙2 = 10 V
𝜙1 = 5 V
𝜙3 = 15 V
𝜙2 = 10 V
p-type
(a)
(b)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 110]
100
9 Semiconductor Light Detection and Photocell
Figure 9.3
One CCD chip.
Source: NASA / Wikimedia
Commons / Public domain.
storage unit. When a higher-pulse voltage is applied to the gate on the right, the
charges begin to transfer to this capacitor (Figure 9.2b). CCD was invented by
American scientists Willard Boyle and George E. Smith at Bell Labs in 1969.
Figure 9.3 is a CCD chip.
CCD detector is a very important device. It completes the conversion of photo-
graphic technology from film to digital. A defect of this device is that there is no
internal gain (amplification), which is very important to detect small signals at
high frequencies, such as optical fiber communication systems. There are differ-
ent kinds of devices that can provide internal gain. Below we use photoconductor
to discuss this type of detector.
9.2
Photoconductor
Figure 9.4 is a schematic diagram of a photoconductor structure. The amplifi-
cation principle of this device comes from the electrical neutrality requirement
of space charge. In most III–V compound semiconductor materials, the drift
velocity of electrons is much faster than that of holes. When a photon irradiates
the device to generate an electron–hole pair. Because the electron mobility is
greater than hole mobility. So, under the action of an external electric field, the
electron will pass through and leave the device in a short time and be absorbed by
the external power supply. At the same time, a hole remains inside the device, the
device has a net positive charge. In order to maintain the space charge neutrality
requirement, an electron will be injected into the device from an external circuit,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 111]
9.3 Transistor Laser
101
W
D
L
+V
hν
Ohmic contact
Electron
Hole
Semiconductor
Figure 9.4
Schematic diagram of a photoconductor. Source: [1] Brennan / Cambridge
University Press.
and this new electron will also pass through the device. If the second electron
passes through the device before recombining with the hole, the device still
has a net positive charge. Once again, an electron is injected into the device to
maintain the space charge neutrality requirement. This process will continue
until the hole generated by the light recombines with the injected electron. This
procedure shows that there are many electrons passing through the device before
recombining with holes. For example, in a device with a length of 1 μm, the
transit time of an electron is on the order of 10 ps, where ps is picoseconds, and
1 ps = 10−12 seconds. The typical lifetime of a hole (referring to the time from being
excited to recombination with an electron) is 10 ns, where ns is nanoseconds, and
1 ns = 10−9 seconds. As a result, on average, one photon generates one electron,
and 1000 electrons will pass through the device. This leads to a gain of 1000,
which is called photoconductive gain [1]. Usually, the actual gain of the device is
less than 1000.
9.3
Transistor Laser
We have just introduced LEDs, diode lasers, and photodetectors. These devices
are widely used in lighting, television, camera, and fiber optic communications.
In fiber optic systems, we need photonic devices and electronic devices to work
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 112]
102
9 Semiconductor Light Detection and Photocell
Electrical
input
signal
Transmitter
Fiber
flylead
Optical splice
Optical coupler or
beam splitter
Connector
Repeater
Electrical signal
Electronics
Electrical
signal
output
Optical signal
Optical
receiver
Signal
restorer
Optical
amplifier
Photo
detector
Receiver
Optical
transmitter
To other
equipment
Amplifier
Drive
circuit
Light
source
Figure 9.5
Schematic diagram of the basic overall structure of the optical ﬁber
communication system.
together to run the system, which is why this subject is also called optoelectronics.
Figure 9.5 is an overall schematic diagram of an optical fiber communication
system. In this figure, the thin lines represent electrical signals, and the thick
lines represent optical signals. So far, the devices we have introduced, they deal
with electricity–electricity, electricity–light, or light–electricity.
To connect optical devices and electrical devices, optical fibers and waveguides
are needed. These technologies are difficult to be compatible with the existing
mainstream semiconductor processes, and it is difficult to integrate them into a
single chip.
In the early of 2004, Milton Feng and others invented the light-emitting
transistor (LET) [3]. Figure 9.6 shows the material structure, device structure,
and luminescence photos of the LET. Figure 9.6a is the structure diagram of the
material, which also uses heterojunctions, but its structure is carefully designed
and complicated. Figure 9.6b is a typical bipolar transistor structure which
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 113]
9.3 Transistor Laser
103
Figure 9.6
Light-emitting
transistor (a) the heterojunction
structure of the transistor, (b) the
layout of the transistor, (c) the
photo of light-emitting.
h𝜈
h𝜈
h𝜈
h𝜈
h𝜈
n+
InGaAs
n− Collector GaAs
p+ Base graded InGaAs (1.4% In) 
n+ Subcollector GaAs
GaAs Substrate
Base
Emitter
Collector
N
Emitter
InGaP
(a)
(b)
(c)
includes the emitter, collector, and base. Figure 9.6c is a photo of light emission.
In late 2004, Feng, G. Walter, and others produced the world’s first transistor
laser [4], please see Figure 9.7. The LET and the transistor laser help realize
the simultaneous processing of electrical and optical signals on a chip. They
give us the opportunity to realize the complete integration of optoelectronics
on a chip.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 114]
Emitter layer
0.1 μm, n+-GaAs
Upper
cladding
layers
100 μm
200 μm
EPRB
BPRB
CPRB
E
B
C
h𝜈
h𝜈
HBLET laser
Bottom
cladding
layers
Waveguide
active region
Ec
0.1 μm, n-Al0.40Ga0.60As
0.03 μm, n-Al0.70Ga0.30As
0.04 μm, n-Al0.40Ga0.80As
0.4 μm, n+-GaAs
SI-GaAs substrate
0.35 μm, n-Al0.98Ga0.02As
0.06 μm, n-Al0.40Ga0.60As
0.12 μm, n-InGaP
0.065 μm, i-GaAs
0.04 μm, n+-GaAs
i-InGaAs QW
0.094 μm, p+-GaAs +
0.35 μm, n-Al0.98Ga0.02As
Collector layer
Sub-collector
QW-base region
Figure 9.7
Transistor laser. HBLET, heterojunction bipolar light-emitting transistor. Source: Walter et al. 2004 / with permission of AIP
Publishing LLC.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 115]
9.4 Solar Cell
105
9.4
Solar Cell
Now let us discuss the working principle and basic structure of solar cells
(Figure 8.7). A solar cell is a kind of electric device, which uses photovoltaic effect
to directly convert light into electricity. The photovoltaic effect is that under the
irradiation of light, a material can generate voltage and current. Photovoltaics is
achieved by using semiconductor materials, mostly silicon. We now use silicon as
an example to discuss photovoltaic cells (solar cells).
As shown in Figures 5.8 and 5.9, a p–n junction contains a depletion layer. In the
depletion region on both sides of the p–n junction, there are negative ions in the
p-type Si and positive ions in the n-type Si. A built-in electric field is established
in the depletion layer, from the n-region to the p-region. When the p–n junction is
irradiated by sunlight, the part of photons whose energy is greater than the band
gap of Si is absorbed, and electron–hole pairs can be generated. Under the attrac-
tion of the built-in electric field, electrons drift to the n-region and holes drift to the
p-region. The width of the depletion layer becomes narrower, and a voltage is built
up in the p–n junction. Since there is no circuit and load at this time, this voltage
is called the open circuit voltage (OCV), as shown in Figure 9.8a. The VOC in the
figure is the OCV. When the p–n junction is connected to a resistor (load) through
a wire, current will flow through the resistor, as shown in Figure 9.8b. This is a
solar cell. When many solar cells are arranged together, it becomes a solar panel.
The silicon wafers used in the production of devices are mirror polished. In order
to reduce light reflection and increase absorption on the surface, usually antire-
flective coatings are put on the Si surface. We also use dry etching (discuss later) to
modify silicon surface to form a rough structure. This technology is called “Black
Silicon-BSi,” because the surface of silicon treated in this way is black. There
are many structures of BSi. Figure 9.9 shows the structure of silicon nanocones
[5]. One of the reasons why the light absorption can be increased is that on such
qVoc
Eg
h𝜈
Ec
Ev
h𝜈
n
p
Current
p
n
(a)
(b)
R
Figure 9.8
(a) Schematic diagram of p–n junction energy band of solar cell. (b) A simple
solar cell circuit. Source: [2] Sze / John Wiley & Sons.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 116]
106
9 Semiconductor Light Detection and Photocell
Silicon
(a)
(b)
Incident light
Figure 9.9
Nanocone structures of Si surface. (a) Schematic diagram of light refraction
and reﬂection in the surface of Si nanocone. (b) SEM picture of the nanocone structure.
Frame
Glass
Encapsulant
Encapsulant
Backsheet
Junction box
Solar cells
Figure 9.10
The structure of a solar panel. Source: Moulin [6].
a surface, the light irradiating area becomes bigger, and in the meanwhile, the
number of reflections and refractions of light between the interface of air and
silicon increases (left one in the figure). Figure 9.10 is a structural diagram of a
solar panel.
References
1 Brennan, K.F. (1999). The Physics of Semiconductors with Applications to
Optoelectronic Devices. Cambridge University Press pp. 609, 630, 631.
2 Sze, S.M. (1985). Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2e. Wiley pp. 407, 408, 412,
794.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 117]
References
107
3 Feng, M., Holonyak, N. Jr.,, and Hafez, W. (2004). Light-emitting transistor: light
emission from InGaP/GaAs heterojunction bipolar transistors. Applied Physics
Letters 84 (1): 151–152.
4 Walter, G., Holonyak, N., Feng, M., and Chan, R. (2004). Laser operation of a
heterojunction bipolar light-emitting transistor. Applied Physics Letters 84 (20):
4768–4770.
5 Chen, Y. et al. (2011). Ultrahigh throughput silicon nanomanufacturing by
simultaneous reactive ion synthesis and etching. ACS Nano 5 (10): 8002–8012.
6 Moulin. (2018). Important of materials in PV modules: recommended bes
t practices to select PV modules. Energetica India (09 October).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 118]
109
10
Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
Silicon plays a pivotal role in the semiconductor industry. It ranks second in the
earth’s storage capacity after oxygen. Approximately 25% of the earth’s crust is
silicon. The melting point of silicon is very high, reaching 1420 ∘C; in comparison,
the melting point of germanium used to make the first transistor is much lower
than that of silicon, only 937 ∘C. The band gap of silicon is 1.14 eV, and its
allowable operating temperature can reach 150 ∘C; the band gap of germanium
is 0.67 eV, and its allowable operating temperature is lower than 100 ∘C, please
refer Section 5.2. In addition, silicon is the only material that can grow insulating
dielectric by thermal oxidation among all semiconductors. The grown dielectric
film of silicon dioxide (SiO2) offers many wondrous properties: First, it is com-
patible with Si in many respects. That is, it adheres tightly to Si, does not dissolve
in water, and is chemically stable up to the melting point of Si. Second, it is an
excellent dielectric with a high-electric field breakdown strength, and it exhibits
a stable interface with Si. Third, SiO2 passivates the silicon surface, preventing
surface leakage. Finally, it serves as an effective diffusion mask (discuss later) [1].
The role of Si–SiO2 structures in semiconductor manufacturing is so important
that they are like King and Queen in the kingdom of semiconductor.
Because of the abovementioned reasons, although the transistor was invented
with germanium, silicon later replaced germanium and became the protagonist
of the semiconductor industry until today. Here we mainly use silicon and planar
technology as examples to introduce the manufacturing process of semiconductor
microchips. The design, manufacturing, testing, and packaging of integrated cir-
cuits are undoubtedly the most complex in the world today. A CMOS-IC process
flow contains more than 350 processing steps, which takes six to eight weeks to
complete. The process flow refers to a series of chemical and physical operations
performed on the wafer of silicon [1]. Most of the operations are completed in
the clean room, please see Figure 7.12. The purity of the chemicals, solvents, and
gases used in the semiconductor process is very high. The purity of the gas reaches
ultra-high purity, as shown in Figure 7.13. The purity of the liquid chemicals and
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 119]
110
10 Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
Figure 10.1
The liquids and solvents used in semiconductor process.
solvents can reach semiconductor grade (≥99%) and CMOS grade (99.5%), at least
ACS (American Chemical Society) level (≥95%), please see Figure 10.1. The vac-
uum required in the process can be as low as 10−11 Torr, where Torr is a pressure
unit. 1 atm = 760 Torr. The temperature range is from liquid helium (−269 ∘C) to
1200 ∘C.
Silicon used to make the chip must have a crystalline structure (see Figure 2.4)
and its purity must also be high. This chapter will introduce the production process
of silicon wafer.
10.1
From Quartzite Ore to Polysilicon
Although the storage capacity of silicon in the earth’s crust is very high, it does not
exist in the form of pure silicon in nature, but in the form of quartzite ore. Please
see Figure 10.2. The main content of quartzite is silica (SiO2). Figure 10.3 is the
process flow chart from quartzite to silicon wafer.
In the first step, the raw material is reduced to metallurgical-grade silicon
(MGS), which has a purity of about 98%. The method is to put the quartzite
together with coal or wood chips in an electric arc furnace (metallurgical fur-
nace). Figure 10.4 is a schematic diagram of the arc furnace. At high temperatures,
the carbon in coal or wood will chemically react with the SiO2 in silica to obtain
MGS. The chemical reaction equation is as follows:
SiO2 (solid) + 2C (solid) →Si (solid) + 2CO (gas)
(10.1)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 120]
10.1 From Quartzite Ore to Polysilicon
111
Figure 10.2
Quartzite.
Raw material (quartzite) 
 Polycrystalline silicon
 
 
Single crystalline silicon 
Distillation and reduction 
  
Wafer 
Saw, grind, polish 
Crystal growth 
Figure 10.3
The process ﬂow from quartzite to silicon wafer. Source: [2] Wolf and
Tauber.
In the second step, the second chemical reaction is carried out. The MGS is
ground into powder, and anhydrous hydrogen chloride and MGS are used for the
chemical reaction to form trichlorosilane (SiHCl3) by using fluidized bed reactor
(FBR):
3HCl (gas) + Si (solid) →SiHCl3 (liquid) + H2 (gas)
(10.2)
SiHCl3 is a volatile liquid and its boiling point is 31.8 ∘C. Due to the low-boiling
point of trichlorosilane, it is easy to use distillation for purification.
The third step is to obtain high-purity SiHCl3 after distillation and separation.
The working principle of distillation is to heat the mixed liquids and use the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 121]
112
10 Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
Metallurgical
grade silicon,
MGS
Liquid Si
Submerged arc furnace
SiC + SiO2
SiO + 2C
SiO2 + C
1600 °C
1780 °C
SiO + CO
SiC + CO
Si + SiO + CO
SiO, CO, H2O
Electrode
Electrode
Quartz +
(Coal, Coke, Wood, Charcoal, etc.)
Figure 10.4
Schematic diagram of a submerged electrode arc furnace. Source: [3] MKS
Instruments Handbook.
different boiling points of different liquids to separate them from the mixture.
The process is well controlled, and high-purity liquid can be distilled and
separated.
The fourth step is to add high-purity trichlorosilane and hydrogen to the
chemical vapor deposition equipment to obtain high-purity polysilicon. Chemical
vapor deposition is represented by CVD. We will have more discussion later. In
the CVD process, the reactor (Siemens-type reactor) is heated, and the following
chemical reaction occurs with hydrogen:
SiHCl3 (gas) + H2 (gas) →Si (solid) + 3HCl (gas)
(10.3)
So far, we have obtained solar cell grade (SoG-Si-99.9999%) and even higher-
electronic grade (EGS-99.999999999%, eleven 9 s) purity polysilicon [4]. The
abovementioned silicon purification process was first developed by Siemens, so
this process is called the Siemens process. Figure 10.5 is a schematic diagram of
the Siemens process flow.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 122]
10.2 Chemical Reaction
113
Fluidized
bed reactor
HCl3Si
Si mg
300 °C
CIH
SiCl3H
H2
Distillation
columns
Siemens-type
reactor
1150 °C
Si eg
Figure 10.5
Using Siemens technology to produce electronic grade silicon.
Source: [5] Jfermin.
10.2
Chemical Reaction
In the previous section, some equations of chemical reaction were used. The
reaction equations represent new substances produced by different substances
through chemical reactions. A chemical reaction is a common phenomenon in
nature, and it is also widely used in semiconductor technology. In this section, we
will further discuss chemical reactions.
For an atom, when the number of outermost valence electrons is 8, the structure
of the atom is stable. In the periodic table (Figure 5.1), such elements are listed in
the rightmost column, group 18, which are six elements such as helium, neon,
and argon. Helium in this group is a special case. It has two electrons in total and
is also a stable structure. These elements exist in the form of monoatomic gases.
Because of their stable structure, we call them noble gases (inert gases). Usually,
noble gases cannot react chemically with atoms of other elements. Under extreme
conditions, inert gases can also undergo chemical reactions, but their products are
very unstable and split easily. We will give examples in later chapters. From the
periodic table, we can see that most of the elements do not meet the requirements
of stable structure. When atoms with unstable structures meet, they exchange or
share valence electrons in the outer layer, making the number of valence electrons
to reach 8. The atoms’ structure become stable and form a molecule. In general,
chemical reactions usually occur between oxygen-similar and metal-similar ele-
ments in the periodic table. Oxygen similar elements include oxygen, nitrogen,
fluorine, chlorine, etc. Metal-similar elements include silicon, gallium, hydrogen,
aluminum, copper, etc. The products formed by the reaction between them are
called compounds. In addition, the atoms of oxygen-similar elements can also
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 123]
114
10 Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
share electrons to form a stable molecule. Most of these molecules exist in the
form of gas.
Oxygen-similar elements have more valence electrons, for example, oxygen
has 6 and fluorine has 7. Metal-similar elements have less valence electrons,
for example, sodium has 1 and aluminum has 3. When oxygen-similar atoms
and metal-similar atoms meet, the oxygen-similar atoms take electrons from the
metal similar atoms. After the electrons transfer, oxygen-similar atoms become
negative ions and metal-similar atoms become positive ions. They attract each
other by electrostatic force to form compound molecules. The bonds of these
molecules are ionic bonds. When oxygen-similar atoms meet each other, each
atom contributes electrons. These electrons form electron pairs. The atoms share
the electron pairs to form molecules, and the molecular bond is a covalent bond.
Figure 10.6 is molecules of covalently bonded oxygen and ionic-bonded silicon
dioxide (SiO2). Since silicon has four valence electrons, it must combine with two
oxygen atoms to form a stable molecule SiO2. Ionic bond and covalent bond are
referred to as chemical bonds. Besides these two bonds, there is another type of
bond-metallic bond. In a metal, protons have weak attraction to electrons. Some
electrons can get rid of the attraction of the nucleus and become free electrons.
In a metal structure, these free electrons are shared by positively charged ions to
build metallic bond.
Figure 10.6
The molecules
of oxygen and SiO2.
Generally, when substances meet at room temper-
ature, the chemical reaction starts difficultly, and the
reaction rate is slow. One important reason for this is
that most substances exist in stable molecular forms,
such as O2, SiO2, and so on. We learned the exper-
iment of hydrogen and oxygen reacting to produce
water in middle school. When hydrogen and oxygen meet, they will explode and
react to produce water under the condition of an open flame which is fire:
2H2 + O2 →2H2O
(10.4)
We cannot help but ask: why is open flame needed? To understand this issue, we
must first understand what fire is. The ordinary fire is a chemical reaction between
oxygen and carbon. When we are close to the fire, we feel hot, and the temper-
ature is high. This is because the air molecules move fast near the fire and the
collisions between the molecules are violent. This collision is so strong that the
chemical bonds of the reactant molecules are broken, and the outermost electrons
of the atoms are excited or even ionized (refer to Chapter 2). The excited electrons
return from the high-energy level to the low-energy level, emitting photons, which
is the first reason for the fire to glow. In addition, if the electrons are ionized, the
electrons get rid of the bondage of the atomic nucleus and become free electrons.
The atoms after the loss of the electrons become positively charged (positive ions).
O2
SiO2
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 124]
10.3 Pull Single Crystal
115
The charges of electrons and ions are opposite and equal in number. This state
is the plasma state. A plasma is defined as a partially ionized gas containing an
equal number of positive and negative charges as well as some number of neutral
particles [2]. The positive and negative charges in the plasma can also recombine
and emit photons, which is the second reason why the fire glows. No matter the
chemical bonds of the molecules are broken, the electrons are excited or ionized,
all of these make the stable molecular structure unstable, which leads chemical
reactions to start easily. From here, we understand why hydrogen and oxygen can
explode (explosive reaction) under an open flame. Explosive reaction refers to the
extremely fast reaction rate. Correspondingly, even under an open flame, many
reaction rates are slow and nonexplosive. Here, the plasma state is introduced. It
was mentioned in Section 2.2 that there are usually three states of matter in nature:
solid, liquid, and gaseous. In fact, there is a fourth state of matter – the plasma state.
From the above discussion, we can see that the purpose of an open flame is
to increase the temperature, strengthen the collision between molecules, and
change them from stable structures to unstable structures for chemical reactions.
In the semiconductor process, an open flame is not used for chemical reactions.
The equipment is heated to achieve chemical reactions, as shown in Figure 10.5.
In addition to increasing the temperature, another commonly used method
is to use plasma technique to achieve chemical reactions at low temperature.
This issue will be discussed in later chapters. There are other ways of chemical
reactions, such as the use of catalysts to achieve chemical reactions. We do not
cover this topic in this book.
10.3
Pull Single Crystal
Through the Siemens process, we have obtained high-purity polysilicon. The
next step is to use the Czochralski – CZ method to make monocrystalline
(single-crystal) silicon, which is currently the most used process for growing
monocrystalline silicon.
Put the polysilicon obtained from the Siemens process into the crucible and con-
trol the temperature to just exceed the melting point of silicon (1414 ∘C). According
to need, boron or phosphorus is added to the molten silicon to obtain p-type or
n-type silicon. The operation of this process is as follows: fix a small monocrys-
talline silicon seed crystal on the lower end of a vertical rod, immerse the seed
crystal on the surface of the molten silicon, and slowly rotate and lift it. Silicon
will form a single crystal according to the seed crystal structure. Under the action
of gravity, a cylindrical silicon single-crystal ingot will be drawn out. The length
of ingot for 300 mm wafer is several meters. The entire process is completed in
a quartz furnace under the protection of inert gas argon. Please see Figure 10.7.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 125]
116
10 Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
Thermal
shield
Silica
crucible
Silicon
melt
Crucible
holder
Heater
Single
crystal
silicon
Seed
crystal
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.7
(a) Czochralski silicon crystal pulling furnace, (b) Process equipment.
Source: Ref. [3], MKS Instruments, Inc.
The Czochralski method was invented by Polish chemist Jan Czochralski (October
23, 1885–April 22, 1953) in 1915.
10.4
Polishing and Slicing
The pulled silicon ingot is not a perfect circle, and its diameter distribution is not
uniform. It must be processed to achieve the designed shape and size. In general,
the size of the pulled silicon ingot is intentionally larger. After grinding to remove
the excess, the ingot is finally reaching the desired cylindrical shape and diameter,
as shown in Figure 10.8.
The size of silicon wafer ranges from 25 mm (1 in.) in the 1960s to 300 mm
(12 in.) in 2001, see Figure 7.10. From 1 in. to 6 in. (150 mm), the flats are used
to indicate the crystal orientation, and they can also be used for the alignment
process in lithography (more on this in the following chapter). The flat is divided
into primary flat and secondary flat. When the size reaches 8 in. (200 mm) and
above, a small notch replaces the flats, see Figure 10.9. There are also wafers that
do not have flat/notch.
In Figure 10.9, the words {100} and {111} appear, which refer to the lattice planes
and orientations of silicon crystal. Refer to the schematic diagram of the silicon
lattice in Figure 2.4. In a coordinate system, silicon crystal is divided into three
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 126]
10.4 Polishing and Slicing
117
Grinding wheel
Ingot section
Figure 10.8
The grinding process of silicon ingot. Source: siltronic.com.
Secondary
flat
Secondary flat
Secondary
flat
180°
90°
Primary
flat
Primary
flat
Primary
flat
Primary
flat
45°
{111}p–type
{111}n–type
{100}n–type
{100}p–type
Notch
≥200mm
Figure 10.9
The ﬂats and notch in silicon wafer. Source: [2] Wolf and Tauber.
lattice planes (100), (110), and (111). (100) refers to the plane that only intersects
the X-axis. (110) is the plane that intersects the X- and Y-axes. (111) is the
plane that intersects the X-, Y-, and Z-axes. They are shown in Figure 10.10. The
integers 100, 110, and 111 representing the lattice planes are called Miller indices,
to commemorate British scientist William Hallowes Miller (April 6, 1801–May
29, 1880.5.20), who established the foundation of modern crystallography. The
symbol {100} comprises the planes of (100), (-100), (010), (0-10), (001), and (00-1).
The other two symbols {110} and {111} have the same meaning. Like the planes,
[100], [110], and [111] are used to indicate the crystal axes. <100> is represented
by six directions [100], [-100], [010], [0-10], [001], and [00-1]. <110> and <111>
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 127]
118
10 Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
(100)
(110)
(111)
Y
Y
Y
Z
Z
Z
X
X
X
Figure 10.10
Lattice planes of silicon. Source: Reprinted with permission of
http://crystal-scientiﬁc.com.
Mounted ingot
Slurry nozzle
Wire web
Wire guide rollers
Figure 10.11
Schematic diagram of a multi-wire saw machine. Source: siltronic.com.
have the same meaning. In solid-state physics, the crystal lattice structure of
silicon is classified as a diamond tetrahedral structure. There are other crystal
lattice structures in semiconductor materials. We do not discuss them here.
After the silicon ingot grinding, it is sliced. The slicing tools include wire saw
and internal diameter (ID) saw. Figure 10.11 is a multi-wire saw. This technology
makes it possible to slice complete silicon ingot into hundreds of silicon wafers in
just one step. After a silicon ingot is sliced into wafers, the next steps include edge
rounding, laser marking, lapping, polishing, and cleaning of the wafers.
The edge of sliced wafer is not very smooth, which may cause unnecessary
mechanical damages, such as the incident of chipping during wafer handling.
In photoresist coating step of lithography process (discuss later), the rough edge
can cause the problem of photoresist buildup on the edge, which is called edge
bead and makes nonuniform film. The purpose of edge rounding is to avoid these
problems. Please see Figure 10.12.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 128]
10.4 Polishing and Slicing
119
Edge rounding wheel
As sawn
wafer
Grinding
chuck
Figure 10.12
Schematic diagram of edge rounding machine. Source: siltronic.com.
Check-characters
Crystal orientation
Dopant
Resistivity
Vendor
Identification number
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.13
The meaning of markings on the edge of wafer (a) The markings show the
information of vendor, resistivity, dopant, etc. Source: siltronic.com. (b) The markings on a
silicon wafer.
Laser marking is used to create an alphanumeric, or barcode, identification
mark on the front of the wafer near the primary flat or notch. According to SEMI
(Semiconductor Equipment and Materials Institute) Std. M1.8, laser marking
specifies an 18-character field to identify the wafer manufacturer, conductivity
type, resistivity, flatness, wafer number, and device type [2]. It allows to know
individual wafer or wafer batch in order to have manufacturing traceability.
Please see Figure 10.13.
The lapping and polishing process includes chemical etching and mechanical
polishing, so this process is called chemical mechanical polishing (CMP). The
basic structure of the equipment is shown in Figure 10.14. After the CMP is com-
pleted, the wafer is wet-etched and cleaned to remove the mechanical damage and
polishing slurry on the surface. Etching mainly uses chemical reaction to remove
some thin layers on the surface of the wafer. If the etching is carried out in a liquid
etchant, it is wet etching; if the etching is carried out in a gaseous chemical, it is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 129]
120
10 Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
Carrier plate
Polishing pad
Polishing platen
Figure 10.14
CMP machine of Si wafer. Source: siltronic.com.
dry etching. We will further discuss the etching process in later chapters. This step
is to use wet etching.
For silicon wafers, RCA cleaning is a set of standard clean (SC) steps. The clean-
ing method was developed in 1965 by an engineer Werner Kern, who was working
at the Radio Corporation of America – RCA. Figure 10.15 is the RCA cleaning
flow chart. The solution H2SO4/H2O2 (sulfuric acid/hydrogen peroxide) is called
piranha in the semiconductor process.
CZ growth is the most economical method to produce silicon wafers (known as
CZ wafers) for general semiconductor device fabrication. But it has a main prob-
lem. Since the ingot is pulled out from the silica crucible (refer Figure 10.7a), some
oxygen contamination is always present in the silicon. Graphite crucible has been
used to avoid this contamination. However, it produces carbon impurities in the
silicon. So, in CZ method, it is difficult to obtain wafers with resistivities greater
than 100 Ω cm. Higher-purity silicon can be produced by a method know as Float
Zone (FZ). A cylindrical polycrystalline silicon ingot is mounted over an induc-
tion coil. An RF electromagnetic field helps melt the silicon from the lower part of
the rod. The field regulates the silicon flow through a small hole in the induction
coil and onto the monocrystal that lies below. The ingot is not contact with any of
the chamber components except for the ambient gas and a seed crystal of known
orientation. So FZ silicon wafers have resistivities as high as 1 × 104 Ω⋅cm [3]. The
silicon wafers manufactured by using FZ method are ideal for the use in power
semiconductor devices. Please see Figure 10.16.
To meet the tough requirements of some devices such as MOSFET manufac-
turing, a thin, defect-free crystal layer is additionally deposited onto the polished
surface of silicon wafer by using epitaxy technology. Epitaxial materials are inher-
ently free of oxygen and carbon. They also have some advantages and selections,
such as controlled and abrupt changes in dopant profiles, n-type silicon over
p-type silicon and p-type silicon over n-type silicon [3]. Please see Figure 10.17.
To apply the epitaxial layer, the silicon wafer is fastened to a susceptor and heated
to a high temperature with the help of infrared lamps. The process gas flow and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 130]
10.4 Polishing and Slicing
121
DI water
DI water
DI water
120–150 °C
10 min
Room T
Room T
80–90 °C
10 min
80–90 °C
10 min
Room T
Strips organics
especially photoresist
Strips oxide
Strips organics
Metals and particles
Strips alkali ions
and metals
H2SO4/H2O2
1 : 1 to 4 : 1
H2O/HF
10 : 1 to 50 : 1
NH4OH/H2O2/H2O
1 : 1 : 5 to 0.05 : 1 : 5
SC-1
HCl/H2O2/H2O
1 : 1 : 6 SC-2
Room T
1 min
Figure 10.15
The RCA cleaning ﬂow. Source: Wolf [1].
Induction coil
Monocrystal
Polycristalline silicon
Figure 10.16
Schematic diagram of Float Zone method. Source: siltronic.com.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 131]
122
10 Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
Lamp heating
Process gas flow
Susceptor
Silicon wafer
Figure 10.17
Schematic diagram of epitaxy machine. Source: siltronic.com.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.18
2-in. silicon wafers delivery pack and information label.
temperature are carefully controlled in order to create an epitaxial layer that
meets the specifications.
So far, the whole process from quartzite to silicon wafer is introduced. According
to the different needs, silicon wafers are polished on one side or on both sides. The
wafers are put into a cassette and packaged in a carrier case for delivery. A cas-
sette can hold 25 wafers. An information label is posted on the outside of the case.
Figure 10.18 shows 2-in. silicon wafers. From the label, we can find the company
name, production date, dopant is B, type is P, diameter is from 1.985 to 2.015 in.,
resistivity is from 0.12 to 0.25 Ω⋅cm, crystal orientation is (111), and thickness is
from 0.012 to 0.014 in. (304.8–355.6 μm). The label was written by hand because
the wafers were made in 1979. Figure 10.19 shows 8-in. silicon wafers. The label
was printed. We can find information similar to the 2-in. wafer label. Figure 10.20
is the picture of 2-in. and 8-in. silicon wafers. 2-in. is p-type (111) wafer and has a
primary flat. 8-in. has a notch.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 132]
References
123
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.19
8-in. silicon wafers delivery pack and information label.
Figure 10.20
8 in. and 2 in. silicon wafers.
References
1 Wolf, S. (2004). Microchip Manufacturing. Lattice Press, p. 214, p. 55, p. 133.
2 Wolf, S. and Tauber, R.N. (2000). Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Process
Technology, Lattice Press, 2e, vol. 1, p. 6, p. 438, p. 23, p. 24.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 133]
124
10 Manufacture of Silicon Wafer
3 MKS Instruments Handbook (2017). Semiconductor Devices and Process
Technology by the Office of the CTO, p. 19, p. 21, p. 22, p. 32.
4 Hashim, U., Ehsan, A.A., and Ahmad, I. (2007). High purity polycrystalline
silicon growth and characterization. Chiang Mai Journal of Science 34 (1):
47–53.
5 Jfermin70, “From sand to the silicon wafer”, Steemit.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 134]
125
11
Basic Knowledges of Process
The fabrication of integrated circuits is mainly divided into three parts: design,
manufacture, and test. The design is completed through various design softwares,
the manufacture is achieved through various processes, and test is performed
by using different tools and methods. As mentioned in Chapter 10, a modern
manufacturing process contains more than 350 technological steps, many of
which are repeated. This book includes very little contents of design and test.
In the following chapters, we mainly discuss the technologies commonly used
in semiconductor processing. Most of the processes use planar technology, see
Figure 7.15. As integrated circuits become more and more complex, the number
of interconnected layers also increases. Figure 11.1 is a partial cross-sectional
view of a CPU with 45 nm, showing the nine-layer metal interconnect (M9).
Regarding metal interconnects, we will discuss them in later chapters.
Semiconductor microchip manufacturing processes mainly include photo-
lithography, etching, deposition, doping, and packaging. Photolithography,
etching and deposition techniques are used repeatedly. This chapter gives a brief
introduction to the overall structures of integrated circuits, optical knowledge
that needs to be understood in lithography, and why plasma is used in the process.
11.1
The Structure of Integrated Circuit (IC)
In this section, we use MOSFET as an example to describe the structure of an IC.
Figure 6.13 is a side view of this device. The top view is shown in Figure 11.2. This
figure is an n-channel MOSFET. A p-channel has a similar top view to that of the
n-channel. The patterns of n+, source, drain, and gate in the device are completed
by photolithography. n+ refers to n-type heavy doping, usually completed by phos-
phorus doping, which can be implanted or diffused. The dielectric layer SiO2 on
the device can be completed by CVD (chemical vapor deposition) or thermal oxi-
dation. SiO2 in the source and drain regions is removed by etching. The metal of
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 135]
126
11 Basic Knowledges of Process
Figure 11.1
A partial cross-sectional view of a CPU. Source: [1] Shimpi et al., 2012 /
AnandTech.
n-Channel enhancement MOSFET
L
n+
Source
metal
W
n+
Drain
metal
Gate
metal
Si
Figure 11.2
Top view of a MOSFET.
the source, drain, and gate is completed by deposition. This kind of deposition is
PVD (physical vapor deposition). It mainly includes evaporation and sputtering
techniques.
A MESFET has a top view similar to a MOSFET. The devices are made on a
semiconductor wafer, and they must have electrically isolated each other. Silicon
devices often use SiO2 isolation, and III–V devices often use proton implantation.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 136]
11.1 The Structure of Integrated Circuit (IC)
127
n-FET
p-well
p-FET
n-well
n+
n+
p+
p+
STI
STI
n+ poly
p+ poly
Shallow trench isolation
STI
Figure 11.3
Schematic diagram of CMOS structure made with STI technology.
Source: [2] Wolf.
For silicon MOSFET, when the feature size is greater than 0.25 μm, the LOCOS
(LOCal oxidation of silicon) technology is adopted; When the feature size is less
than or equal to 0.25 μm, the STI (shallow trench isolation) technology is adopted.
As shown in Figure 11.3. The STI area in the figure is SiO2, and Poly is polysilicon.
In the early technology, the gate metal was usually made of Al, but in modern
times it is replaced by heavily doped polysilicon.
After the basic devices-transistors, diodes, resistors, and capacitors are made
on the wafer and isolated from each other, SiO2 film is deposited on these devices
as an ILD (interlevel dielectric) by CVD. Vias (connecting holes) are opened
on the ILD, and the independent devices are connected by metal through these
vias to become an IC. This technology of connecting devices together is called
interconnect technology, and this part of an IC is called interconnect layer.
Figure 11.4 is a schematic diagram of the interconnect layer between P-channel
MOS (PMOS) and N-channel MOS (NMOS). This schematic diagram is only
one-layer Interconnect. The nine-layer interconnect shown in Figure 11.1 cannot
meet the current IC complexity requirements. For example, Intel’s 14 nm chip has
n-FET
p-well
p-FET
n-well
n+
n+
p+
p+
STI
STI
n+poly
p+poly
Shallow trench isolation
STI
Al:Cu alloy
W-plugs
ILD
CVD-oxide
TiSi2
Figure 11.4
Schematic diagram of the interconnection of PMOS and NMOS.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 137]
128
11 Basic Knowledges of Process
a 13-layer interconnect [3]. Normally, transistors, diodes, resistors, and capacitors
are built on the first layer of the wafer. The basic logic gates are completed through
the first layer of interconnect (as shown in Figure 6.16). In the next step, through
the second layer of interconnect, these basic logic gates are connected into basic
functional units. In the next step, these functional units are connected into
more complex units through the third layer of interconnect; and so on. Finally, a
complete IC is formed, and it meets the design specifications.
As discussed above, no matter how complex an IC is, the main processing steps
include: (i) photolithography is used to complete the planar structure of the IC,
(ii) deposition is used to grow dielectric films or metal films, (iii) etching is used
to remove some dielectric or metal films in some specific areas, (iv) diffusion and
implantation are used to complete the n-type and p-type doping of the IC, and
(v) testing and packaging are used to complete the final product of the IC. All
semiconductor processes follow the basic principles of chemistry and physics. The
design of process and equipment is also based on these principles.
11.2
Resolution of Optical System
Light rays
Figure 11.5
Diffraction of light.
Among all the processes, photolithography (lithography) is
the most important because it determines the technology
node of the IC (refer to Section 7.3). The lithography pro-
cess is completed by an aligner. The ultraviolet light emitted
by the machine is used to transfer the designed patterns to
the surface of the wafer through a photomask (mask). Most
lithography tools are a set of complex optics and control
system. The resolution of the lithography machine deter-
mines the technology node. We introduced the reflection
and refraction of light in Section 8.3. In addition, light
has another important characteristic feature-diffraction.
Diffraction is a characteristic of waves. The diffraction of
light is related to the resolution of the optical system.
When a beam of parallel light passes through a gap or hole, the light will not con-
tinue to travel along a straight line, but will diverge, as shown in Figure 11.5. The
wider the gap or the larger the diameter of the hole, the smaller the angle of
the light divergence. The narrower the gap or the smaller the diameter of the hole,
the bigger the angle of the light divergence. This is the diffraction of light. The fea-
ture size of contemporary ICs is very small, that is to say, the size of some patterns
on the mask used in the lithography is very small. These patterns are composed of a
series of small gaps and holes. When light passes through them, diffraction occurs.
We will continue to discuss lithography machine and mask in later chapters.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 138]
11.2 Resolution of Optical System
129
Airy Disc
Figure 11.6
Light diffraction intensity proﬁle and Airy disk. Source: [4] Ghoushchi et al.,
2015 / Koç University.
Let us take a small hole as an example. Due to diffraction, the intensity distribu-
tion of the light passing through the small hole is uneven, with a bright large spot
in the middle and dim rings around it. This is the diffraction pattern, as shown
in Figure 11.6. The area with the highest intensity in the middle is called Airy
disk (or Airy disk), in honor of British scientist Sir George Biddell Airy (July 27,
1801–January 2, 1892). The radius of Airy disk refers to the point from the center
of the spot to the point where the first light intensity of the diffraction pattern is
zero. Figure 11.6 shows the diameter of Airy disk.
Through the diffraction of light, we can deduce the resolution of the optical
system. Please see Figure 11.7. When two light sources (Object 1 and Object 2)
illuminate a screen through a small hole, two diffraction images appear on the
screen. The diffraction image is shown in Figure 11.8. In the figure, “Just resolved”
means that the center peak of one Airy disk just falls on the first light intensity at
zero of another Airy disk. If we use 𝜃to represent the angle between the two rays
entering the small hole, and r to represent the distance between the two light spots,
then when the following formula is satisfied:
𝜃= 1.22 𝜆
D
(11.1)
r =
1.22𝜆
2n sin 𝜃= 0.61𝜆
NA
(11.2)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 139]
130
11 Basic Knowledges of Process
Object 2
Object 1
Intensities
Intensity
(b)
(a)
0
D
D
–1.22λ
1.22λ
θmin
θmin
θ
Figure 11.7
Schematic diagram of the resolution of two light sources passing through a
small hole. Source: Reprinted with permission of BCcampus.
Well resolved
Just resolved
Not resolved
Figure 11.8
Schematic diagram of Rayleigh criterion. Source: Reproduced with
permission of Boston Biophysics.
𝜃is the smallest angle when the two light spots are just resolved, which is half the
angle from the center of the small hole to Airy disk. It is represented by 𝜃min in
Figure 11.7. r is the minimum distance between the centers of the two Airy disks
when the two light spots are just resolved. This value is the radius of Airy disk,
which is represented by rmin in Figure 11.8.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 140]
11.3 Why Plasma Used in the Process
131
Formulas (11.1) and (11.2) are Rayleigh criterions, which were developed
by British scientist John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh (November 12,
1842–June 30, 1919). 𝜆in the formulas is the wavelength of the incident light, D is
the diameter of the small hole, n is the refractive index of the surrounding optical
medium, and NA is called the numerical aperture:
NA = n sin 𝜃
(11.3)
If formulas (11.1)–(11.3) are applied to the design of a lithography system, it is
seen that in order to obtain a high-resolution, a short-wavelength light source and
a large-size optical lens are required. Usually the medium around the lens is air.
If we immerse the lens in a medium with a higher-refractive index than air, the
numerical aperture will increase, and the resolution of the system will be higher.
We will continue the discussion in later chapters.
If optical medium (medium) is air, the maximum NA is 1 according to formula
(11.3). For a microscope, NA = 0.87 is nearing the limit when air is utilized as the
imaging medium [5]. We will continue the discussion in the later chapters.
11.3
Why Plasma Used in the Process
As we mentioned before, etching and deposition are also the main parts of semi-
conductor processes. In these processes, plasma technique is commonly used,
such as RIE (reactive-ion etching), PECVD (plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition), and sputtering. In theory, there is no essential difference between
RIE and PECVD. Both require plasma and mainly use chemical reactions.
In sputtering system, the plasma is required to perform PVD.
The biggest difference between RIE and PECVD is the chemical reaction
product. If the product is volatile, that is, the product is in a gaseous state, it
is RIE. If the product is nonvolatile, that is, the product is in a solid state, it
is PECVD. The chemical reaction product is volatile, which usually means its
boiling point is very low. The chemical reaction product is nonvolatile, which
usually means its boiling point is very high. For example, in RIE, the most used
etching chemicals for Si, SiO2, and Si3N4 are fluorine-containing gases CF4,
CHF3, and SF6. After fluorine and silicon react chemically, the boiling point of
the product silicon tetrafluoride (SiF4) is −86 ∘C:
Si (solid) + 4F (gas) →SiF4 (gas)
(11.4)
SiF4 can be removed from the process chamber by a pump, which is etching.
However, the boiling point of silica produced by the reaction of oxygen and silicon
is 2950 ∘C:
Si (solid) + 2O (gas) →SiO2 (solid)
(11.5)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 141]
132
11 Basic Knowledges of Process
SiO2 is not pumped away, but remains on the surface of the sample, which is
deposition.
As mentioned in the previous chapter, to make the chemical reaction to proceed
smoothly between stable molecules, we should encourage the molecules to
collide with each other, break the chemical bonds, and excite the electrons in the
outermost shell. One of the ways to make molecules collide with each other is
to raise the temperature. However, because of the different strengths of different
chemical bonds, the temperature required to break these chemical bonds is
different. Sometimes the required temperature is very high, which has certain
difficulties in actual operation.
In addition to the method of heating, the other is to use electric and magnetic
fields. In Chapter 4, we discussed electric and magnetic fields. They are both vector
fields. The electric field is represented by a capital black E and the magnetic field is
represented by a capital black B. When a charge Q enters the electromagnetic field
at a speed V, the force F that it receives is called Lorentz force and satisfies Lorentz
equation. Note that both speed and force are vectors, so the letters in bold are used:
F = Q (E + V × B)
(11.6)
The above equation is a vector operation. The cross symbol × in the equation
indicates that the direction of the force on the charge is 90∘with the direction of
the magnetic field. There is no × in front of the electric field, which means that
the direction of the force on the charge is consistent with the direction of the
electric field. This equation was first proposed by the Dutch physicist Hendrik
Lorentz (July 18, 1853–February 4, 1928). Lorentz equation shows that in an
electromagnetic field, a charged particle is accelerated and its direction is changed
by a force. This particle can collide with other particles around it, producing the
same effect as raising the temperature. Normally, molecules at room temperature
are electrically neutral, and a neutral particle is not subjected to the force of an
electromagnetic field. Due to thermal motion, gas and liquid molecules still move
randomly in all directions. But in a solid, because of the limitation of the crystal
lattice, the atoms can only vibrate thermally near the crystal lattice. The semicon-
ductor manufacturing processes, such as RIE and PECVD, primarily use gaseous
chemicals to complete etching and deposition. So, in this section we will use gas as
an example to illustrate how plasma is generated under the action of Lorentz force.
As mentioned above, gaseous molecules move in all directions at room temper-
ature. Table 11.1 lists the mean (average) thermal velocity of some gases at 20 ∘C.
Mach number in the table is the ratio of the velocity of an object to the velocity of
sound, named after Austrian physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach (February 18,
1838–February 19, 1916).
M = u
v
(11.7)
where M is the Mach number, u is the object velocity, and v is the sound velocity.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 142]
References
133
Table 11.1
Mean thermal velocity of some gases at 20 ∘C [6].
Gas
Chemical symbol
Mean velocity (m/s)
Mach number
Hydrogen
H2
1754
5.3
Helium
He
1245
3.7
Water vapor
H2O
585
1.8
Nitrogen
N2
470
1.4
Air
464
1.4
Argon
Ar
394
1.2
Carbon dioxide
CO2
375
1.1
As can be seen from this table, the mean thermal velocity of gases exceeds
the speed of sound. Collisions occur between them. Some ions and electrons are
generated. In addition, cosmic rays can also generate some ions and electrons. But
the concentration of charged ions and electrons produced in these ways is very
low, which is why the chemical reaction rate is very slow at room temperature.
However, if an electromagnetic field is added and the energy of the electro-
magnetic field exceeds a certain limit, these low concentration ions, especially
electrons, hit other molecules at a faster speed under the acceleration of the
electromagnetic field, break more molecular bonds, and excite more electrons.
When the concentration of ions and excited electrons exceeds a certain number,
the plasma discharge is initiated. This process is called ionization. An example
of ionization is lightning in rainy weather, where the high-strength electric
field between clouds triggers the plasma by air molecules. The generation of
plasma enables chemical reactions to proceed at room temperature or even lower
temperature.
In the actual process, we pass the selected gases into the process chamber, apply
an electric or magnetic field to the process chamber, and generate plasma in the
chamber. According to the discussion in Chapter 4, we revealed that the elec-
tric field is related to the capacitor, and the magnetic field is related to the spiral
coil inductor. Therefore, when designing a process chamber capable of generating
plasma, only two structures can be adopted: a capacitive structure and an inductive
structure. These two structures can be used alone or mixed.
References
1 Shimpi, A.L. (2012). Apple A5X die size measured: 162.94 mm2, Samsung 45 nm
LP confirmed. AnandTech, March 16.
2 Wolf, S. (2004). Microchip Manufacturing, 67–69. Lattice Press.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 143]
134
11 Basic Knowledges of Process
3 Hruska, J. (2014). Intel’s 14 nm Broadwell chip reverse engineered, reveals
impressive FinFETs, 13-layer design. ExtremeTech.
4 Ghoushchi, V.P. (2015). Opto-mechanical design and development of an
optodigital confocal microscope. University of Murcia, M.Sc. Thesis. p. 9.
5 Numerical Aperture. Nikon, Microscopy, The source for microscopy education.
6 Pfeiffer Vacuum Technology, 1.2.4 Thermal velocity. pfeiffer-vacuum.com.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 144]
135
12
Photolithography (Lithography)
Photolithography is to make device patterns on the surface of semiconductor
substrate. After the patterns are completed, other processes will follow-up, such
as etching, deposition, and so on. Figure 12.1 is a simple schematic diagram of
the flow of lithography process and etching. The lithography process shown in
the figure is like the film photography which we used before, but there are three
main differences: (i) the photoresist-coated wafer replacing photographic film,
(ii) the photomask replacing the scenery, and (iii) the ultraviolet light replacing
the sunlight. During film photography, the film feels different light intensities in
the scene, which means that the light intensity received on the film is uneven.
During photolithography, ultraviolet light passes through the pattern windows
of the mask, and the intensity that the photoresist receives is uniform. Below we
will discuss the lithography process based on this schematic diagram.
12.1
The Steps of Lithography Process
When we get a semiconductor wafer or piece and need to do a photolithography
process, the steps shown in Figure 12.2 are usually followed:
12.1.1
Cleaning
When we have a wafer or a piece, to avoid contamination of the process, the
wafer or piece must be cleaned first. In Chapter 10, we discussed RCA cleaning
(Figure 10.15). This is the standard cleaning method for silicon wafer. This
method can be used to clean Si wafers, Si covered with SiO2, and Si covered with
Si3N4. But for III–V semiconductor materials (refer to Chapter 5) and silicon
wafers that have completed metal processing, RCA cleaning cannot be used,
because this cleaning solution can corrode compound semiconductor materials
and metals. At this moment, the common cleaning method is to use organic
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 145]
136
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Photoresist
SiO2
Mask
Ultraviolet light
Development
Etching
Stripping
Figure 12.1
Schematic diagram of photolithography process.
Clean
Dehydration bake
Photoresist coating
Soft bake
Alignment and exposure
Developing
Inspection
Hard bake
Descum
Next process
Figure 12.2
Lithography process step diagram.
solvents soaking and washing wafer or piece. We first use acetone, then use
alcohol or isopropyl alcohol (IPA), and finally rinse with DI water. In addition,
because RCA cleaning is complicated and dangerous to use, organic solvents can
also be used to clean silicon wafers, SiO2/Si and Si3N4/Si when the requirements
are not strict. No matter what method is used, the final step is to rinse with DI
water. After rinsing, use a nitrogen gun to blow dry, or use a spin dryer. Please see
Figure 12.3.
12.1.2
Dehydration Bake
The last step of cleaning is to rinse the wafer or piece with DI water. Although it is
dried with a nitrogen gun or a spin dryer after rinsing, there are still water traces on
the surface of the wafer or piece. We need to dehydrate the surface. There are two
main methods of the dehydration. Put the wafer or piece into a vacuum chamber
or onto a hotplate to heat up for the dehydration. The hot plate is simple and cheap
to use. So, in most cases, the hot plate is used for dehydration bake. The photo of
the hot plate is shown in Figure 12.4.
To further understand the necessity of dehydration, we need to briefly intro-
duce the hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity of the material surface. When a solid
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 146]
12.1 The Steps of Lithography Process
137
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.3
N2 gun (a) and spin dryer (b).
Figure 12.4
The picture of hotplate.
surface is in contact with liquid, there are two situations of the surface. One is
hydrophilic surface, and the other is hydrophobic surface, see Figure 12.5. For
liquid water, SiO2 is a hydrophilic surface and Si is a hydrophobic surface. If Si
stays in the air for a period of time, there will be a natural oxide layer on the
surface. So, in general, it is also a hydrophilic surface. Therefore, a thin layer
of water molecules is adsorbed on the surface. The photoresist used in pho-
tolithography is hydrophobic. When a hydrophilic surface with water molecules
meets a hydrophobic material, the adhesion is poor. Due to the hydrophilicity of
SiO2, the water adsorbed makes the surface to have poor adhesion with the pho-
toresist, and the normal photolithography process cannot be performed. So, the
dehydration bake is required to drive the water out of the surface. The temperature
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 147]
138
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
Superhydrophobic
θ =150° – 180°
Hydrophobic
θ = 90° – 150°
Superhydrophilic
θ < 5° in 0.5 s
Hydrophilic
θ < 90°
θ
θ
θ
Figure 12.5
Schematic diagram of the hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity of the material
surface. Source: [1] Ahmad et al. / Taylor & Francis.
for desorption of surface water molecules is 150–200 ∘C [2]. A recommended
dehydration bake condition is that the hot plate temperature is 150–200 ∘C and
the time is 15–10 minutes.
12.1.3
Photoresist Coating
Photoresist (PR or resist) is a photosensitive organic material used in the pho-
tolithography process. There are two commonly used resists-positive photoresist
and negative photoresist. If the exposed areas can be removed by the developer,
the unexposed areas cannot be removed by the developer, it is positive photore-
sist. The PR in Figure 12.1 is positive resist. If the exposed areas cannot be removed
by the developer, the unexposed areas can be removed by the developer, which is
negative photoresist. Sometimes we do not distinguish between positive PR and
negative PR, referred to as PR, please see Figure 12.6. In order to further improve
the adhesion between the resist and the wafer or piece surface, a layer of primer
needs to be coated on the surface before coating the PR on it. The commonly used
primer is HMDS (hexamethyldisilazane). The left one of Figure 12.7 is HMDS. The
right one is polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) for e-beam lithography.
Dehydration bake was discussed in the previous paragraph. However, after bak-
ing, a small amount of water or hydroxide (OH−) may remain on the surface of
the wafer or piece, which will adversely affect the adhesion of the PR. HMDS can
remove residual water and hydroxide radicals on the surface and combine with the
surface. In this way, when the photoresist is coated on the wafer or piece surface
containing HMDS, its adhesion will be improved.
When the wafer or piece has just completed the growth or deposition of SiO2
or Si3N4, and if the next step is photolithography process, do not leave it in the
room for too long, but coat the resist immediately. No need to clean, bake, or
coat HMDS, just coat the PR directly. Our commonly used SiO2 or Si3N4 equip-
ment are thermal oxidation, low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD),
low-temperature oxidation (LTO), and PECVD. The temperature of all these
processes is above 250 ∘C. Just after completion, there will be no traces of water
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 148]
12.1 The Steps of Lithography Process
139
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.6
Positive photoresist (a) and negative photoresist (b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.7
HMDS (a) and electron beam lithography resist (b).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 149]
140
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
Figure 12.8
Spinner.
or OH−on the wafer or piece surface. In general, the cleanliness level inside the
equipment is higher than that in the clean room (refer to Section 7.4), so the
pre-PR coating steps can be omitted.
The equipment used for PR coating is a spinner, as shown in Figure 12.8. The
size of the wafer chuck is different according to the size of the wafer or piece. There
are small holes on the chuck, which are connected to a vacuum pump. Through
vacuum, the wafer or piece is held on the chuck. The PR is dropped on the sur-
face of the wafer or piece. A motor accelerates the chuck to the spinning speed of
2000–6000 rpm (revolutions per minute) within a few seconds and keep this speed
for 30–60 seconds, so that the resist is evenly spread on the wafer or piece sur-
face. The unit of thickness of PR is usually μm. Table 12.1 shows the relationship
between the thickness of AZ 1500 series positive PR and the spinning speed of the
spinner. Figure 12.9 shows the silicon wafers before and after photoresist coating.
Table 12.1
The thickness (μm) of the AZ 1500 series positive PR vs. the spin speed (rpm).
Spin speed
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
AZ 1505
0.71
0.58
0.50
0.45
0.41
AZ 1512HS
1.70
1.39
1.20
1.07
0.98
AZ 1514H
1.98
1.62
1.40
1.25
1.14
AZ 1518
2.55
2.08
1.80
1.61
1.47
AZ 1529
4.10
3.35
2.90
2.59
2.37
Source: Ref. [3] / Clariant.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 150]
12.1 The Steps of Lithography Process
141
Figure 12.9
Si wafers without PR
coating (left) and with PR coating
(right).
12.1.4
Soft Bake
After the coating of photoresist, the wafer or piece needs to do soft bake, also
called pre-bake. The purpose of this step is to remove most of the solvent in the
PR and make it solid for the next step of alignment and exposure. Usually, the
photoresist in the bottle contains 65–85% solvent, which makes the PR thinner
and can successfully complete the PR coating step. After the coating is completed,
the solvent content will drop to 10–30%, but the surface is still very sticky at this
time and cannot do alignment and exposure. After the soft bake is completed,
the solvent in the PR is reduced to 5% [2], and the liquid-cast film is converted
into solid form. So that the alignment and exposure can proceed smoothly. In
addition, the soft bake can improve the adhesion between the PR and the surface,
which is beneficial to the development after exposure.
In most cases, the soft bake temperature is 90–110 ∘C. According to the thickness
of the photoresist and the temperature of the hot plate, the time is 1–5 minutes.
12.1.5
Alignment and Exposure
After the soft bake is completed, alignment and exposure are performed.
Alignment is to align the finished patterns on the wafer or piece with a photo-
mask by using a mask aligner (aligner). In the early days, the aligners were
manual alignment. Now most of them use automatic alignment. But in university
laboratories and clean rooms, manual alignment is mainly used. Figure 12.10 is
a photo of an aligner. Figure 12.11 is a photo of a photomask. The brown area
on the mask is opaque, and the ultraviolet light emitted by the aligner cannot
pass through this area. The white part is transparent. The ultraviolet light passes
through this area to expose the resist on the surface under the mask. The patterns
on the mask are transferred to the PR. For the convenience of observation, a mask
with large patterns is specially found here as an example to illustrate. Please also
refer to Figure 12.1.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 151]
142
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
Figure 12.10
EVG 620 mask aligner.
Figure 12.11
A photomask.
Figure 12.10 is a contact aligner, that means the mask and the surface of wafer or
piece contact each other. This type of aligner can also perform non-contact prox-
imity exposure. There is also a long-distance non-contact machine. The projec-
tion exposure system widely used in production is the long-distance non-contact
lithography machine. Figure 12.12 is a schematic diagram of the three exposure
modes. Projection photomask is also called reticle. Typical projection systems use
reduction optics (4X–5X).There are two kinds of projection systems-stepper and
scanner. During exposure, a stepper moves only the wafer-step and repeat, and a
scanner moves the reticle and wafer simultaneously step and scan.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 152]
12.1 The Steps of Lithography Process
143
Contact
Light
source
Condenser
lens
Mask
Photoresist
Silicon
wafer
Gap
Objective
lens
Proximity
Projection
Figure 12.12
Basic operation modes of optical lithography: In contact lithography the
mask is in direct contact with the resist, in proximity lithography there is a small gap in
between. Projection lithography uses a lens system between the mask and the sample.
Source: [4] Haberfehlner.
The contact aligner can get high resolution, but the defects on the surface of
photoresist are big. This is because if there are small dirty spots on the surface of
PR, once the mask and the wafer or piece contact each other, the damaged area
of the small particles will become much bigger. In addition, the contact one is
cheap, and the diffraction effect of light is small.
The smallest pattern size that can be obtained by the proximity mode is larger
than that of the contact mode. This is because diffraction reduces the resolution
of this mode, but the PR surface has fewer defects.
The projection type has higher resolution and lower defects on the resist
surface. Take the stepper as an example. When it is working, the tool shrinks
the size of patterns on the reticle several times and projects them onto a certain
area of the wafer. Then the wafer moves its position, and tool projects the
patterns to a new position. With this way, repeat step by step, and finally make
patterns all over the surface of the wafer. We can imagine that with a certain
area of circuit patterns, the larger the wafer size is, the more circuits are finished
with same step–step process. The production cost will be lower, and the price
will be cheaper. Therefore, the size of Si wafer continues to become larger, see
Figure 7.10.
There are different types of light sources used to generate ultraviolet (UV)
light. High-pressure mercury-vapor lamp (HPMVL) was once widely used in
semiconductor photolithography processes. Because the light source is cheap and
easy to operate, it is still a workhorse in university laboratories and clean rooms.
Figure 12.13 is a photo of a HPMVL. When the mercury lamp is lit, the pressure
of the ionized mercury gas in the lamp can reach 40 atm [2], which is why we
call it a high-pressure lamp. Figure 12.14 is the spectrum of the HPMVL. In the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 153]
144
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
Figure 12.13
High-pressure mercury UV lamp.
0.10
365 405 436
546
579
312–313
297–302
334
254
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
300
400
500
Wavelength (nm)
Spectral intensity (W/sr/nm/1000cd)
600
700
Figure 1
HBO 100
Mercury arc lamp
spectral
distribution
800
Figure 12.14
The spectrum of the high-pressure mercury lamp. Source: Reprinted with
permission of ZEISS.
spectrum, there are three peaks of luminescence. The wavelengths are 436, 405,
and 365 nm, respectively. These three wavelengths are named G-line, H-line, and
I-line. Among the three spectral lines, the I-line has the shortest wavelength.
According to Rayleigh criterion, it has the highest resolution. Therefore, in
the current lithography systems with HPMVLs, most of them use I-line. In the
mercury lamp spectrum, 546 and 312–313 nm are also two spectral lines with
higher peaks. However, their peaks are smaller than G-line, H-line, and I-line.
The output power is smaller, and the exposure time is longer. In addition, the long
wavelength of 546 nm is not conducive to the production of devices with small
feature sizes Therefore, the two spectral lines of 546 and 312–313 nm are not used
much in the process. Quartz glass is mostly used to make photomask and reticle.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 154]
12.1 The Steps of Lithography Process
145
12.1.6
Developing
After exposure, the wafer or piece is placed in the developer to display the latent
patterns and become the device patterns on the photoresist. The following pro-
cesses are performed on these patterns. Figure 12.15 is negative PR and positive
PR developers. The developers for both resists are usually aqueous-alkaline. They
are based either on a diluted sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide solution.
These two types of developers are metal ion containing (MIC) or metal ion bearing
(MIB). Another type of developer is metal ion free (MIF), mostly based on organic
TMAH (TetraMethylAmmoniumHydroxide). For AZ series photoresists, the pos-
itive one can use either AZ MIC developer or MIF developer, the negative one
only uses MIF developer. Another kind of developer for negative resist is a special
organic solvent solution, for example SU-8 developer is shown in the figure.
When developing, agitate wafer or place in a container for desired time. After
development, the positive PR pattern has the developing opening with wide top
and narrow bottom (close to the substrate), and the negative PR pattern has the
developing opening with narrow top and wide bottom. Refer to Figure 12.16.
Figure 12.15
Negative PR developer (left) and positive PR developer (right).
Substrate
PR
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.16
The proﬁles of PRs after development, the (a) is positive and the (b) is
negative. Source: [5] Lueke et al. / MDPI / CC BY 4.0.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 155]
146
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
1.993 μm
1.976 μm
1.488 μm
1.530 μm
2.084 μm
5.0kV 9.0mm × 12.0k SE(U) 1/2/2020 14:57
4.00um
Figure 12.17
The SEM picture of positive PR after development.
Figure 12.17 is a SEM (scanning electron microscope) picture of the openings’ side
view of the positive PR patterns. If we want to have a steeper profile, a simple way
is to appropriately increase the exposure time and shorten the development time.
12.1.7
Inspection
After the development, put the wafer or piece under a microscope for observa-
tion to check whether the pattern openings are clean and whether the alignment
between different layers meets the accuracy specifications. Figure 12.18 is a photo
Figure 12.18
Check the patterns of the sample under a microscope.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 156]
12.1 The Steps of Lithography Process
147
of a microscope and the sample being observed. If the result is not satisfactory,
remove the PR and redo the process. For the most PRs, a simple way to redo the
process is to put the sample on a spinner. When the spinner starts to spin, spray
the surface with acetone, followed by isopropanol, never use DI water. Wait for the
spinner to stop and observe the surface of the sample. If there is no PR residue, we
can drop and spin to coat a new resist layer.
12.1.8
Hard Bake
This step is also called post-bake. For most developers, the last step of develop-
ment is to rinse with DI water. For an organic solvent developer, the last step is
generally to rinse with isopropanol. The purpose of the hard bake is to remove the
water residue or residual organic solvent, and to make the photoresist to harden
continually, laying a good foundation for the next process. But, some photoresists
(for example, SU-8 negative PR) do not need to do hard bake.
For positive resists, a common problem in hard bake is reflow. When the tem-
perature of the hot plate is high, the edge of the pattern opening appears to reflow,
making the edge round and affecting the next process. Figure 12.19 is a reflow
phenomenon of SPR PR. As can be seen from the figure, when the temperature
of the hot plate is 95 ∘C, the edge of the PR opening begins to reflow. Therefore,
No hardbake
75 °C
110 °C
95 °C
Figure 12.19
Reﬂow issue of the PR during hard bake.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 157]
148
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
under normal circumstances, the temperature of hard bake should be lower than
the temperature of soft bake, and in the meanwhile, the time should be extended.
Negative resists crosslink after exposure. The crosslinking makes them thermally
stable, so even elevated temperature will not deteriorate the resist profile [6].
12.1.9
Descum
After the development is completed, observe the openings under the microscope.
Although they look clean, there may be a thin layer of PR residues left on the sur-
face of the openings. The residues may be introduced from insufficient exposure
or developing time. These residues do not have much impact on dry etching but
will have a huge impact on metal processes such as ohmic contact. So, we need to
further clean the opening-remove the residues, generally by using oxygen plasma
method. This step is called descum.
To explore this issue further, we need to say a few more words about organic
matters. Photoresist is an organic matter (organic molecule or compound).
Organic matters are compounds containing carbon, but some exceptions, such as
CO, CO2, SiC, etc. Most inorganic matters are molecules not containing carbon.
The smallest organic molecule is methane (CH4). Compared with inorganic
molecules, the biggest feature of organic compounds is that all large and macro
molecules are composed of organic compounds. If we use daily life example to
illustrate the difference between inorganic and organic matters, an inorganic
molecule is like a grass, and an organic molecule is like a tree. The difference
between a tree and grass is that a tree has a trunk. Because of the trunk, a tree can
support its huge body. Through this example, we can think of an organic matter.
If a large molecular structure of an organic matter is supported, it must have
a structure like a tree trunk, and carbon plays this role. What is so great about
carbon? [7]
●Carbon atoms can be linked by strong, stable covalent bonds.
●Carbon atoms can form stable bonds to many other elements (H, F, N, S, P,
etc.). Most organic compounds contain a few hydrogens, and sometimes oxygen,
nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, etc.
●Carbon atoms can form complex structures, such as long chains, branched
chains, rings, chiral compounds, complex 3D shapes, etc.
The chiral compound mentioned above is a compound that has an asymmetric
center and cannot be superposed on its mirror image. Figure 12.20 shows the
molecular structure of Novolak, which is widely used as a photoresist material.
The molecule is represented by skeletal formula and carbon atoms are represented
by the intersections of line segments. It is composed of carbon chains and rings.
The carbon ring exists in the form of benzene ring (right one in the figure).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 158]
12.1 The Steps of Lithography Process
149
H3C
OH
OH
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
OH
HO
OH
(a)
(b)
OH
OH
Figure 12.20
(a) Molecular structure of Novolak, which is a phenol-formaldehyde
condensation polymer with a branched structure (Source: [8] Reiser et al. / with
permission of Elsevier) and (b) benzene ring.
An important reason why carbon has this characteristic is that it has the second
strongest bond in nature. Please see Table 12.2. For the same-element structure,
nitrogen has the strongest bond (N≡N), followed by carbon (C≡C). The mole
(symbol: mol) is a unit that represents the quantity of a substance. The number
of microscopic substances (atoms, molecules, ions, etc.) in a mole is about
6.02 × 1023. This number is called Avogadro number, in memory of the Italian
scientist Amedeo Avogadro (1776–1856). Although nitrogen has the largest
bonding energy and the strongest bond, it is unfortunate that nitrogen exists in
the form of a gas in a large temperature range. Its boiling point is −195.795 ∘C.
Carbon exists as a solid in a large temperature range. Its sublimation temperature
is 3642 ∘C. Sublimation means that the substance changes directly from a solid
to a gas without passing through a liquid state. This allows carbon to be a “trunk”
within a large temperature range. Carbon provides a solid foundation for the
formation of organic matter. Life on the earth consists of the organic molecules,
so life on the earth is carbon-based life.
Now let us return to the descum. As mentioned above, descum uses oxygen
plasma to clean PR residues in the PR openings. Why does plasma be used? We
have already discussed before, so I do not repeat it here. Why does oxygen be used?
This is because of carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide produced by the reaction
between oxygen and carbon in the PR. CO2 or CO is a gas at room temperature.
In addition, other materials that make up photoresist can also form volatiles after
reacting with oxygen, or after being separated from the molecular structure, they
are themselves gaseous. So, the residues can be removed with oxygen. For the
same reason, fluorine and hydrogen also can be used for PR descum, because
their reactants with carbon, carbon tetrafluoride (CF4) and methane (CH4) are
gases at room temperature. Compared with oxygen, fluorine and hydrogen are
more dangerous, especially hydrogen, which is even more combustible and dan-
gerous gas. Their price is more expensive than oxygen, so we usually use oxygen
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 159]
150
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
Table 12.2
Average bond energies (strengths, kJ/mol) for some common bonds.
Bond
Bond energy
H—H
436
H—C
415
H—N
390
H—O
464
H—F
569
H—Si
395
H—P
320
H—S
340
H—Cl
432
H—Br
370
H—I
295
C—C
345
C=C
611
C≡C
837
C—N
290
C=K
615
C≡N
891
C—O
350
C=O
741
C≡O
1080
C—F
439
C—Si
360
C—P
265
C—S
260
C—Cl
330
C—Br
275
C—I
240
N—N
160
N=N
418
N≡N
946
N—O
200
N—F
270
N—P
210
N—Cl
200
(Continued)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 160]
12.1 The Steps of Lithography Process
151
Table 12.2
(Continued)
Bond
Bond energy
N—Br
245
O—O
140
O=O
498
O—F
160
O—Si
370
O—P
350
O—Cl
205
O—I
200
F—F
160
F—Si
540
F—P
489
F—S
285
F—Cl
255
F—Br
235
Si—Si
230
Si—P
215
Si—S
225
Si—Cl
359
Si—Br
290
Si—I
215
P—P
215
P—S
230
P—Cl
330
P—Br
270
P—I
215
S—S
215
S—Cl
250
S—Br
215
Cl—Cl
243
Cl—Br
220
Cl—I
210
Br—Br
190
Br—I
180
I—I
150
Source: Ref. [9] / Rice University / CC BY 4.0.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 161]
152
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
for the step of descum. From the above discussion, we can see that the descum
is actually dry etching, but the etched layer is very thin. We can also conclude
that all organic matter will be etched by oxygen. However, if an organic substance
contains a certain component, after reacting with oxygen, it produces non-volatile
product, the equipment will be contaminated. So, we should pay attention to this
aspect.
In the dry etching process, we usually use fluorine-containing gases to etch sil-
icon, silicon dioxide and silicon nitride (refer to the reaction Eq. (11.4)). Fluorine
can also etch PR, so a small amount of PR residues has little effect on dry etching.
But, if these residues are left between the metal and the semiconductor surface, it
will have a significant impact on the semiconductor-metal contact. I measured the
impact before. The ohmic contact resistance without the descum can sometimes
reach 5–10 times higher than that after the descum.
So far, we have finished the basic process flow of photolithography. Of course,
there are some special circumstances, and this basic flow is not immutable. Some
processes and photoresists need post exposure bake (PEB). AZ 5214E image
reversal process requires PEB, usually 110–130 ∘C for a few minutes. Another case
is that many AZ negative resists need PEB. PEB can carry out the crosslinking
which is initiated during exposure rendering the exposed structures insoluble
in the developer, typically 110–120 ∘C for a few minutes [6]. After finishing
photolithography, we can do other processes.
12.2
Alignment Mark (Mark) Design on the Photomask
In the lithography process, the design of photomask is also an important topic.
In this section, we do not discuss the entire design, because the requirements of
different devices and circuits design are different, and the design rules of different
companies’ production lines are also different. We only focus on the alignment
mark on the mask used for manual alignment. Several points need to be considered
in the design of the alignment mark, which are often encountered in university
laboratories and clean rooms.
The fabrication of a microchip cannot be completed with one step of lithog-
raphy. It takes multiple lithography steps to complete. Between layers made by
different lithography step, their pattern structures need to be aligned with each
other, as shown in Figure 12.21. The brown and blue patterns in the figure need
to be aligned. The cross patterns on both sides are commonly used alignment
marks. The alignment marks are used to align the patterns of different layers of
the microchip. The alignment marks can be designed on both sides of the wafer or
in the middle of the patterns, depending on the size of the sample (whole wafer or
piece) during the lithography process.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 162]
12.2 Alignment Mark (Mark) Design on the Photomask
153
Figure 12.21
Alignment in the
photolithography (between brown patterns and
blue patterns). Source: Reprinted the image of
Rick J. Bojko and used with the permission of N.
Shane Patrick, Washington Nanofabrication
Facility.
Figure 12.22
Cross alignment mark.
L
W
d
Usually, in the first step of lithography, the first layer of cross alignment mark is
made on the wafer or piece. For the convenience of the next alignment step, the
cross patterns are preferably made of metal (gold is the best), so that it is convenient
to observe later. The substrate can also be etched to make the cross patterns, but
the contrast is not as good as that of metal. In the subsequent photolithography of
other layers, the alignment can be performed based on the first layer. Figure 12.22
is a set of typical cross alignment mark. The yellow one in the mark is the cross
pattern of the first layer, and the green one is the pattern of other layers. The white
area is transparent, and the other parts are opaque. L is the length of the mark, W
is the width, and d is the alignment overlay space between two layers of the marks.
The question discussed in this section is how to determine the values of L, W, and
d, and the direction of the alignment mark. We need to consider these issues in
the following three cases:
Case 1. The design of L and W. The alignment mark cannot be designed to be
too small, which is inconvenient to watch. According to the size of the device
area, the length is generally 100–200 μm, that is, L = 100–200 μm. The width is
generally 20–40 μm, that is, W = 20–40 μm.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 163]
154
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
S
D
G
t
Figure 12.23
The typical structure of MESFET.
Case 2. Design of d. Please note, d cannot be designed to be zero, that is, d = 0.
This is not feasible, because once d is zero, the alignment situation cannot be
seen under the microscope of the aligner. The design of d should consider the
following two points:
1. The accuracy of the device: We take a MOSFET as an example to illustrate,
please see Figure 12.23. In the MOSFET process, the drain region D and
the source region S are fabricated at the same time, and the gate region G
is fabricated separately. D and S are ohmic contacts, and these regions need
to be heavily doped. The yellows in the figure are the metal in the D and
S electrodes, and the blues are the heavily doped areas. The area of the
metal is slightly smaller than the doping area. Ideally, the distances between
D and G, S and G are same, denoted by t in the figure. One of the design
rules of d is less than t, that is, d < t. The purpose of this is that in the
step of alignment, once the alignment accuracy is not good, even if the
two layers of alignment marks touch together (d = 0 in a certain direc-
tion), t will not be zero, the device can still work, but the characteristics
deteriorate.
2. The magnification of the aligner’s microscope: Karlsuss aligner in
Figure 12.24 is commonly used to contact aligner at universities. Due
to the requirements of depth of field (DOF) and field of view (FOV), the
magnification of microscope used for the aligner cannot be too large. The
maximum magnification of this microscope is 300. Now the devices are
getting smaller and smaller, so we hope that d is as small as possible.
However, because of the limitation of microscope magnification, if d is
too small, it is difficult to see clearly under the microscope, which is not
conducive to alignment. For example, if the design is d = 1 μm, it is 0.3 mm
under the microscope with a magnification of 300 times, which is difficult
for the eyes to see clearly. If the design is d = 2 μm, it is 0.6 mm under
the microscope of 300 times, this scale is not difficult to see clearly with the
eyes. So, the second design rule of d is to refer to the magnification of the
aligner’s microscope.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 164]
12.2 Alignment Mark (Mark) Design on the Photomask
155
Figure 12.24
Karlsuss MJB3 contact aligner.
In short, the design of the alignment accuracy d should be considered
according to the requirements of device design and the situation of contact
aligner, rather than designing blindly.
To avoid misalignment problem, modern CMOS technology uses self-
alignment technique. The CMOS structures in Figures 11.2–11.4 are finished
by the technique of self-alignment. An important reason for using polycide
(Section 6.4) instead of metal as electrodes in CMOS devices is to use
self-alignment process. This topic will not be discussed in this book. For
more details, please read reference [10].
Case 3. Design of direction. If it is processing of whole wafer, we can determine
the direction through the flats of the wafer (Figure 10.9). A mask usually has
some words on it that can be used to determine the direction (Figure 12.11).
But when processing a small piece, as shown in Figure 12.25, this is a common
situation in the university clean rooms. Every time these small pieces are placed
in an aligner, the direction cannot be determined. In addition, when aligning
under the microscope, we only use the alignment marks. If there is no direction
indication on the mark, the difference between the direction of a small piece
and a mask by 90∘, 180∘, and 270∘cannot be found. So, it is necessary to design
a pattern indicating the direction on the mask. We can use different patterns.
A simple method is to add a small square to a corner of the cross pattern in
the mark, as shown in Figure 12.22. This small square pattern does not need
to consider the alignment overlay space, and the size of each layer can be the
same. It just gives a sign to avoid the deviation in the direction when a small
piece is aligned. From the picture, we can clearly see the edge bead issue in the
corner of right one. The left one is cut from a whole wafer after PR coating, so
no edge bead on it.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 165]
156
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
Figure 12.25
Small pieces of semiconductor.
12.3
Contemporary Photolithography Equipment
Technologies
So far, the lithography machine we have discussed is only used to make
micron-level microchips. With I-line, the pattern with a feature size of 0.5 μm
can be finished. However, it is difficult to make smaller size than 0.5 μm by using
I-line. According to Rayleigh criterion, to distinguish smaller sizes, we need
to make the following improvements in the optical system: large optical lens,
high refractive index optical medium and short wavelength of exposure light
source.
We can make large optical lens, but due to the manufacturing and other reasons,
we cannot make the lens too large. Using a high-refractive index optical medium,
the space between final lens and wafer is filled with water which is one of the most
used optical medium. This technology used in a contemporary advanced lithogra-
phy machine is called immersion lithography, please see Figure 12.26. Regarding
short wavelength, 193 nm ArF excimer laser is used as exposure light source to
replace I-line HPMVL.
Immersion lithography was made by Advanced Semiconductor Material
Lithography (ASML) in 2003. When using ArF excimer laser, the NA can reach
1.35. 193 nm is deep ultraviolet (DUV). The refractive index of water is around
1.33 (Section 8.3.2) in the visible light range (400–700 nm) but is 1.44 in DUV of
193 nm. Such a high NA optical systems are over 1.2 m high and weigh more than
a metric ton [11]. Figure 12.27 is a photo of ASML scanner with ArF excimer laser
light and water immersion stage. The NA of this machine is 1.35. By using this
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 166]
12.3 Contemporary Photolithography Equipment Technologies
157
Projection
lens
Stage
Wafer
Immersion fluid
Fluid return
Fluid supply
Figure 12.26
Schematic diagram of immersion lithography technology, including the
last lens element contacting the immersion ﬂuid (water).
Figure 12.27
ASML TwinScan XT:1950i scanner. Source: [12] Roger et al., 2009 / with
permission of Annual Reviews.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 167]
158
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
system, single exposure can extend resolution down to 3× nm hp (Section 7.3),
and double patterning techniques can further extend to 2× nm hp [13]. Here 3×
and 2× mean thirties and twenties.
As the feature size becomes smaller and smaller, the wavelength of the
light source becomes shorter and shorter. The light source used in the pro-
cess of 7 nm and smaller is extreme ultraviolet (EUV) with a wavelength of
13.5 nm. Let us return to the Planck energy Eq. (2.1) (E = h𝜈) to calculate
the EUV requirements for optical lenses. Planck constant h = 6.626 × 10−34J⋅s
in the equation. The relationship between the energy unit electron volt (eV)
used in microscopic particles and the commonly used energy unit Joule (J) is
1 eV = 1.602 × 10−19 J. The 𝜈in the equation is the frequency of light, the speed of
light C = 3 × 108 m/s = 3 × 1017 nm/s. The relationship between the speed of light
(C), frequency (ν), and wavelength (λ) is:
C = λ 𝜈
(12.1)
Using formulas (2.1) and (12.1), and substituting the above values, the following
conclusions can be obtained:
1. The material of the quartz photomask we mentioned above is SiO2. Its band gap
is ESiO2 = 9 eV. Using the above formulas and values, we can get the shortest
wavelength that can pass through the quartz mask which is λ = 137.87 nm.
From this number, we know that quartz can be used to make optical lenses and
photomasks for DUV system.
2. For the light source of λEUV = 13.5 nm, quartz glass cannot be used. It is neces-
sary to use a material with a band gap of at least EEUV = 90 eV for optical lenses
and photomasks. Unfortunately, such material is nonexistent.
Judging from the electromagnetic wave spectrum in Figure 7.20, the EUV has
entered the X band and can be absorbed by almost all materials, including air.
To avoid absorption, the light system of a EUV lithography machine adopts a
reflective mirror structure, and the photomask also adopts this structure. The
optical system is placed in a vacuum chamber, and the wafer and the mask are
also placed in a vacuum chamber. In addition, it is also very demanding for
the machining accuracy of the lithography equipment. Processing a 7 nm chip
with a 13.5 nm light source requires carefully designed software for correction.
In short, such a lithography system is very difficult to make. Currently, only
Dutch ASML company (ASML Holding N.V) can manufacture it worldwide.
The price of an ASML EUV projection lithography system is more than US$100
million [14], while the price of an etching system for production is between US$4
million and US$7 million [15]. Figure 12.28 is an ASML EUV scanner lithography
system.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 168]
References
159
Handler for moving and storing masks
Mask entrance
and exit
Wafer handler moves wafers
in and out of system
Wafer is measured
Wafer is exposed
EUV light source
Track system attached
to EUV scanner
coats wafers before
exposure and handles
wafers after exposure
Active mask is exposed to EUV light
First scanner mirror
Figure 12.28
ASML EUV scanner lithography system. Source: [16] Courtland et al.,
2016 / with permission of IEEE.
References
1 Ahmad, D., van den Boogaert, I., Miller, J. et al. (2018). Hydrophilic and
hydrophobic materials and their applications. Energy Sources Part A: Recovery,
Utilization, and Environmental Effects 40 (22): 2687.
2 Wolf, S. and Tauber, R.N. (2000). Chapter 12: Lithography I: optical photoresist
materials and process technology; Chapter 13: Lithography III: optical aligners
and photomasks. In: Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Process Technology,
2e, vol. 1. Lattice Press, p. 510, p. 515, p. 589.
3 Product data sheet, AZ 1500 series, Standard photoresists, Clariant.
4 Haberfehlner, G. 3D nanoimaging of semiconductor devices and materials by
electron tomography, Graz University of Technology, ResearchGate, p. 12.
5 Lueke, J., Badr, A., Lou, E., and Moussa, W.A. (2015). Microfabrication
and integration of a sol-gel PZT folded spring energy harvester. Sensors 15:
12218–12241.
6 MicroChemicals. Resists, Developers and Removers. Revised: 2013-11-07.
7 Boudreaux, K.A. Organic compounds: alkanes, Chapter 1. In: CHEM 2353
Fundamentals of Organic Chemistry Organic and Biochemistry for Today.
Angelo State University.
8 Reiser, A., Huang, J.P., He, X. et al. (2002). The molecular mechanism of
novolak-diazonaphthoquinone resists. European Polymer Journal 38: 619–629.
9 Rice University Chemical bonding and molecular geometry. In: Chemistry,
Chapter 7. 7.5 Strengths of ionic and covalent bonds.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 169]
160
12 Photolithography (Lithography)
10 Wolf, S. (2004). Microchip Manufacturing. Lattice Press.
11 ASML, Lithography principles, Lenses & Mirrors. (2019).
12 French, R.H. and Tran, H.V. (2009). Immersion lithography: photomask and
wafer-level materials. Annual Review of Materials Research 39: 93–126.
13 Furukawa, T., Terayama, K., Shioya, T., and Shima, M. (2013). Material
development for Arf immersion extension towards sub-20 nm node. Journal
of Photopolymer Science and Technology 26 (2): 225–230.
14 Clark, D. (2021). The Tech Cold War’s ‘Most Complicated Machine’ That’s Out
of China’s Reach. A $150 million chip-making tool from a Dutch company has
become a lever in the U.S.-Chinese struggle. It also shows how entrenched the
global supply chain is. The New York Times (July 4).
15 王聪/张天闻. (2018). “国内刻蚀机供应商崛起在望”, 摩尔芯闻. .
16 Courtland, R. (2016). The molten tin solution. IEEE Spectrum 31.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 170]
161
13
Dielectric Films Growth
As insulating layers and optical films, dielectrics are widely used in the manufac-
turing of semiconductor microchips. Among these dielectrics, SiO2 and Si3N4 are
the two most used films. The electrical and mechanical stabilities of the Si–SiO2
interface make this structure the cornerstone of MOSFETs. Si3N4 has five main
applications:
1. The last protective film (layer) of the integrated circuit, which is called
passivation film (layer).
2. A barrier layer for partial isolation of oxidation process.
3. The optical refractive index of SiO2 is 1.46, and that of Si3N4 is 2.05. Due to
the difference in refractive index, they and their combination are important
components of optoelectronic devices.
4. The stress of Si3N4 film can be easily adjusted. So it has found a place in the
manufacturing of many types of devices, such as cantilever, micro, and nano
tube (Figure 7.19), and other structures.
5. SiO2 and Si3N4 can be used as mask layers in III–V dry etching.
The growth methods of the two films are carried out by chemical reactions.
Different machines use different temperatures, which we will discuss below. At
these temperatures, the resulting dielectric film has an amorphous structure.
This structure is composed of many tiny crystal grains. One of their main defects
is pinholes. Pinholes are small holes in the film. When metal is grown, metal
particles can pass through these pinholes, which weakens the insulation of the
film. When the temperature is increased, the tiny crystal grains that make up
the film can diffuse in the film at a faster speed, filling pinholes, reducing the
pinhole density, and improving the insulation of the film. Conversely, when the
temperature is decreased, the pinhole density increases, reducing the insulation
of the film. So, for electrical insulation, high-temperature process is a good choice.
From this point of view, the higher temperature, the better quality of the film.
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 171]
162
13 Dielectric Films Growth
However, due to the following two reasons, not all materials and processes can be
finished with high temperature methods for these two dielectric films:
1. Material restrictions. For silicon, the film growth temperature can be as high
as 1200 ∘C (Chapter 10). However, III–V materials cannot withstand such high
temperature.
2. The limitation of the process. After the metal is deposited on the semiconductor
surface, in order to achieve a good contact, the metal needs to be heated up for
annealing (sintering). In most cases, the annealing temperature is 400–500 ∘C.
From the above discussion, we have a conclusion: In order to meet the process
requirements, we should have film growth technology which temperature is less
than 400 ∘C. The different equipment developed based on this point uses differ-
ent temperatures for the growth of SiO2 and Si3N4. In this chapter, we mainly
introduce the growth processes of these two films.
13.1
The Growth of Silicon Dioxide Film
The Si–SiO2 system is a milestone invention. Based on this invention, the
silicon planar technology was created (Figure 7.15). For SiO2 growth, there
are three main methods: thermal oxidation, LTO-low temperature oxide, and
PECVD. The temperature of thermal oxidation is 900–1200 ∘C, the temperature
of LTO is 400–750 ∘C, and the temperature of PECVD is 250–350 ∘C. It can be
seen from this that the SiO2 growth process uses three different temperature
ranges. Thermal oxidation gives the best quality film. PECVD can complete
film growth below 400 ∘C. LTO gives a range between these two. In these three
processes, thermal oxidation is the direct reaction of oxygen and silicon in
the surface of the substrate to produce SiO2, LTO generates SiO2 by chemical
reaction through thermal decomposition, and PECVD uses two different gases
to generate SiO2 through chemical reaction with the aid of plasma. For special
requirements, such as growing SiO2 on photoresist, we can continue to lower
PECVD temperature, but the quality of the film is decreased. In addition,
this section also introduces another deposition technique with even lower
temperature.
13.1.1
Thermal Oxidation Process of SiO2
Thermal oxidation is to put Si wafers directly into an environment of oxygen
(dry oxidation) or water vapor (wet oxidation). The temperature is increased to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 172]
13.1 The Growth of Silicon Dioxide Film
163
Figure 13.1
Schematic diagram of thermal
oxidation process [1]. Source: Chinese
Technical Books.
SiO2
O2, H2O
Diffusion
reaction
Si
Si + O2=SiO2 or 
Si + 2H2O=SiO2 + 2H2
900–1200 ∘C, so that oxygen and silicon react directly to form silicon dioxide. The
chemical reaction formulas in this temperature range are
Dry ∶Si(solid) + O2(gas) = SiO2(solid).
Wet ∶Si(solid) + 2H2O(gas) = SiO2(solid) + 2H2(gas)
(13.1)
SiO2 is a solid, and it stays on the surface of the Si substrate to form SiO2 film.
The above chemical reactions occur at the interface of SiO2–Si. After the film is
formed, oxygen and water will pass through the SiO2 film with thermal diffusion
and reach the SiO2–Si interface. After reacting with silicon, a new SiO2 layer is
formed, as shown in Figure 13.1. Thermal oxidation is a unique process of silicon,
and it has the following characteristics:
1. It can reach the highest temperature in the processes.
2. The quality of the grown SiO2 film is the best.
3. The growth process is a direct chemical reaction at the interface of SiO2–Si to
form a SiO2 film, which is unique among all film growth processes. During oxi-
dation, oxygen first reacts with the contaminations and defects on the surface
of silicon, so that these contaminations and defects are removed from the sili-
con surface. This feature allows the thermal oxidation process to obtain a fresh
and clean silicon surface, which is not achieved by other film growth processes.
4. The growth rate of the wet method is higher than that of the dry method, and
the density of the film grown by the dry method is better than that of the wet
method, which means that the quality of dry oxidation is better than that of wet
oxidation.
5. Since oxygen and water vapor must diffuse through the grown film to reach the
SiO2–Si interface, as the thickness of the film becomes larger and larger, the
time required for diffusion becomes longer and longer. Therefore, the growth
rate decreases with time until it becomes saturated. Please see Figure 13.2.
Saturation means that when the thickness exceeds a certain value, SiO2 will
not grow again. This is not the case with other methods. Once the conditions
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 173]
164
13 Dielectric Films Growth
0.50
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.45
800 °C
900 °C
1000 °C
1100 °C
800°C
900°C
1000 °C
1100°C
1200 °C
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0
1
2
3
Oxidation time (hr)
(a)
(b)
Oxide thickness X0 (μm)
Oxide thickness X0 (μm)
4
5
6
7
8
0
1
2
3
Oxidation time (hr)
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 13.2
The relationship between the thickness of the thermal oxidation SiO2 ﬁlm
and time. The lattice plane is (100) (refer to Figure 10.10). (a) dry oxidation and (b) wet
oxidation. Source: Reprinted with permission of IuE, TU Wien.
are determined, the growth rate is fixed and will not change with time and
thickness.
6. The proportions of silicon consumed are 44% by the dry and 41% by the wet [1].
Assuming to grow 1000 Å of SiO2, 440 Å of Si is used in the dry, and 410 Å of Si
is used in the wet. Other methods do not consume silicon.
Thermal oxidation is done in an oxidation furnace. The main structure of the
furnace is a quartz tube with heating resistance coils around it. Put the silicon
wafers or pieces in the quartz boat and push it into the quartz tube. For dry
oxidation, UHP (Section 7.4) oxygen is input the furnace and passed over the
wafers or pieces. For wet oxidation, oxygen is input a bubbler containing DI
water at 95 ∘C. The oxygen carries water vapor and goes to the furnace over the
wafers or pieces inside. The heating resistance coils are powered to heat the tube.
SiO2 film is generated in the surface of silicon substrate by chemical reaction
of silicon and oxygen or silicon and water. Figure 13.3 is a schematic diagram
and photos of the oxidation furnace and its accessories. The quartz is mainly
composed of silicon dioxide, which has a melting point of over 1600 ∘C and is one
of the commonly used materials in high-temperature processes. As many kinds
of metals can react with chlorine to produce volatile chlorides (discuss later),
similarly sometimes, HCl or Cl2 can be mixed in the gas flow to remove metallic
impurities and improve the quality of SiO2 film.
13.1.2
LTO Process
The second method of growing SiO2 is LTO. The growth temperature of LTO
is lower than thermal oxidation temperature and is chemical vapor deposition
(CVD). This growth method does not consume silicon substrate, nor does it
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 174]
13.1 The Growth of Silicon Dioxide Film
165
Heating coils
Quartz tube
Quartz carrier
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
O2
H2O
Wafers
Tube cover
Figure 13.3
(a) Schematic diagram of oxidation furnace. (b) Si wafer and quartz boat.
(c) Water bubbler. O2 ﬂows into the bubbler and takes away water vapor. (d) A furnace.
Source: (a) [2] / Bhargav Veepuria (b–d) Lindberg / Tempress 8500.
consume other types of substrates. So the substrate can be silicon, or other
semiconductors and nonsemiconductor materials. The equipment used is like the
thermal oxidation furnace. It also uses a quartz tube and has a heating resistance
wire, but the chemical gases and the temperature are different. There are two
main types for LTO oxide layer depositions:
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 175]
166
13 Dielectric Films Growth
Type 1. TEOS deposition. TEOS is tetraethoxysilane, the chemical formula
is Si(OC2H5)4, and the other name is Tetraethyl OrthoSilicate, TEOS is
the abbreviation of this chemical. TEOS generates thermal decomposition
reaction at 650–800 ∘C, and the product SiO2 is deposited on the surface of
the substrate. The process temperature is 720–750 ∘C. The pressure is over
100 mTorr. For comparison, 1 atm = 760 Torr. The reaction process is as
follows [2]:
TEOS →SiO2 + Gaseous organic molecules + (SiO + C)
(13.2)
The oxygen in the reaction formula comes from TEOS itself and cannot be
introduced from the outside. The oxygen introduced from the outside causes
the quality of film to deteriorate. The content of SiO and C in the reaction
formula should be minimized. This can be achieved by adjusting the process
parameters.
Type 2. Silane deposition. When silane (SiH4) and oxygen meet, they will have
chemical reaction to generate SiO2 that deposits on the substrate surface. SiH4
is a gas at room temperature. Its structure is very unstable, because silicon and
hydrogen are both metal-like elements, the chemical bond between them is very
weak. It can decompose and release active hydrogen and silicon at room tem-
perature. The active hydrogen can have explosive reaction with oxygen in the
air to form water, and the silicon also reacts with oxygen to form SiO2. Active
hydrogen and silicon mean that they exist as atoms not molecules. For safety,
SiH4 should be diluted with high-purity nitrogen to 5% or less, or with other
inert gases, such as helium. In order to ensure the quality of the film, the tem-
perature should be heated above 400 ∘C, generally 400–450 ∘C. The pressure is
from 150 to 300 mTorr [3]. The chemical reaction equation is
SiH4(gas) + 2O2(gas) →SiO2(solid) + 2H2O(gas)
(13.3)
13.1.3
PECVD Process of Silicon Dioxide
The PECVD process uses plasma technique to deposit SiO2. In order to complete
the deposition, a PECVD system must have the following main parts:
1. Process chamber. This is the core part of the whole system because the samples
are deposited in the chamber.
2. In order to ensure the quality of the film, the samples must be heated.
As mentioned above, the temperature should be lower than 400 ∘C, gener-
ally set to 250–350 ∘C. The temperature is usually tested and controlled by
thermocouple.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 176]
13.1 The Growth of Silicon Dioxide Film
167
Chamber
Pump
RF power
supply
Matchwork
MFC
Gas
cylinder
Heater
coolant
Figure 13.4
Schematic diagram of PECVD system. MFC, mass ﬂow controller.
3. Maintaining a certain process pressure. If the pressure is too low, the growing
film is not dense enough. If the pressure is too high, large particles are likely to
be produced, and the quality of the film will deteriorate. The pressure is gener-
ally set up between 500 mTorr and 5 Torr. Therefore, a vacuum pump system is
needed to control the pressure in the process chamber.
4. It is necessary to input gas into the process chamber, so a gas supply system is
required.
5. A power supply (source) is required to generate an electric or a magnetic field.
To make it easier for gas molecules to collide with each other to achieve the
purpose of activating chemical reactions, the power supply generally uses a
high-frequency power source. The most used frequency is 13.56 MHz. This fre-
quency is in the RF range, please see Figure 7.20. So this power supply is also
called RF power supply.
In fact, the abovementioned main parts are standard configurations of many
kinds of semiconductor process equipment. The schematic diagram of the struc-
ture is shown in Figure 13.4. We will explain each part of the system in the dry
etching in Chapter 14.
In PECVD SiO2 system, for further safety, it is not only SiH4 that is diluted with
nitrogen or other inert gases but also reacts with N2O instead of O2. N2O is laugh-
ing gas.
13.1.4
TEOS + O3 Deposition Using APCVD System [4]
An Atmospheric Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (APCVD) system is
implemented for SiO2 film deposition. TEOS and ozone (O3) are mixed into the
APCVD system. The deposition temperature range is 125 to 400 ∘C. Figure 13.5 is
the schematic diagram of the APCVD system.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 177]
168
13 Dielectric Films Growth
Exhaust
Reactor
Temperature
controller
Thermocouple
TEOS/N2
O3/O2
MFC 3
MFC 2
TEOS
Bubblers
MFC 1
N2
O2
Ozonizer
Figure 13.5
Schematic diagram of the APCVD system.
13.2
The Growth of Silicon Nitride Film
There are two main growth methods for silicon nitride, Low Pressure Chemical
Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) and PECVD. The pressure of LPCVD is generally set
to 0.15–2 Torr. Compared with this process, the thermal oxidation process is pro-
cessed at 1 atm. There are also high-pressure processes, such as the High-Pressure
Oxidation – HIPOX process, which has a pressure of 10–25 atm. It is characterized
by increasing the growth rate and is widely used in LOCOS and STI techniques
[5], see Section 11.1.
13.2.1
LPCVD
The basic structure of LPCVD equipment is like that of thermal oxidation fur-
nace. Its main components are quartz tube and heating resistance wire. Thermal
oxidation furnace does not have vacuum pumps. LPCVD is connected to vacuum
pumps. Figure 13.6 is a schematic diagram and photos of an LPCVD system. The
diagram shows three heating zones. The wafers are put into the center zone to do
the process. Thermal oxidation furnace has the same heating zones. The boats in
the picture are placed in a cart to protect them. The material of the boat can be
quartz or graphite. The equipment used for the LTO processes (TEOS and silane
depositions) is the same as the LPCVD equipment. In fact, one LPCVD machine
can have several different quartz tubes for the growth and deposition of different
films. The polysilicon for gate we mentioned earlier is completed with LPCVD
equipment. In the process of depositing silicon dioxide by the silane method,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 178]
13.2 The Growth of Silicon Nitride Film
169
LPCVD system
Pressure
sensor
Loading
door
Process gas inlet
Temperature
Flat zone
(a)
(b)
(c)
Center zone
Wafer boat
Quartz
tube
To pump
Heating Coils
Distance
Wafers
Figure 13.6
LPCVD system. (a) schematic diagram Hong Xiao [6], (b) is a machine
(ﬁrstnano) and (c) are wafer boats.
without oxygen, a polysilicon film will be deposited on the surface of the device in
the temperature range of 600–700 ∘C. In PECVD, there is no oxygen source, and
silicon film can also be deposited. Due to the lower temperature, the deposited
film by PECVD is amorphous silicon. The difference between polycrystalline and
amorphous is that the grain size of polycrystalline is much larger than that of
amorphous.
For the deposition of silicon nitride film, the commonly used gas is Dichlorosi-
lane – DCS. Its molecular formula is H2SiCl2, which provides a silicon atom.
Another gas is ammonia, the molecular formula is NH3. The reason why pure
nitrogen is not used is that nitrogen has the largest bonding energy (see Table
12.2) and is not easy to break, so ammonia is used instead of nitrogen. In the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 179]
170
13 Dielectric Films Growth
PECVD system, ammonia is also used instead of nitrogen to deposit silicon nitride
film. In the temperature range of 750–850 ∘C, the two gases produce the following
chemical reactions:
3H2SiCl2 (gas) + 4NH3 (gas) →Si3N4 (solid) + 6HCl (gas) + 6H2 (gas)
(13.4)
The LPCVD Si3N4 film has a very dense structure. One of the applications is used
as a mask in the LOCOS process.
LOCOS is a traditional integrated circuit isolation technique, and is shown in
Figure 13.7. The first step in the process is to grow thermally a thin layer of silicon
dioxide on silicon substrate, which is called pad-oxide. Use LPCVD to deposit a
silicon nitride film on this oxide pad. Use photolithography to make patterns on
this film. Use dry etching to etch the opening until the surface of silicon. Finally,
place the silicon wafer in the high-pressure oxidation furnace, and thermal oxida-
tion is performed. The dense silicon nitride film acts as a barrier mask to prevent
the diffusion of oxygen or water vapor; so oxidation only occurs in the opening
without silicon nitride film. “Bird’s beak” in the figure is an inherent problem in
LOCOS technique. Its occurrence is caused by lateral oxidation in the process, so
it can only be used for the devices with a feature size greater than 0.25 μm. Please
see Section 11.1.
Nitride
Nitride
Pad oxide
Silicon wafer
Thermal oxidation
(a)
(b)
(c)
Oxide
Oxide
“Bird’s beak”
Nitride removal
Figure 13.7
Schematic diagram of LOCOS process ﬂow. Source: Reprinted with
permission of IuE, TU Wien. (a) Opening nitride and oxide until Si surface. (b) Thermal
oxidation through the opening. (c) Removing nitride ﬁlm.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 180]
13.2 The Growth of Silicon Nitride Film
171
The growth of Si3N4 film by using thermal nitridation is extremely slow and
self-limiting. This is because silicon nitride is so dense that when nitrogen and
silicon react to produce a Si3N4 film, this film will prevent the diffusion of nitrogen
and stop the growth of Si3N4. Through the chemical reaction with ammonia,
thickness of the film grown by thermal nitridation is only 3–4 nm [5]. Due to this
limitation, this process is only used in the manufacture of some special devices.
The reaction of Si and NH3 shows as following:
3Si (solid) + 4NH3 →Si3N4 (solid) + 6H2 (gas)
(13.5)
13.2.2
PECVD Process of Silicon Nitride
PECVD Si3N4 deposition equipment and PECVD SiO2 equipment are the same.
But look closely, they are still somewhat different:
The first difference is that different gases are passed into the process chamber to
deposit different films. SiO2 is dilute silane and laughing gas, while Si3N4 is
dilute silane and ammonia.
The second difference is that SiO2 equipment usually needs one power source,
namely 13.56 MHz, which is called a high-frequency (HF) power supply. Si3N4
equipment has two sets of power sources, one is a power source with a frequency
of 13.56 MHz, and the other is a power source with a frequency of 300–400 kHz
[7], which is called a low-frequency (LF) power supply. On a silicon substrate,
when the deposited Si3N4 film is completed by a high-frequency power supply,
the film shows tensile stress, causing the silicon wafer to be convex. When the
deposited Si3N4 film is completed by a low-frequency power supply, the film
exhibits compressive stress, which causes the silicon wafer to be concave, see
Figure 13.8. Figure 13.9 is a photo of a PECVD machine used to deposit Si3N4.
It can be used to deposit Si3N4 or SiO2 film, depending on the gases input.
Film
Substrate
Film
Substrate
Film
Substrate
Tensile
Compressive
Figure 13.8
Changes of compressive stress and tensile stress substrate.
Source: Reprinted with permission of IuE, TU Wien.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 181]
172
13 Dielectric Films Growth
Figure 13.9
The photo of a PECVD machine for depositing Si3N4 ﬁlm.
As mentioned above, with HF power, we can make Si3N4 film with tensile
stress; with LF power, we can make Si3N4 film with compressive stress. If
the film is done by using HF and LF powers at the same time, we can make
Si3N4 film with low stress. The stress of Si3N4 has been found in many appli-
cations in the devices’ manufacturing, especially in micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS). Figure 13.10 is a cantilever made by Si3N4 film with tensile
stress. The device was made by Professor Chang Liu’s research group at the
Figure 13.10
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) picture of cantilevers.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 182]
13.2 The Growth of Silicon Nitride Film
173
University of Illinois. The μm-sized transformer shown in Figure 7.19 is also
made using the stress technique of by Si3N4 film.
As can be seen from Figure 13.8, if a compressive stress film is deposited on Si
surface, the substrate and the film tend to stick together. If a tensile stress film is
deposited on Si surface, the substrate and the film tend to separate. Therefore, if a
Si3N4 film is used as the final passivation film, a compressive stress film should be
used, and the reliability of the device is higher than that of a tensile stress film used.
In the above processes, we use combustible gases. For example, DCS and silane
are both combustible gases (they easily separate out hydrogen). DCS is also a
toxic gas (chlorine is separated out). We classify combustible and toxic gases
as hazardous gases. When using hazardous gases, the exhaust gases removed
by pump from the equipment must first be processed by CDO and exhaust gas
treatment equipment before they can be discharged into the atmosphere. CDO
is the abbreviation of “Controlled Decomposition Oxidation,” which means con-
trolled oxidative decomposition. The word for exhaust gas treatment equipment
is “scrubber,” which is used to remove harmful materials from the exhaust gases.
Fluorine-containing gases CF4, CHF3, and SF6 are not combustible and toxic. So
they may go to scrubber directly without passing CDO. Figure 13.11 are photos of
CDO and scrubber.
Figure 13.11
CDO (a) and scrubber (b).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 183]
174
13 Dielectric Films Growth
13.3
Atomic Layer Deposition Technique [8]
W
Aspect ratio
H
W
—
=
H
Figure 13.12
Schematic diagram of
aspect ratio.
The film growth techniques we discussed above are
widely used in the manufacturing of microchips. As the
feature size of the devices gets smaller and smaller, these
techniques have two common issues that are difficult to
figure out: thin films deposition and achieving a confor-
mal layer on a high aspect ratio structure. In semicon-
ductor manufacture, an aspect ratio is primarily the ratio
of the height and width of an etching structure, please see
Figure 13.12. Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) is a promis-
ing system to solve two issues. Let us use CVD system as
an example to describe ALD system in this section.
Typically, CVD processes are used in flow-type reactors
with simultaneous and continuous reactants injection
and continuous removal of reaction by-products. These processes are mainly
characterized by the following parameters: deposition temperature (T, ∘C),
deposition pressure (P, mTorr-Torr), deposition time (t, min, or s), and gas flow
A+B “on”
A
IMP
d1
d2
B
A and B gas-phase
interaction and IMP
formation
IMP diffusion
Surface reactions
and film growth
Device structure
H
W
P
(a)
(b)
t
Process time
A+B “off”
Figure 13.13
A simple scheme of the CVD
process with the formation of intermediate
products (IMP) from the reaction of A and B
in the gas phase, diffusion and forming the
ﬁlm on the structure surface.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 184]
13.3 Atomic Layer Deposition Technique
175
rate (sccm, talk later). However, ALD technique shows completely different
process implementation and features. Unlike CVD processes, ALD processes
are organized cyclically with sequential injection of the precursors and other
reactants separated by an inert gas (mostly N2). There are two types of ALD
system: thermal activated ALD (TA-ALD) and plasma-enhanced ALD (PE-ALD).
Figure 13.13 is the diagram of CVD processes with reactants A and B. Figure 13.14
is the diagram of a cyclic process with precursor A and reactant B and represents
TA-ALD process. In the case of PE-ALD, the plasma discharge is usually switch-on
some short time after the start of the reactant pulse and switch-off at the end
of the pulse.
The step coverage (film conformality) can be expressed as the ratio of the film
thickness at the bottom of the step (or gap) to the film thickness at the top of this
step (or gap), d2/d1 (%). Depending on CVD process and its conditions, the ratio
from a few percent to almost 100%. As the conformality is not good, and as the
film thickness increases, the top opening of the structure will close-off, leaving a
void inside the film. Unlike CVD, ALD completely excludes reactant interaction
in the gas phase, and the formation and diffusion of IMPs (intermediate products).
As compared to CVD, all processes of ALD are localized strongly on the surface
of objects. A key advantage is layer-by-layer deposition (therefore, it is called
ALD). Due to the self-limited chemical reaction, which is beneficial to the thin
films’ deposition. In addition, ALD is a strongly surface-limited process and has
A
Purge
Purge
Process cycle
Precursor A injection.
adsorption. A residues
evacuation
B
Reactant B injection.
reaction with absorbed A
with thin layer formation
B residues and by-products
evacuation.
readiness for the next cycle
Figure 13.14
Schematic diagram of a cyclic process with precursor A and reactant B of
ALD forming the ﬁlm on the device structure surface.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 185]
176
13 Dielectric Films Growth
Figure 13.15
A photo of TA-ALD. The process chamber in on the top. The precursor
cylinders are covered by heating jackets. Source: Veeco Instruments Inc.
an excellent thin film conformality, which is beneficial to do deposition on a
high-aspect ratio structure.
There are many kinds of Si precursors. One commonly used one is BDEAS
{bis(diethylamino)silane SiH2[N(C2H5)2]2}. The reactant for SiO2 is usually ozone
produced by an ozonizer (Figure 13.5). The reactant for Si3N4 is usually NH3.
The processes are usually done in the temperature range 200–400 ∘C. Monolayer
films and high conformality of SiO2 and Si3N4 can be created by using ALD. But
the deposition rate is slow. Figure 13.15 is a photo of TA-ALD, and Figure 13.16
is a schematic of PE-ALD. In Figure 13.16, spectroscopic ellipsometer is used
for in situ measurement of the film thickness. VAT valves are widely used in the
manufacturing equipment of semiconductor.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 186]
References
177
Figure 13.16
Schematic
diagram of ALD reactor with
plasma enhancement. Source:
[9] Gaines.
Spectroscopic
ellipsometer
Transfer port W/ Gate-valve for
load-lock/Cluster tool integration
Plasma
gas
input
Remote
plasma
source
Precursor
input (x4)
References
1 电子工业生产技术手册7, 半导体与集成电路卷，硅器件与集成电路, 184, 国防
工业出版社，1991年页。
2 高等学校教学参考书, 半导体器件工艺原理, 厦门大学物理系半导体物理教研室
编, 人民教育出版社, 44–45 页, 1977年。
3 Alamariu, B. tube6c-LTO standard operation procedure, MIT.
4 Juárez, H., Pacio, M., Díaz, T. et al. (2009). Low temperature deposition: proper-
ties of SiO2 films from TEOS and ozone by APCVD system. Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 167: 012020.
5 Wolf, S. and Tauber, R.N. (2000). Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era: Process
Technology, 2e, vol. 1, p. 283, p. 299. Lattice Press.
6 Xiao, H. CVD and Dielectric Thin Film, Chapter 10, 22.
7 Van de Ven, E.P., Connick, I.W., and Harrus, A.S. (1990). Advantages of dual
frequency PECVD for deposition of ILD and passivation films. VMIC Conference,
(12–13 June 1990). IEEE. pp. 194–201.
8 Vasilyev, V.Y. (2021). Atomic layer deposition of silicon dioxide thin films. ECS
Journal of Solid State Science and Technology 10: 053004.
9 Gaines, J.R. (2017). KJLC® awarded a patent for its atomic layer deposition
system and process.Kurt J. Lesker, November 28. US patent 9,695,510.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 187]
179
14
Introduction of Etching and RIE System
Etching is an important process in the manufacture of semiconductor microchips.
After photolithography is completed, the device patterns produced by the litho-
graphy can be permanently transferred and prepared on the substrate under
the PR by etching. In the transferring and preparation, most of the microchip’s
manufacturing processes require accurate transfer with constant pattern size. The
process can be divided into two types: wet etching and dry etching. Wet etching
uses liquid to etch the substrate, and dry etching uses gas to etch the substrate.
14.1
Wet Etching
Wet etching involves many things. For example, the etching rate of the etchant
used for silicon is different on different lattice planes, but this issue is not involved
here. This section discusses the wet etching of SiO2, also including Si3N4. They are
the most used dielectrics in semiconductor processing.
The commonly used silicon dioxide (oxide) etchant is hydrofluoric acid (HF)
and buffered oxide etch (BOE) in which water and ammonium fluoride (NH4F)
are added to hydrofluoric acid. This kind of etchant is known as HF-based etchant.
The concentration of commonly used HF liquid is 49%, and its etching rate is too
fast. So it is necessary to add DI water to dilute HF during the process, or use
BOE. BOE is also called buffered HF or BHF. Figure 14.1 is the photos of HF and
BOE. HF etches SiO2, the principle is that fluorine and silicon react to produce
a volatile, see Eq. (11.4). Nevertheless, the etching process of wet and dry tech-
niques is different. As mentioned in Section 11.3, in order to complete dry etching
at room temperature, plasma technique is needed in most cases. Wet etching does
not require plasma, but the key is that the etchant must be adsorbed on the surface
being etched. Since the HF-based etchant is an aqueous solution, the surface to be
etched must be hydrophilic (see Figure 12.5). The surface of SiO2 is hydrophilic,
so this etchant can etch SiO2. The surface of Si is hydrophobic, so this etchant
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 188]
180
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
Figure 14.1
HF (small bottle on the
right) and BOE (big bottle on the left).
cannot etch Si. This is very interesting because according to the chemical reaction
formula, SiF4, the reactant of F and Si is a volatile. In theory, HF can etch Si, but
in fact, it does not work because the surface of Si is hydrophobic.
Wet etching of silicon nitride is divided into two situations: (i) Si3N4 deposited by
PECVD can be etched by HF-based etchant, but the etching rate is lower than that
of SiO2; (ii) Si3N4 deposited by LPCVD can be etched by HF-based etchant with
slow etching rate. The commonly used method is in a phosphoric acid (H3PO4)
solution at 150–170 ∘C.
There are some differences between dry etching and wet etching. Dry etching is
implemented through chemical reaction, physical sputtering, or the combination
of chemical and physical actions. Wet etching is primarily achieved by chemical
reaction. Dry etching of silicon and silicon dioxide is divided into three situations:
(i) It etches Si and SiO2; (ii) It only etches Si but not SiO2; (iii) It only etches SiO2
but not Si. Dry etching of silicon and silicon nitride is divided into two situations:
(i) It etches Si and Si3N4; (ii) It only etches Si but not Si3N4. These situations will
be discussed in detail in Chapter 15.
Compared with dry etching, wet etching has two main advantages: (i) low cost.
The main equipment for wet etching is a fume hood (see Figure 14.2). The price
is lower than the equipment for dry etching. (ii) High-production efficiency. Up to
25 wafers can be placed in a wafer cassette and placed in the bath for etching at
the same time (see Figure 14.3). The bath showed in the figure can be heated. HF
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 189]
14.1 Wet Etching
181
Figure 14.2
A fume hood with simple structure for wafer cleaning, wet etching, and
developing.
Figure 14.3
Etch bath, cassette, and wafers.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 190]
182
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
PR
PR
Substrate
(a)
Substrate
(b)
Figure 14.4
The proﬁles of isotropic etch (a) and anisotropic etch (b).
bath has a similar structure but no heating wires inside. However, wet etching
has two main disadvantages: (i) It is difficult to perform small size etch. (ii) It can
only perform isotropic etch, that is, the etching rate is the same in all directions.
In the manufacture of microchips, anisotropic etch is main target. Figure 14.4 is a
schematic diagram of isotropic and anisotropic etching profiles.
14.2
RIE System for Dry Etching
As we said before, from a chemical point of view, dry etching and chemical
vapor deposition are essentially the same. The fundamental difference is that the
product is volatile after chemical reaction, which is the etching; the product is
nonvolatile after chemical reaction, which is the deposition. RIE is the most used
dry etching equipment. An RIE machine and a PECVD machine are very similar
in appearance. The basic structure of the two machines is shown in Figure 13.4.
In a process chamber, either deposition or etching can be done, depending on the
gases input. We will discuss RIE equipment below related to the Figure 13.4. Due
to the similarities between RIE and PECVD, PECVD will often be mentioned for
comparison in the following discussions.
14.2.1
RIE Process Flow and Equipment Structure
Let us use the dry etching of SiO2 to illustrate the RIE process flow. The diagram
of the flow is shown in Figure 14.5. The first step is to grow or deposit a SiO2
dielectric film on the wafer surface. The second step is to complete the photoresist
patterning on the film, where the photoresist is used as a masking film to protect
the unexposed areas from etching. The third step is to put it into the machine to
complete the etch of the openings without the PR protection. In the third step,
“che + phy” refers to chemical reaction and physical sputtering (bombardment);
“radicals” refers to the atoms, or the collection of atoms that exist in the plasma.
They are electrically neutral, but in the states of incomplete chemical bonding,
making them very chemically reactive.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 191]
14.2 RIE System for Dry Etching
183
Ions, radicals, che+phy
Photoresist patterning
Reactive ion etching of SiO2
Volatile etch products
Silicon
SiO2
Photoresist
SiO2
Silicon
Photoresist
SiO2
Silicon
SiO2 layer growth or deposition
Figure 14.5
Schematic diagram of RIE dry etching process.
Let us use CF4 as an example. The most abundant ionic specie found in CF4
plasma is CF3
+. In addition to CF4 molecules, ionic species, and electrons, there
are a large number of radicals formed. In CF4 plasma, the most abundant radicals
are CF3 and F. In general, radicals are thought to exist in plasma in much higher
concentration than ions. For more details, please refer the reference [1] on page
670. These particles are also subject to the collision of electrons and ions in the
plasma. Due to the similarity, we use the basic structure of PECVD shown in Figure
13.4 to discuss RIE system. In RIE, the core part is the process chamber, because
the samples are processed here.
As discussed in Section 11.3, a plasma process chamber can only adopt two
structures: capacitance or inductance. What structure should RIE adopt? To
determine this issue, we need to discuss dry etching. In the process, the two
most important materials to be etched by dry etching are SiO2 and Si3N4, which
are chemically the same as silicon etching. They are carried out by the reaction
of fluorine and silicon to form a volatile. When the fluorine-containing gas is
split and activated by plasma, the active radical F can directly react with Si to
produce volatile SiF4. However, F cannot directly react with Si inside SiO2 and
Si3N4 because silicon atoms in these two materials are bound by oxygen and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 192]
184
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
nitrogen. In order to etch them, the chemical bonds of these two molecules
must be broken. Gas molecules can collide with each other and split through the
action of electromagnetic field. SiO2 and Si3N4 are solids, and collision between
molecules is impossible. How to break the bonds? This requires bombarding the
surface of SiO2 and Si3N4 with ions to break their chemical bonds. This is the
physical sputtering (bombardment) of ions, as shown in Figure 14.5.
When a charged ion enters electromagnetic field, the electric field causes lin-
ear acceleration of the ion, the magnetic field changes the direction of movement
of the ion, and the linearly accelerated ion will physically bombard the surface
of the substrate. Although a radical can also randomly bombard the surface, the
sputtering force of a radical is smaller than that of an accelerated ion, so physical
sputtering is also called physical sputtering of ions. As mentioned in Chapter 4,
capacitance and electric field are related. So if we want to design a process cham-
ber, in which there are both chemical reaction and physical sputtering, we can
only use a capacitive structure. This kind of plasma is called capacitively coupled
plasma (CCP). The schematic diagram of RIE system using CCP process chamber
is shown in Figure 14.6. PECVD also uses a similar structure. Figure 14.7 is a photo
of a RIE equipment. Below we will describe each part of the system according to
Figure 14.6 in conjunction with Figure 13.4.
14.2.2
Process Chamber
As mentioned above, the process chamber (chamber) in an RIE machine uses
a capacitive structure. When the chamber is opened, the structure is shown
in Figure 14.8. The top (upper) electrode in the figure is also called shower-
head because this electrode has many small holes (like showerhead used in
Gas inlet
Top electrode
(showerhead)
Semiconductor
substrate
Bottom
electrode
(platen)
RF power
supply
Match
work
Pumping
port
Plasma
Figure 14.6
Schematic
diagram of the overall
structure of the RIE
system.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 193]
14.2 RIE System for Dry Etching
185
Pumping
line
Process
chamber
Control
unit
Mechanical
pump
Figure 14.7
Photos of an RIE machine. Source: PlasmaLab RIE.
RIE chamber
Capacitive structure
Top (upper) electrode
Showerhead
Bottom (lower) electrode
Platen
Figure 14.8
The structure and names of a process chamber. Source: PlasmaLab RIE.
the bathroom) through which etching gases enter the chamber. The bottom
(lower) electrode has another name platen. An O-ring is inlaid on the outer
edge of the showerhead. The O-ring ensures that the chamber can maintain a
certain vacuum. The wafer or piece is placed on the platen. The etching gases
are introduced into the chamber. Under the action of the electric field, plasma
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 194]
186
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
Figure 14.9
The color of
plasma glow.
discharge is generated, and photons are emitted. The light emitted by different
gas has different wavelength and different color. There is a small window on the
sidewall of the chamber to observe the luminous color, as shown in Figure 14.9. A
PECVD machine has a process chamber with the same structure and has similar
light emission.
14.2.3
Vacuum Pumps
The vacuum pumps (pumps) used in different systems are different. Figure 14.10
shows commonly used pumps. The left is a turbomolecular pump (turbo pump),
and the right is a Roots blower and mechanical (backing) pump. If the process
Gas filter
Roots
blower
Backing
pump
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.10
A turbomolecular pump (a), Roots blower and mechanical pump (b).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 195]
14.2 RIE System for Dry Etching
187
pressure is 100 mTorr or higher, and the gas flow is not large, a mechanical pump
can meet the requirement. However, if high vacuum is required, or the gas flow
rate is large, it is necessary to assist other types of pumps. RIE requires a high
vacuum, the turbo pump can meet this requirement. The structure of the pump
uses a combination of turbo and mechanical pumps. PECVD hopes to have a low
vacuum, but the gas flow is large, mainly because the diluent gas flow is large.
The pump structure used in PECVD is a combination of a Roots blower and a
mechanical pump. The “Gas filter” showed in the figure is frequently used in
PECVD system. This is because PECVD is a process that produces tiny particles,
and the filter can block the particles that may enter the pump, extending the
service life of the pump. The pumping lines are used to connect pumps to the
process chamber through pumping port, as shown in Figure 14.6.
14.2.4
RF Power Supply (Source) and Matching Network
(Matchwork)
As mentioned in Section 13.1.3, the frequency of most power supplies used for
the process is 13.56 MHz. Other frequencies are sometimes used in the power
supplies. 300–400 kHz supplies are used for PECVD Si3N4 deposition and 2 MHz
supply is used for inductively coupled plasma (ICP) dry etching (discuss in
Chapter 15). Theses frequencies are in the radio frequency (RF) range, so they
are called RF power supplies. In addition to RF supplies, we also use DC and
microwave (2.45 GHz) power supplies in the process. Figure 14.11 is the photo of
a 13.56 MHz power supply. To understand the power supply, impedance matching
needs to be discussed. For RF power supply, it satisfies impedance Eq. (4.9), which
contains the components of capacitance and inductance. Different size of RIE
chamber, the capacitance is different. So with different sizes and frequencies, the
Figure 14.11
RF power
supply.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 196]
188
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
Power
supply
Load
DC circuit
Output resistance
Input impedance
Output impedance
AC circuit
Input resistance
Figure 14.12
The difference
between DC circuit and AC circuit.
impedance of the system is also different. Because the working frequency of the
supply is very high, when a supply is connected to a process chamber, it is easy to
cause a problem called impedance mismatch. Figure 14.12 is a schematic diagram
of the connection between a supply and a load. For a DC circuit, output resistance
of the supply and input resistance of the load are the same. For an AC circuit,
output impedance of the supply and input impedance of the load are different
in many times. This is called impedance mismatch. As a product, the output
impedance of the power supply is generally designed to be 50 Ω. This number has
a special name, characteristic impedance. In our actual system, the load is the
process chamber. It is difficult for the input impedance of the chamber to achieve
a characteristic impedance of 50 Ω, which causes impedance mismatch problem.
Therefore, on a RF power supply, there are two power readings (Figure 14.11):
FORWARD is the incident power, which refers to the power from the supply to
the chamber; REVERSE is the reflected power, which refers to the power from
the chamber to the supply. In the system, FORWARD is sometimes written as
INCIDENT, and REVERSE is sometimes written as REFLECTED. During the
process, the reflected power should be as small as possible, preferably zero. If the
reflected power is large, the following three problems will occur:
1. The power entering the process chamber is smaller than the power designed in
the recipe. The etching result deviates from the expected value, which is lower
than the designed value.
2. It is difficult in ignition of the plasma discharge. 3. It may cause damage to the
power supply.
If the matching between the supply and the chamber is not good, and there
is a large reverse power, we should use a matching network (matchwork) to
eliminate the mismatch problem, please see Figures 14.13 and 14.14. Matching
is a very important issue in the design of RF and microwave circuits. Different
structures are used for different systems and frequencies. For RF power supply
used in semiconductor technology, a matching network is mainly composed of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 197]
14.2 RIE System for Dry Etching
189
Figure 14.13
Matchwork controller.
Figure 14.14
The variable capacitors used in matching networks. (a) one uses two
vacuum capacitors and (b) one uses two rotary capacitors.
two variable capacitors and an inductor. The capacitors are called capacitor 1 (C1)
and capacitor 2 (C2), or load C and tune C, or magnitude C and phase C, please
see Figure 14.14. The matchwork is placed between the supply and the chamber,
see Figures 13.4 and 14.6.
14.2.5
Gas Cylinder and Mass Flow Controller (MFC)
The chemical gases used in the process need containers for storage. Cylinders
are the containers to store the gases (see Figure 14.15a). Since most gas cylinders
store high-pressure gases and cannot be directly connected to the equipment,
we need to use a regulator to reduce the pressure from a high-pressure cylinder
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 198]
190
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
High pressure valve
High pressure gauge
Adjustment knob
Low pressure gauge
Low pressure valve
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.15
Gas cylinders (a) and a regulator (b).
to a safe working pressure for the equipment use (see Figure 14.15b). In the
figure, “High-pressure valve” is the cylinder valve, “High-pressure gauge” shows
the pressure inside the cylinder, “Adjustment knob” is a pressure-reducing
valve, “Low-pressure gauge” reads the pressure after the adjustment knob, and
“Low-pressure valve” is the valve after the adjustment knob. In the following
chapters, the high-pressure and low-pressure gauges will be referred to as pressure
gauge for short.
The boiling point or sublimation temperature of each chemical gas is different,
and the pressure of the cylinder that stores it is also different. The lower the
temperature, the higher the cylinder pressure. The higher the temperature, the
lower the cylinder pressure. Some etching gases are liquid or close to liquid at
room temperature. At this time, the pressure of the cylinder is very low, and it can
be directly connected to the system without a regulator. Figure 14.16 shows the
values displayed by several high-pressure gauges of different gases. The unit of
the pressure gauge in the figure is pounds per square inch (psi), 1 atm = 14.7 psi.
The pressure of CF4 in the picture exceeds 1500 psi, CHF3 is close to 600 psi,
and SF6 is only 300 psi. These cylinders have been used for some time, and the
pressure has decreased. The pressure of the new cylinder is 2000 psi for CF4,
635 psi for CHF3, and 320 psi for SF6 [2]. Their corresponding boiling points are
shown in the figure. From the pressure of the cylinder, we can understand which
gas has a low boiling point and which gas has a high boiling point. BCl3, one
of the most used etching gases for III–V semiconductors, has a boiling point of
12.6 ∘C and a cylinder pressure of 4.4 psi [2]. In this case, the cylinder can be
directly connected to the equipment and no regulator is required.
The three gases mentioned above, CF4, CHF3, and SF6, are the three most used
gases for dry etching of Si, SiO2, and Si3N4. The first two gases contain carbon,
so sometimes we call CF4 as Freon 14 and CHF3 as Freon 23. The three gases are
very stable. Plasma method is required to ionize them for the dry etching. There are
many differences between the three gases, but in the process, the main difference
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 199]
14.2 RIE System for Dry Etching
191
CF4, Boiling point –127.8 °C
CHF3, Boiling point –82.1 °C
SF6, Boiling point –50.8°C
Figure 14.16
Different boiling points correspond to different pressures of the cylinders
with unit psi.
between them is the content of fluorine. Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) contains 6 F,
Freon 14 has 4 F, and Freon 23 has only 3 F. Therefore, under a same condition,
SF6 etching rate is the highest, CF4 is in the middle, and CHF3 is the lowest. Here
are three results of PECVD Si3N4 etching rate: SF6 is around 1564 Å/min, CF4 is
around 835 Å/min, and CHF3 is around 284 Å/min.
When a cylinder is opened, the high-pressure gas passes through the regula-
tor to reduce to low pressure, generally about 20 psi. The low-pressure gas then
enters the gas flow control device along the gas line. This device is mass flow con-
troller (MFC), as shown in Figure 14.17. The most used gas flow rate unit in the
process is Standard Cubic Centimeters per Minute (SCCM). One cubic centime-
ter (cm3) is 1 milliliter (ml). About learning, Confucius said 2500 years ago: “learn
one point, understand three points.” We just learned about SCCM. If we encounter
other flow rate units, we should be able to read them out according to this method.
Figure 14.18 is the other two flow rate units, SCFH is Standard Cubic Feet per Hour
and SLPM is Standard Liter per Minute. The “standard” refers to the standard con-
ditions of temperature and pressure–temperature is 0 ∘C and pressure is 1 atm.
At this point, a complete gas supply system has been established, see Figure 13.4.
One gas connects with one MFC. If more than one gas used in the etching, they
are merged to one gas line after passing through the MFCs and enter the process
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 200]
192
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
Figure 14.17
MFC (a) and the unit of gas ﬂow (b).
Figure 14.18
Gas ﬂow units SCFH (a) and SLPM (b).
chamber through the gas inlet. Please refer to Figure 14.6. MFC was also showed
in Figure 13.4.
For MFC, there is one issue that needs to be considered, and it is conversion
factors (correction factors) between different gases. The gas labeled on MFC in
Figure 14.17 is N2. It can be considered that this MFC is calibrated with nitrogen.
Its range is 0–100 sccm. This means that when using this MFC to control N2, the
minimum flow rate is 0 sccm, and the maximum flow rate is 100 sccm. Corre-
sponding to different gases and needs, the calibration gas of MFC is different, and
the range is also different (see Figure 14.19). When the upper MFC is used for
chlorine, the maximum flow is 50 sccm; when the lower one is used for silane,
the maximum flow is 150 sccm.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 201]
14.2 RIE System for Dry Etching
193
Figure 14.19
Cl2, 50 sccm MFC and
SiH4, 150 sccm MFC.
Table 14.1
Gas conversion factors with respect to N2.
Gas name
Conversion factor
N2, Nitrogen
1.00
Air
1.00
Ar, Argon
1.39
H2, Hydrogen
1.01
He, Helium
1.45
O2, Oxygen
0.99
Cl2, Chlorine
0.86
N2O, Nitrous oxide
0.71
CH4, Methane
0.72
NH3, Ammonia
0.73
SiH4, Silane
0.60
CHF3, Trifluoro methane (Freon23)
0.50
CF4, Carbon tetrafluoride (Freon14)
0.42
BCl3, Boron trichloride
0.41
SiCl4, Silicon tetrachloride
0.28
SF6, Sulfur hexafluoride
0.26
C4F8, Octafluorocyclobutane
0.16
Source: Adapted from Ref. [3].
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 202]
194
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
The question now is, if an MFC is broken, for example a 100 sccm CF4 MFC is
broken, there is no same MFC at this time, but there is a 100 sccm N2 MFC. We
can install this N2 MFC on the gas line of CF4 to control CF4. 100 sccm N2 MFC is
used for CF4. Is the maximum flow rate also 100 sccm? The answer is no. We must
multiply by a number called conversion factor or correction factor to convert N2
to CF4 (see Table 14.1). The gases listed on the table are commonly used gases in
the process. In this table, all gases are converted based on N2. The factor of CF4 is
0.42, so if 100 sccm N2 MFC is used to control CF4, the flow rate of CF4 at full scale
is 100 × 0.42 = 42 sccm. The conversion of other gases can be deduced by analogy.
14.2.6
Heater and Coolant
In PECVD, the platen needs to be heated to about 300 ∘C, so there must be a set
of heating and control systems in the PECVD equipment. RIE usually does not
require heating, and photoresist can be used as a mask for etching in the process.
Figure 14.20
Water chillers, the left is a small one and the right is a large one.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 203]
14.2 RIE System for Dry Etching
195
Figure 14.21
The computer screen of operating software. Source: Oxford Instruments,
PlasmaPro 80 RIE.
The plasma in the process generates a lot of heat, which requires cooling. In
addition, a large power supply also needs cooling. So in RIE and PECVD systems,
cooling is an essential part. In cooling technology, water is the most used coolant,
and other types of coolants can also be used. The system can be directly connected
to the chilly water system in the clean room, or water chillers (chillers) can be
used, see Figure 14.20.
So far, a whole RIE system is introduced. Most of the pictures I took from old
model machines. New model machines have become compact. It is not easy to find
these parts from the outside. But we can find such information on the computer
screen of the operating software (see Figure 14.21). From this figure, we can find
MFC, flow rate, pressure, forward power, reflected power, matchwork, and DC bias
(talk in Chapter 15).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 204]
196
14 Introduction of Etching and RIE System
References
1 Wolf, S. and Tauber, R.N. (2000). Chapter 14, Dry etching for ULSI fabrication.
In: Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Process Technology, 2e, vol. 1, 670.
Lattice Press.
2 Matheson Tri⋅Gas, Gases and Equipment, pp. 199, 200, and 225.
3 “Gas Correction Factors for Thermal-based Mass Flow Controllers”, MKS
Instruments, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 205]
197
15
Dry Etching
In Chapter 14, we mainly discussed the RIE system. In the dry etching process,
there is still much to be understood. In this chapter, we will discuss the etch pro-
file, speed, the selection of etching gases for different materials, and inductively
coupled plasma (ICP).
When doing RIE etching process, we need to record the following four
parameters:
1. Gas flow rate (flow), the unit is sccm.
2. The process pressure (pressure), the unit is mTorr.
3. The process power (power), the unit is W.
4. DC bias, the unit is V.
For the PECVD deposition process, the first three parameters to be recorded are
the same as RIE, except that the fourth parameter is different. This parameter is
temperature.
Below we will discuss the abovementioned aspects.
15.1
The Etch Proﬁle of RIE
For dry etching, the profile after etching is one of our main concerns. If the influ-
ence of other chemical components in the process is not considered, and fluorine
etching of Si, SiO2, and Si3N4 is only examined, the profile of the substrate opening
after RIE etching is shown in Figure 15.1. The photoresist cross-section (profile)
in the schematic diagram is in an ideal situation. The actual resist cross-section
is shown in Figure 12.16. We use the ideal photoresist cross-section to discuss the
profile of dry etching. Figure 15.1 uses silicon as an example. SiO2 and Si3N4 have
similar conclusions.
For dry etching, the resulting profile has two extreme cases:
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 206]
198
15 Dry Etching
PR
Si
RIE
Undercut
Anisotropic
physical-
sputtering
Isotropic
chemical-
reaction
Figure 15.1
Schematic diagram of Si
opening proﬁle after RIE dry etching.
15.1.1
Case 1
Completely isotropic etch, which is obtained by a complete chemical reaction. As
this reaction is nondirectional, the reaction rate in all directions is the same, and
the resulting cross-section is an isotropic profile.
What kind of equipment can be used to obtain such a profile? As mentioned
in Chapter 11, the purpose of using plasma technique in the process is to make
stable molecular structures unstable through intermolecular collisions; even the
chemical bonds are broken so that chemical reactions can proceed smoothly. In
the RIE equipment, the process chamber uses a capacitive structure. Capacitor
is related to voltage, see formula (4.1). In this way, when RF power enters the
chamber, a DC bias voltage (DC bias) is established between the upper and lower
electrodes (see Figure 14.21). The RIE system is designed in such a way that the
direction of the electric field is from shower head to platen (we will elaborate
on it in Section 15.5). The ions are accelerated by the electric field (DC bias) and
bombarded the surface of the substrate. This is the origin of physical sputtering of
RIE. Therefore, RIE does not produce a complete chemical reaction and obtain a
complete isotropic profile. From these discussions, we can conclude that if there
is a fluorine-containing gas, it is easy to split and does not need a power supply to
generate plasma, and there is no physical bombardment. Such a tool can be used to
produce a complete chemical reaction, and the etched profile is isotropic. This dry
etching machine is a xenon difluoride (XeF2) etcher (see Figure 15.2). Figure 15.3
shows the structure of the etcher’s process chamber. XeF2 is a very strange
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.2
Xactix XeF2 etcher (a) and software interface for operating the machine (b).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 207]
15.1 The Etch Proﬁle of RIE
199
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.3
The process chamber of the etcher (a) is the picture of the chamber, (b) is
the structure when the chamber is opened.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 208]
200
15 Dry Etching
substance. Xenon (Xe) is an inert gas, and inert gases should not chemically react
with other elements. But XeF2 is a product of chemical reaction between xenon
and fluorine! Nevertheless, it is very unstable and easy to break. This substance
has two states, solid and gaseous. It is stored in a gas cylinder. When the pressure
exceeds 4 Torr, it maintains a solid state. When the pressure is less than 4 Torr,
it sublimates from solid state to gaseous state, separate and free atomic fluorine.
Fluorine can react with silicon to form a volatile product, which can be pumped
away to achieve the purpose of etching. Since the XeF2 etcher does not require a
power supply, no plasma, and no physical sputtering, it can etch Si, but not SiO2
and Si3N4, or photoresist. For the process chamber of this equipment, we can
only call the showerhead and platen. Compared with RIE, XeF2 etcher is simple,
cheap, and does not generate a lot of heat. It is used to etch a single-atom material
if this material produces volatile chemical reactions with fluorine, such as silicon,
germanium, and tungsten. The existence of XeF2 etcher makes it possible to do
isotropic dry etching of silicon, but it is more difficult to achieve isotropic dry
etching of SiO2 and Si3N4. Figure 15.4 is showing two SEM pictures of Si etching
profiles. Left one uses SiO2 as etching mask with a small opening and right one is
the etching result with a huge opening. We can see from the pictures that with a
small hole, XeF2 gives almost perfect isotropic etch like a spherical surface. With
a big opening, the etching profile is the same as the schematic diagram shown in
Figure 14.4. XeF2 etcher can be used to etch Si only, but not SiO2 and Si3N4. As the
etching rate of SiO2 is extremely slow, when using XeF2 tool, we should remove
the native oxide by using BOE from Si surface to get better etch result. Figure 15.5
shows the etched openings with BOE and without BOE dip. From the photos, we
can find that the etched surface with BOE dip is much smoother than the surface
without BOE dip. The average etching rate without BOE is around 8% lower than
that with BOE. So the PR shadow with BOE is larger than that without BOE.
1.51 μm
3.04 μm
3.31 μm
(a)
(b)
5.00 μm
5.0 kV 10.1 mm x10.0 k SE(M) 5/12/2021 09 : 15
Figure 15.4
SEM pictures of Si etched proﬁles by using XeF2 etcher. (a) XeF2 etches Si
through a small opening, (b) XeF2 etches Si through a large opening.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 209]
15.1 The Etch Proﬁle of RIE
201
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.5
Si etched openings with BOE dip (a) and without BOE dip (b).
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Etch rate (nm/min)
XeF2 pressure (Torr)
(111) Si vs. XeF2 pressure
Figure 15.6
The relationship of (111) Si etching rate and XeF2 pressure.
XeF2 gives only chemical reactions. The higher the pressure, the faster the
etching rate (discussed later in Section 15.5). Figure 15.6 is the curve of Si etching
rate vs. XeF2 pressure. Here I want to talk more about the tool I used for the
experiment. Many universities have Xactix XeF2 etchers. There are two chambers
in the tool-expansion chamber and main chamber (picture b in the Figure 15.2).
The etching is finished in the main chamber. The pressure we set in the recipe is
the pressure in the expansion chamber. When the etch starts, a valve between two
chambers opens and XeF2 source is shared by expansion and main chambers; so
the process pressure in main chamber is around half of the pressure in the recipe.
15.1.2
Case 2
Completely anisotropic etch is obtained by complete physical sputtering. The
names of physical bombardment and physical sputtering are often used inter-
changeably. The physical sputtering is produced by the ion bombardment of the
sample surface accelerated by the electric field. Its directionality is strong, and
it only strikes along the direction of the electric field. Therefore, it is possible to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 210]
202
15 Dry Etching
obtain complete anisotropic etch that only etches longitudinally but not laterally.
If the gas does not produce a chemical reaction, RIE can achieve this etch. What
kind of gas can play this role? The answer is argon (Ar). Argon is an inert gas
and does not join any chemical reactions (see Figure 5.1 of the periodic table).
Inert gas is the 18th group. In this group, argon is the heaviest mass that can be
used easily and on a large scale. The inert gas above it is light in mass, and the
natural content below it is low. Ar is easily ionized into Ar+, so it is widely used in
physical bombardment in the semiconductor processes. When only argon is used
in RIE, complete physical bombardment and anisotropic etch can be achieved.
The RF power entering the process chamber is concentrated into a small area,
which increases the power density and the rate of Ar+ physical sputtering. This
technology is called ion milling. When used for metal film growth, it is also called
a metal sputtering process, and we will discuss in Chapter 16.
We may ask, since only Ar can be used to obtain complete anisotropic etch,
which is also one of the most desired results in the manufacture of microchips,
can we only use Ar+ bombardment for etching? Theoretically, it is yes, and this is
why we have ion milling technique. But in fact, there are some problems in doing
so, mainly in the following two aspects:
1. This kind of bombardment cannot produce volatile matter. The sputtered mat-
ter accumulates around the pattern openings and even the sample surface.
2. Since bombardment can cause etching to all materials, it brings certain diffi-
culties to the selection of etch masking films.
Therefore, during dry etching, we generally do not add Ar to the etching
recipe unless there are special requirements (discuss in Section 15.2). The
selected gases produce volatile matter with the etched materials. At the same
time, the ions produce ion bombardment on the etched openings, but the
bombardment force is lower than Ar+ bombardment. RIE is a etch process
involving chemical reaction and physical sputtering. The profile obtained
after etching is neither completely isotropic nor completely anisotropic, but
a shape between the two, as shown in Figure 15.1. In Figure 15.1, undercut
is an inevitable phenomenon of RIE dry etching. To reduce the undercut, it
is necessary to increase the physical bombardment composition and reduce
the chemical reaction composition. To increase the undercut, it is necessary
to reduce the physical bombardment composition and increase the chemical
reaction composition. In the process parameters, to increase the physical
composition and reduce the chemical composition, we need to reduce the
pressure and increase the power; to increase the chemical composition and
reduce the physical composition, we need to increase the pressure and reduce
the power. Reducing the pressure means increasing the mean free path of the
etching gas (discuss in Section 15.5) and the DC bias voltage. Increasing the
power means increasing the DC bias voltage. These are all helpful to improve
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 211]
15.2 Etching Rate of RIE
203
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
20
40
60
80
100
CF4 pressure-DC
DC bias (V)  
Pressure (mTorr)
(a)
(b)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
O2 power-DC
DC bias (V)  
Power (W)
Figure 15.7
The relationships of pressure and DC bias for CF4 (a), power and DC bias
for O2 (b).
the composition of physical bombardment, thus making the etch profile more
anisotropic, and vice versa. Figure 15.7 shows the relationships between
pressure and DC bias, power and DC bias. But as the power increases, the ion
density increases, and the chemical composition becomes larger. Therefore, be
careful when adjusting the power to improve the profile.
15.2
Etching Rate of RIE
Another important consideration in RIE process is etching rate. Only when the
rate is known can the time be set to reach the desired depth. The depth of etch is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 212]
204
15 Dry Etching
PECVD Si3N4 Etch rate vs. RF power
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
50
100
150
200
CF4 RF power (W)
Etch rate (Å/min)
Figure 15.8
Using CF4 as etching gas, the relationship between the rate and power of
PECVD Si3N4.
different, and the gas selected is also different. If we want to etch deeply, we should
choose a gas that etches quickly. If we want to etch shallowly, we should choose
a gas that etches slowly. As mentioned in Section 14.2.5, CF4, CHF3, and SF6 are
the three commonly used gases for etching Si, SiO2, and Si3N4. SF6 has the fastest
rate and CHF3 has the slowest rate. So if we want to etch fast, we should choose
SF6. If we want to etch slowly, we should use CHF3.
In addition to the different etching rates of different gases, the etching rates of
different powers are also different. They are high power, fast rate and low power,
slow rate. Figure 15.8 shows the relationship between etching rate and power
when Si3N4 is etched by CF4 in an RIE. Since increasing the power can increase
the etching rate, then we may ask: Can we increase the power to a very high level
to increase the etching rate to meet our fast etch requirements? The answer is no.
There is a problem in actual operation if the power is large, the DC bias voltage
is high. When the DC bias is higher than a certain value, the process chamber of
capacitive structure will face the danger of breakdown. There was a RIE machine I
used before, when the DC bias reached 500 V, the system would alarm. Therefore,
in the clean room of the university, the RF power supply of RIE tool is generally
between 300 and 500 W.
Using the same parameters, the etching rate is different for different substrate
materials. Table 15.1 shows the etching rate of CF4 on some materials. It can be
seen from the table that under the same conditions, the rate of Si3N4 is faster
than that of SiO2. Due to this reason, Si3N4 and SiO2 are the two commonly used
dielectric materials, and discussing this issue will help us understand the influ-
ence of chemical bond on etching rate. To illustrate this phenomenon, we need to
introduce Arrhenius equation in chemical reactions [1]:
𝓀= A exp
(
−E
RT
)
(15.1)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 213]
15.2 Etching Rate of RIE
205
Table 15.1
The etching rate of CF4 (ﬂow 30 sccm, pressure
35 mTorr, power 93 W).
The materials etched
Etching rate (Å/min)
LPCVD Si3N4
376
PECVD Si3N4
706
Thermal SiO2
211
PECVD SiO2
230
Silicon
421
The 𝓀in the equation is called rate constant of the reaction. The larger the
𝓀value, the faster the chemical reaction rate. A is pre-exponential factor or
frequency factor because it is related to collision frequency of molecules. E
is activation energy, T is absolute temperature, and R is ideal gas constant.
R = 8.314 J/mol/k, where mol is the mole (refer to Section 12.1.9); k is absolute
temperature Kelvin (refer to Section 5.2). The equation was proposed by Swedish
scientist Svante Arrhenius (February 19, 1859–October 2, 1927) in 1889.
Because of the exponential, E and T in the equation have a great influence on
the reaction rate. The smaller the E value, the faster the rate. The larger the T
value, the faster the rate. For every 10 ∘C increase in temperature, the reaction
rate increases by about two to four times [1], and the etching rate will increase.
The greater the bond strength of the molecule, the greater the activation energy
required, the slower the chemical reaction rate, and the lower the etching rate. In
thermodynamics, we use the standard enthalpy of formation to indicate the energy
released or consumed when 1 mol of a substance is created from its constituent
elements. It is usually expressed by ΔHf. ΔHf of SiO2 is 911 kJ/mol, and Si3N4 is
745 kJ/mol [2]. The ΔHf of SiO2 is greater than that of Si3N4. The activation energy
of Si3N4 is smaller, so the etching rate is faster. The activation energy of SiO2 is
larger, so the etching rate is slower.
The enthalpies of different etched materials are important reference values for
designing etching recipes. All other conditions are the same, such as the etching
gas, the boiling point of the reactant, etc. Using same recipe, in most cases, the
etching rate of the material with large value of enthalpy is slow, and the etching
rate of the material with small value of enthalpy is fast. If the material to be etched
has a larger value of enthalpy, to make the etch going well, a small amount of
argon gas (refer to 15.1.2) should be added to the etching recipe. Ar+ can produce
the strongest physical sputtering among dry etching gases. The strong physical
bombardment breaks the strong chemical bond and enables the chemical reaction
to proceed. For example, the ΔHf of Al2O3 (sapphire) is 1676 kJ/mol [2], and its
chemical bond is so strong that when etching this material, we need to add argon
in the etching recipe.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 214]
206
15 Dry Etching
15.3
Dry Etching of III–V Semiconductors and Metals
As mentioned in Chapter 11, we use fluorine-containing gases to etch Si, SiO2, and
Si3N4. This kind of gases cannot etch III–V semiconductors and most metals. We
take GaAs and Al as examples. The boiling point of fluorine and gallium reactant
GaF3 is 1000 ∘C, and the melting point of aluminum reactant AlF3 is 1290 ∘C.
Obviously, these reactants are nonvolatile. However, when reacting with chlorine,
the boiling point of GaCl3 is 201 ∘C and the sublimation temperature of AlCl3
is 180 ∘C. The boiling point and sublimation temperature of these two reactants
are much lower. The values given are at 1 atm. At low pressure, these values are
even smaller. Therefore, the etching gases for III–V materials, most metals and
their oxides are chlorine-containing rather than fluorine-containing. The Al2O3
mentioned above must be etched with chlorine-containing gases plus argon.
The boiling point of a substance is the temperature at which the vapor pressure
of a liquid equals the pressure surrounding the liquid and the liquid changes
into a vapor. The sublimation temperature of a substance is the temperature at
which the vapor pressure of a solid equals the pressure surrounding the solid
and the solid changes into a vapor. From the principle of physics, the higher the
pressure, the higher the boiling point and sublimation temperature; the lower
the pressure, the lower the boiling point and sublimation temperature. The
relationship between boiling point and pressure follows the Clausius–Clapeyron
equation named after Rudolf Clausius (January 2, 1822–August 24, 1888) who
was a German scientist and BenoÎt Clapeyron (January 26, 1799–January 28,
1864) who was a French engineer [3]:
ln P (T2)
P (T1) = −
ΔvapH
R
(
1
T2
−1
T1
)
(15.2)
In the equation, ln is natural log, P (T1) and P (T2) are vapor pressures at two tem-
peratures, ΔvapH = Hv −HL is molar enthalpy change of vaporization, Hv is molar
enthalpy of formation for vapor phase, and HL is molar enthalpy of formation for
liquid phase. The relationship between sublimation temperature and pressure also
follows this equation.
Molar enthalpies of formation for GaCl3 and AlCl3 are listed in NIST Chemistry
WebBook. For example, ΔvapH of GaCl3 is 72.7 kJ/mol [4]. Let us use GaCl3
to calculate the boiling point under the process pressure. The boiling point is
201 ∘C = 474.15 K at 1 atm. In Eq. (15.2), P (T1) = 1 atm and T1 = 474.15 K.
The most used pressure range for RIE is 5–50 mTorr. This range converted to the
standard atmosphere is 6.58 × 10−6–6.58 × 10−5 atm. The highest process pressure
of 6.58 × 10−5 atm is used to do calculation.
Input P (T1) = 1 atm, P (T2) = 6.58 × 10−5 atm, T1 = 474.15 K, ΔvapH =
72.7 kJ/mol, and R = 8.314 J/mol/k to Eq. (15.2), we can get T2 = 311.5 K = 38.35 ∘C.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 215]
15.4 Etch Proﬁle Control
207
Compared to the boiling point T1 at 1 atm, the boiling point T2 is reduced by
more than 160 ∘C at the RIE pressure of 50 mTorr. When the pressure is 5 mTorr,
the boiling point will be lower. The situation of AlCl3 is the same. In addi-
tion, the plasma can increase chamber temperature during dry etching, which
is why the platen of RIE is usually cooled by water. So GaCl3 and AlCl3 are
volatile at the processing pressure. In GaAs, arsenic can also react with chlorine
to produce arsenic trichloride (AsCl3). The boiling point of AsCl3 is 130.2 ∘C at
1 atm. From these discussions, we conclude that GaAs and Al (including Al2O3)
can be etched by chlorine-containing gases, but not fluorine-containing gases.
This rule fits most III–V materials and metals.
Indium phosphide (InP) is one of the III–V materials that is widely used to
make high-speed transistors. After chemical reaction with chlorine, the boiling
point of InCl3 is 800 ∘C. Even under the process pressure, the reactant with such a
high-boiling point cannot be pumped out from the chamber. InCl3 remains in the
sample surface as a hard shell that will hinder the further progress of the chemical
reaction between In and Cl. To figure out this issue, three methods can be used:
1. Heating up the platen to around 300 ∘C. As mentioned in Section 14.2.6, RIE
is usually kept at room temperature. For InP dry etching, we should buy a RIE
that its platen can be heated.
2. Adding Ar in the recipe. During dry etching, Ar+ provides strong sputtering and
removes the surface hard shell from the sample. So that the chemical reaction
of In and Cl can keep going.
3. Using CH4 as etching gas. After chemical reaction of In and CH4, the reactant
is In(CH3)3. Its boiling point is 134 ∘C, which is much lower than that of InCl3.
In(CH3)3 can be pumped out from the chamber under the process pressure. But
with CH4 it is easy to create polymer and contaminate the chamber.
If we use Cl-containing gases to etch InP, in addition to adding Ar, we can also add
H2 to the recipe. The chemical reaction of hydrogen and phosphorus creates phos-
phine (PH3). The boiling point of PH3 is −87.7 ∘C. So phosphorus can be removed
from the chamber. CH4 has hydrogen and does not need to add H2.
15.4
Etch Proﬁle Control
In the etching process, photoresist is the most-used masking film (mask). In wet
etching, the selected etchant has a small etch to the PR. The adhesion between
the PR and the substrate is a main factor affecting the quality of etching. In the
dry etching, the gases selected should have a small etch of the mask. The ratio
of the etching rate of substrate (Rs) to the etching rate of mask (Rm) is called
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 216]
208
15 Dry Etching
selectivity (S):
S = Rs
Rm
(15.3)
It is better for a larger S value. The ideal situation is infinite. That means that the
masking film is not etched at all, which does not exist in the actual process. In
the fluorine-containing etching process, the etching rate of the commonly used
positive photoresist AZ5214 is about two times faster than that of silicon diox-
ide. The thickness of AZ5214 is 1.3–2.0 μm. The etching depth of SiO2 is usually
1000–5000 Å (0.1–0.5 μm). So, after the etch, there is still a certain thickness of PR
left on the substrate surface.
In most cases, the thickness of PR has little effect on the dry etching process,
but the shape of the opening has a great influence on the etch profile. The shape
of the etched profile of the substrate has a great influence on the manufacture of
many kinds of microchips. Mostly, it is desirable that the cross-section is a steep
90∘angle, which is difficult to achieve. The adjustment of the cross-section angle
(control of lateral etching) is related to the settings of process pressure and power
as described in Section 15.1. It is also related to the following two factors:
15.4.1
Inﬂuence of the PR Opening Shape on the Etch Proﬁle
For positive photoresist, an ideal opening should be a steep 90∘angle up and down,
as shown on the left in Figure 15.9. In this case, if it is completely anisotropic
etch, the etching cross-section is also a steep 90∘angle. However, the actual shape
of the PR is shown on the right (refer to Figures 12.16 and 12.17). Because the
PR has an oblique angle, the thin area is etched during the process, making the
upper opening of the profile to be larger than the lower opening, and a complete
anisotropic etch profile becomes an incomplete anisotropic etch profile. From this
point of view, to achieve the ideal substrate cross-section, the first step is to do a
good job in photolithography.
Substrate
(a)
(b)
Substrate
PR
PR
Figure 15.9
The inﬂuence of PR proﬁle on the proﬁle of substrate. (a) ideal and
(b) actual.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 217]
15.4 Etch Proﬁle Control
209
15.4.2
The Effect of Carbon on Etching Rate and Proﬁle
The etching gases Freon 14 (CF4) and Freon 23 (CHF3) both contain carbon.
CHF3 also has hydrogen. Another gas used in the process C4F8 has a higher
carbon content. Carbon plays an important role in RIE. In the etching process,
silicon and carbon are competing to produce a chemical reaction with fluorine,
and hydrogen also participates in the reaction. The complete reaction of carbon
and fluorine forms CF4, which is a gas, can be drawn out of the process chamber
by pump. However, the incomplete reaction of carbon and fluorine forms a Teflon
polymer, which stays on the surface of the substrate and the openings to prevent
the etching. This process is called passivation. Among the above three gases, C4F8
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
10
20
30
(a)
(b)
40
50
60
Etch rate (Å/min)
CHF3 pressure (mTorr)
Silicon etch rate vs. pressure
0
–50
0
50
100
150
200
300
250
10
20
30
CHF3 pressure (mTorr)
Etch rate (Å/min)
PECVD Si3N4 etch rate vs. pressure
40
50
60
Figure 15.10
The relationship of Si (a) and Si3N4 (b) etching rates and pressure using
CHF3.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 218]
210
15 Dry Etching
has the strongest passivation because it has four carbons; CHF3 is the second
because hydrogen can participate in the competition with silicon to react with
fluorine, and CF4 is the weakest. The passivation effect of carbon-free chemicals
is less than that of carbon-containing gases, such as SF6.
Taking CHF3 as an example, as the pressure increases, the passivation effect
increases, and even the etch stops and becomes the deposition of Teflon film.
Figure 15.10 shows the relationship curves of Si and Si3N4 between etching rate
and pressure using CHF3. The figure shows that as the pressure increases, the etch-
ing rates of Si and Si3N4 decrease until they reach zero. SiO2 etching rate has no
big change when the pressure is lower than around 55 mTorr because oxygen can
react with hydrogen to reduce the competition between hydrogen and silicon. By
using these results, we can design a recipe that it etches SiO2 only, not Si and Si3N4
(or etching rate is very slow).
Passivation also affects the shape of profile. As mentioned above, the etched pro-
file of RIE is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom (Figure 15.1). The presence
of carbon can reduce lateral etch and the profile becomes steeper. The greater the
passivation is, the more the opening tends to 90∘, and even become narrow at the
top and wide at the bottom. Figure 15.11 is the change of the substrate etched
opening angle after CF4, CHF3, and C4F8 etching. In the SEM photos of CF4 and
CHF3 etching SiO2, our results show that the angle of CHF3 is steeper than CF4,
which is consistent with the above description; and the etching rate of CHF3 is
slower than that of CF4, which is also in line with the discussion in Section 14.2.5.
In another photo, Si is etched with SF6 + C4F8, which produced an opening with
a narrow top and a wide bottom.
In this section, the etching profile is briefly discussed. The actual situation is
much more complicated. If we understand the principle, we will be handy in solv-
ing process problems.
CF4–SiO2
93.17°
75.30°
5.0 kV 9.8 mm x40.0 k SE(U) 7/30/2019 10 : 04
1.00 μm
121.0 nm
255.0 nm SiO2
etch in plasma
CHF3–SiO2
SF6 + C4F8-Si
Figure 15.11
Angle change of the
proﬁle with different
carbon-containing gases.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 219]
15.5 Other Issues
211
15.5
Other Issues
We have discussed the etching rate, profile, III–V materials, and metal etch in the
previous sections. In RIE, other issues need to be considered. Only by clarifying
these can we understand the ICP technique to be discussed in Section 15.6.
Although RIE and PECVD equipment are similar in that they both complete the
process in a chemical reaction, but they still have some differences. Let us start
with these differences to further explore other aspects of RIE.
15.5.1
The Differences Between RIE and PECVD
Difference 1. As mentioned in Section 14.2, from a chemical point of view, there is
no essential difference between RIE and PECVD. They are both chemical reac-
tions. However, in RIE, the chemical reaction product is volatile and can be
pumped out of the process chamber; in PECVD, the chemical reaction product
is nonvolatile and remains on the sample surface. So the difference 1 is that the
reactants are volatile and nonvolatile.
Difference 2. In Section 13.1.3, it was mentioned that the temperature of PECVD
platen is set to 250–350 ∘C. The RIE platen is generally kept at room tempera-
ture; therefore, photoresist can be used as a mask for etching; so difference 2 is
that the platen temperature is different.
Difference 3. In Section 13.1.3, it was mentioned that the process pressure range
of PECVD is 500 mTorr–5 Torr. Such a high pressure makes the plasma density
high, and the particles produced during the film deposition are dense. In
addition, high pressure makes the DC bias low (Figure 15.7) and reduce the
bombardment on the surface of deposited film. The pressure of RIE is generally
5–50 mTorr. The reason why the pressure of RIE is low is that during dry
etching, the etch gas is expected to have a larger mean free path so that the gas
can reach the sample surface with no or less collisions with each other. The
collisions can change the direction of linear motion of etch gas, which will have
an adverse effect on etching. The pressure is too low, the number of etch gas
molecules in the chamber is too small. Too small a number of molecules make
the chance of collision with each other small and the plasma difficult to ignite.
Now let us talk about the mean free path. The mean free path is the average dis-
tance traveled by a moving microscopic particle (such as a molecule, an atom,
and a photon). Two particles collide not completely but bounce off when they
approach each other at a certain distance. Taking this distance as the bound-
ary, we give the effective diameter d of the particle. When the pressure is p, the
expression of the mean free path l of the particle is as follows:
l = kBT∕
√
2𝜋d2p
(15.4)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 220]
212
15 Dry Etching
The kB in the formula is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is the absolute temperature.
The expression shows that the mean free path is inversely proportional to the
pressure. The higher the pressure, the smaller the mean free path; the lower the
pressure, the bigger the mean free path.
Figure 15.12 is a schematic diagram of the mean free path of a particle. The dis-
tance of the particle travels from the start point to the finish point. When the
vacuum is high, the particle can reach the finish point from the start point with-
out collision. When the vacuum is low, the particle has multiple collisions with
the other particles from the start point to the finish point. For dry etching, if
the sample is placed at the finish point (platen), the etch gases come the cham-
ber from the start point (showerhead), we hope that the gases directly reach the
surface of the sample to avoid collisions with each other. So the RIE process
pressure should be set low. To understand the issue more, see Figure 15.13 that
shows the relationship between the mean free path and pressure of an argon in
a sputtering tool (discuss in Chapter 16). For comparison, at room temperature,
the mean free path of an air molecule at 1 atm (760 Torr) is 68 nm.
Start
Collision
Finish
Distance (d)
Figure 15.12
Schematic
diagram of the mean free path of
a particle. Source: Reprinted with
permission of school physics.
10–6
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
Argon pressure (Torr)
Substrate-target distance =
40 cm
Mean free path (cm)
Figure 15.13
The
relationship of the mean
free path of an Ar in the
sputtering tool. Source: [5]
Radzimski et al. / AIP
Publishing.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 221]
15.5 Other Issues
213
Difference 4. The RF power supply of RIE is connected to the platen. The direction
of the electric field in the process chamber is from the shower head to the platen,
which is the same as moving direction of the etch gas and has a strong physical
bombardment to the sample. The RF power supply of PECVD is connected to
the shower head. The direction of the electric field in the process chamber is
from the platen to the shower head, which is opposite to moving direction of the
deposition gas and the physical bombardment of the sample is weak as shown
in Figure 15.14. High pressure and connecting power supply to the showerhead
make small bombardment on the film during deposition. This is good for the
quality of the film.
Difference 5. RIE equipment displays DC bias voltage. PECVD equipment does
not display DC bias voltage. As shown in Figure 15.15.
Difference 6. RIE power is generally set to 50–200 W, which has strong physical
bombardment. PECVD power is generally set to 20–100 W, which has weak
physical bombardment.
Difference 7. For RIE, the chemical reaction happens in the sample surface,
and the gas just needs to flow into the chamber; so RIE has less holes in the
showerhead (Figure 14.8). For PECVD, the chemical reaction happens in the
space between the showerhead and platen. To meet the requirement of creating
uniform gas dispersion for deposition, PECVD has more holes in the
showerhead (see Figure 15.16).
Gases
Showerhead
Gases
Showerhead
Platen
Wafer
Electrical
Field
Ions
Platen
Wafer
Electrical
Field
Ions
Power
supply
Match
work
Power
supply
Match
work
RIE
PECVD
Figure 15.14
The connection position of the RF power supplies in RIE and PECVD, and
the direction of the electric ﬁeld in the process chambers.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 222]
214
15 Dry Etching
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.15
On the left (a) is the RIE console, which displays DC bias. On the right (b)
is the PECVD console, which does not display DC bias. Source: PlasmaLab RIE.
Figure 15.16
Showerhead of PECVD. Source: STS Multiplex PECVD.
15.5.2
The Difference Between Si and SiO2 Dry Etching
In Section 14.2.1, we discussed the difference between Si and SiO2 in dry etching.
When fluorine radicals and ions meet silicon, a chemical reaction can occur auto-
matically. When fluorine radicals and ions meet silicon dioxide, they must rely
on physical sputtering to reduce the bond strength between silicon and oxygen,
or even break it, to ensure a chemical reaction between silicon and fluorine. From
this point of view, for the convenience of considering the process, we can think that
the etching rate of silicon depends on the chemical reaction and is linked to the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 223]
15.6 Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Technique and Bosch Process
215
Plasma density
Power
Pressure
Flow
Figure 15.17
The methods to increase the plasma density.
RIE
Showerhead
Electrical field
Ion movement
Wafer
Platen
Magnetic
field
Ion
movement
ICP
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.18
Schematic diagram of the force on positive ions in the RIE (a) and ICP (b).
plasma density. The higher the density, the faster the etching rate. This assump-
tion is consistent with Figure 15.6. The etching rate of silicon dioxide depends on
the physical sputtering and is related to the power of the plasma. The greater the
power, the faster the etching rate. This assumption is consistent with Figure 15.8.
When MEMS (see Chapter 13) appeared, the deep etching of silicon became an
important issue. From the discussion just now, we can see that in order to increase
the etching rate of silicon, it is necessary to increase the plasma density. From the
perspective of RIE process, the plasma density can be increased from two aspects:
increasing the pressure and increasing the power, as shown in Figure 15.17. We
have just discussed that RIE is a low-pressure process, and increasing the pressure
is not conducive to dry thing. In addition, because RIE is a capacitive structure,
increasing power also increases DC bias voltage, which makes the process cham-
ber to face the danger of breakdown. So the power of RIE cannot be increased
much, as described in Section 15.2, generally between 300 and 500 W.
15.6
Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Technique
and Bosch Process
As mentioned earlier, an RIE system cannot increase the plasma density by
increasing the pressure and power. Since RIE does not make it, a new system
must be developed to increase the plasma density and increase the etching rate of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 224]
216
15 Dry Etching
silicon. RIE is CCP. As mentioned in Section 11.3, there are only two structures
that can be used in a process chamber for plasma generation: capacitor and
inductor. The RIE of capacitive structure cannot increase the plasma density, so
the question is can the process chamber be designed with an inductive structure?
The answer is yes. We are discussing this in the subsequent paragraphs.
15.6.1
Inductively Coupled Plasma Technique
Let us discuss inductor again. An inductor is composed of a spiral coil, as shown
in Figure 4.5. The inductance of an inductor is equal to the magnetic flux divided
by the current, as shown in Eq. (4.2). There are no DC bias and breakdown
concerns. It is conceivable that if this coil is made of superconducting material,
then it can flow infinite current and generate infinite magnetic field energy in the
coil. But the actual situation is that superconductivity is realized at an ultra-low
temperature, its operating cost is very high, and it is not cost-effective for semi-
conductor equipment. We mostly use copper tube to make this coil. The copper
tube is cooled with water. After this treatment, 3000 W or higher RF power can
be added to the coil, usually 1000–3000 W; so the inductor solves the problem of
high power.
Let us look at the effect of the coil on ions. Figure 15.18a shows the distribution
of the RIE electric field. The direction of the electric field is consistent with the
moving direction of positive ions such as fluoride ions. This makes it easy to push
the ions to hit the sample (physical bombardment) and the platen. Under normal
circumstances, the RIE process chamber is made of stainless steel or aluminum.
The area of the platen is larger than that of the sample. Therefore, some ions are
bombarded onto the platen surface. Once the ions are in contact with sample and
metal, they are absorbed. From this point of view, the RIE structure suppresses
the increase in plasma density. However, once an ion enters the magnetic field,
according to Lorentz Eq. (11.6), the direction of the force acting on the ion by the
magnetic field is at an angle of 90∘with the direction of the magnetic field. Due to
the use of RF power supply, the ion oscillates inside the coil under the action of the
magnetic field, as shown in Figure 15.18b. In this case, the plasma density is easily
increased.
Based on the abovementioned two reasons: high power and ion oscillation, the
process chamber made of coil can increase the ion density to a high level. This
process chamber is called inductively coupled plasma (ICP). The actual structure
is a vacuum chamber made of ceramics, and a coil made of copper tube around the
chamber. Figure 15.18 is a schematic diagram of ion movement and force in RIE
and ICP. Replacing showerhead with ICP in an RIE produces an ICP system. Since
this system is a combination of ICP and RIE, it is also called ICP RIE. Figure 15.19
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 225]
15.6 Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Technique and Bosch Process
217
(a)
(b)
RIE power
ICP power
Figure 15.19
Photos of ICP RIE (STS ASE). The top picture (a) points out the relative
position of ICP and RIE. The bottom picture (b) is 300 W small power supply for RIE and
1000 W big power supply for ICP.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 226]
218
15 Dry Etching
Platen
(bottom electrode)
Wafer/sample
ICP chamber
Coil plasma
generator
Gas inlet
Plasma
RF power
supply
RF power
supply
RF matching
unit
RF matching
unit
~
~
RIE chamber
Pumping port
Figure 15.20
Schematic diagram of the internal structure of the ICP RIE process
chamber (STS ASE). The frequency for both power supplies is 13.56 MHz. Some ICP
machines use 2 MHz supple for ICP chamber.
is a photo of an ICP RIE machine. Figure 15.20 is a schematic diagram of the
internal structure of the ICP RIE process chamber. We can compare it with
Figure 14.6 to see the difference in structures of RIE and ICP. Compared with
RIE, ICP has the following three features:
Feature 1. ICP can provide high-density plasma (HDP) under low pressure. RIE
cannot produce HDP. HDP is the fundamental difference between ICP and RIE.
It should be emphasized here that in semiconductor manufacturing, there are
other types of equipment that can produce HDP. HDP can be used for dry etch-
ing or other processes.
Feature 2. For silicon, germanium, and other single element materials that react
with fluorine to produce volatile reactants, ICP can significantly increase the
etching rate. For compound materials, such as SiO2, although the etching rate
can also be increased, the effect is not as obvious as that of single-element
materials such as Si. For example, in an RIE, the etching rate of silicon using
SF6 is usually less than 1 μm/min, but in an ICP, the etching rate can easily
exceed 3 μm/min. In general, the etching rate that depends on the chemical
reaction increases significantly, and the etching rate that depends on the
physical sputtering increases nonsignificantly. So when an ICP RIE is used to
etch single-element materials like Si, the system is called Deep RIE (DRIE).
Feature 3. The power can be set separately for ICP and RIE to increase the selec-
tivity S (Eq. (15.3)). Here we take Si and SiO2 as examples to illustrate this issue.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 227]
15.6 Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Technique and Bosch Process
219
070212B 15.0 kV 8.5 mm x30 SE(M) 2/17/2007 21:42
1.00 mm
Figure 15.21
Comb actuator driven microstage.
If the power is only set in the ICP and the RIE power is zero, the DC bias is
zero, and there is no physical bombardment. The machine can only etch Si but
not SiO2 and the etching profile of Si is almost isotropic. In real process, due
to the thermal movement of particles, the effect of magnetic field on ions, etc.,
there is a certain amount of physical bombardment. So there is certain etch to
SiO2, but the rate is slow. From this view of point, we can see that increasing
the ICP power can increase the etching rate of Si; reducing the RIE power can
reduce SiO2 etching rate. With this adjustment, we can increase the S value of
Si and SiO2 in the fluorine-containing gas. Using SF6 in an RIE, the S value
of Si and SiO2 is 20–30, but in an ICP, the S value can exceed 100. Due to the
high selectivity of ICP, we can use SiO2 as a masking film to deeply etch Si.
Figure 15.21 is a comb actuator driven microstage made by ICP. The device was
made by Professor P. Ferreira’s research group at the University of Illinois using
STS advanced silicon etch (ASE). The device’s suspension structure made by
using high S value and Bosch process (please see below).
15.6.2
Bosch Process
For the deep etching of silicon, most devices require steep 90∘profile, as shown in
Figure 15.21. Since RIE contains two parts, chemical reaction and physical sputter-
ing, the etch profile is shown in Figure 15.1, which is wide at the top and narrow
at the bottom. Although the etch angle can be adjusted by selecting the carbon
content in the etching gases, as shown in Figure 15.11, but due to the limitations
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 228]
220
15 Dry Etching
90°
Scallop
Step 3. Etch
Step 2. Passivation
Step 1. Etch
PR
Si
Figure 15.22
Schematic
diagram of Bosch process.
of the etching rate and selectivity, this technique has not been widely used in the
deep etching of silicon. Bosch process is a process developed in response to this
issue. This technique is named after Bosch because it was first developed by a
German company, Robert Bosch GmbH. In Bosch process, etching and passiva-
tion are performed alternately to achieve a controlled angle (90∘) and ensure a
certain etching rate.
The following is an example of Bosch process etch recipe (STS ASE):
Etching∶SF6 + O2, 130 sccm + 13 sccm, ICP 600 W, platen 12 W, 12 s.
Passivation∶C4F8, 85 sccm, ICP 600 W, platen 0 W, 8 s.
The entire etch process repeats this cycle – etching and passivation. Figure 15.22
describes the cycle in detail.
Step 1. Etching: SF6 + O2 is used for etching. SF6 is the fastest etching gas. Adding
O2 can increase the ability to remove Teflon film. In this step, the power of ICP
is 600 W, the power of RIE (Platen) is 12 W, and the time is 12′′. RIE has power,
DC bias, directionality, physical bombardment, and the etched profile is wide at
the top and narrow at the bottom.
Step 2. Passivation: Passivation uses C4F8 gas, the freon gas with the most
carbon. In this step, the power of ICP is 600 W, the power of RIE (Platen)
is 0 W, and the time is 8′′. RIE has no power, no DC bias, no directionality,
and no physical bombardment. The purpose of this step is to complete the
total chemical reaction to produce Teflon film, and evenly cover the etched
opening.
After that, the first step of etching is repeated. Due to the low-pressure process
and the electric field corresponding to the DC bias, the ions basically reach
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 229]
15.6 Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Technique and Bosch Process
221
the bottom of the etched opening in a straight line, as shown in Figure 14.5.
The bottom part bears a large momentum, while the sidewall bears a small
momentum (see Figure 8.10). The Teflon film at the bottom can be removed by
physical bombardment, but the sidewall cannot be removed. So repeat the first
step of etching, and the same etch profile can be obtained. Then passivation and
etching… then stop until reaching the depth of etch. The obtained profile angle
can reach 90∘, but the sidewalls are not smooth, resulting in a jagged surface.
When the size becomes smaller, those sharp angles will become rounded, making
the sidewalls look like scallops, so the word “scallop” is used to describe this kind
of sidewall. Figure 15.23 shows some structures made by ICP RIE (STS ASE) using
Bosch process in the clean room at the University of Illinois. The photo on the top
shows that using the same recipe, the smaller the structure size, the slower the
etching rate. This is not difficult to understand. Because of small size, it is more
difficult for etching gas to enter the structure, and it is also more difficult for the
reaction product to come out from the structure. The wall-like structure in the
middle clearly shows the scallop-like sidewalls. The pillar structure on the bottom,
through the adjustment of the recipe, makes the scallops on the sidewall less
undulating.
In Bosch process, the entire etching process is performed by the competi-
tion between silicon and carbon. These two materials compete to react with
fluorine. If the reaction of silicon is dominant, the etching profile tends to be
RIE structure and becomes wide on the top and narrow on the bottom. If the
carbon reaction is dominant, more Teflon film is produced, causing a problem
called micro-grass, which is shown in Figure 15.24a. When the problem of
micrograss occurs, it is necessary to reduce the passivation step and increase the
etching step.
The method is in the etching step; increase the RIE power and the etching
time, which can be increased together or individually. In the passivation step,
decrease the ICP power and passivation time, which can be decreased together
or individually. The adjustment of these two steps can be carried out together,
or one step can be selected separately. Using same etch recipe, the small opening
is etched normally, the opening surface is shiny. But the large opening is etched
abnormally, and the opening surface is black. This is a situation that often
encounters the micrograss problem in Bosch etch process. If we have this prob-
lem, we should solve it according to the method just mentioned. The adjustment
should be made according to the specific situation in the process. Figure 15.24b
is the adjusted etched profile. The photo shows that the angle of the profile is
basically 90∘.
In most cases, the devices prefer smooth etched sidewall rather than undulat-
ing. The sidewalls showed in Figure 15.23 cannot meet the needs of most device
manufacturing. To solve the issue of scallops, we can do thermal oxidation after
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 230]
222
15 Dry Etching
1.17 μm
2.08 μm
223 nm
967 nm
10.0 μm
5.0 kV 9.9 mm x4.00 k SE(U) 3/20/2020 12:38
10.0 kV 17.0 mm x40.0 k
1.00 μm
Figure 15.23
Silicon
trench, wall, and pillar
structures made by
Bosch process on ICP
RIE.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 231]
References
223
After open chamber clean
Etch 30 min in STS ICP, rate 1.7 μm/min
Change recipe and
30 min O2 plasma clean
Etch 30 min in 141.9 μm
etchrate = 4.7 μm/min
53.1 μm
10.9 μm PR left
141.9 μm
100 μm
5.0 kV 9.2 mm x400 SE(U) 6/15/2018 09:34
100 μm
5.0 kV 9.7 mm x400 SE(U) 6/18/2018 16:00
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.24
Micrograss problem (a) and the structure after the problem is solved (b).
Bosch process. During the oxidation, the reaction rate between the spikes of
silicon and oxygen is faster than that of the smooth part. So, after thermal
oxidation, the etched sidewall of silicon will become smooth. Meanwhile, the
Teflon film on the sidewall will be removed cleanly.
References
1 傅献彩陈瑞华编. (1979). 高等学校试用教材, 物理化学, 下册, 南京大学物理化学
教研室, 高等教育出版社, 1979 修订本, 第206 页, 第204 页。.
2 Murarka, S.P., Eizenberg, M., and Sinha, A.K. (2003). Interlayer Dielectrics for
Semiconductor Technologies, 32. Elsevier Academic Press.
3 Stanley, I.S. (2016). Chemical, Biochemical, and Engineering Thermodynamics,
5e, 336. Wiley.
4 NIST Chemistry WebBook, SRD 69.
5 Radzimski, Z.J., Posadowski, W.M., Rossnagel, S.M., and Shingubara, S. (1998).
Directional copper deposition using dc magnetron self-sputtering. Journal of
Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures
Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 16 (3): 1102–1106.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 232]
225
16
Metal Processes
Metals play important roles in semiconductor microchips. Semiconductors are not
conductors, and their resistivity (Chapter 1) is greater than that of metal conduc-
tors. Metals mainly have roles in three aspects:
1. Metals are used to make resistors, semiconductor diodes, and transistors (refer
to Chapter 6).
2. Metals are used to make ohmic contact.
3. Metals are used to interconnect the devices in an integrated circuit.
In semiconductor processes, three main techniques are used to make metals onto
the semiconductor surface:
1. Thermal evaporation,
2. Electron beam evaporation,
3. Sputter deposition.
They are PVD. Metals do not completely cover the whole surface of a device, but
some specific areas patterned by photolithography. These patterns are mainly real-
ized by two methods. One is etching, and the other is lift-off. To achieve good
contact between a metal and the semiconductor surface, metal annealing (sinter-
ing step) is also required. Figure 16.1 is a schematic diagram of the processes of
metal etching and lift-off. This is discussed in detail in the subsequent sections.
16.1
Thermal Evaporation Technique
The equipment used for the thermal evaporation process is called thermal
evaporator. Thermal evaporation is carried out in the evaporation chamber, using
a diffusion pump or a cryopump in combination with a mechanical pump to
pump the chamber to 1 × 10−6 Torr. Put the metal to be evaporated (evaporation
source or evaporant) on the resistive heat element (heater). The element can be
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 233]
226
16 Metal Processes
Substrate
Substrate
Metal
Metal
Wet or dry etch
PR stripper
Substrate
PR removal
Substrate
Met
Substrate
Etch-back
(a)
(b)
Lift-off
PR
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
PR
PR
PR
Metal
Metal
Figure 16.1
The processes of metal etch-back (a) and lift-off (b).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.2
Resistive heat element and metal pellets. (a) is boat type heater, (b) is
ﬁlament type heater, and (c) is titanium pellets. Source: Kurt J. Lesker.
made into boat type or filament type. According to the shape of the filament,
the evaporant can be made into different shapes, such as pellet, cane, wire, clip
as shown in Figure 16.2. The process chamber has two types: bell-jar type and
door-opening type. Figure 16.3 is a bell-jar type thermal evaporator. The material
of the heat element is made of tungsten, which has the highest melting point
3400 ∘C. Tantalum with melting point of 3000 ∘C and molybdenum with melting
point of 2600 ∘C [1] are also used. Such metals are called high temperature metals
or refractory metals. The evaporation source metal changes from a solid state
to a gas state directly by the high-temperature heating of the element. Under
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 234]
16.2 Electron Beam Evaporation Technique
227
Chamber
Diffusion pump
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.3
(a) A bell-jar type thermal evaporator which uses diffusion and mechanical
pumps, (b) The heater used in the machine is boat type. Source: Cooke Vacuum Products.
1 × 10−6 Torr vacuum, the mean free path of metal gaseous molecules (refer to
Figure 15.13) is large enough to deposit on the sample surface without collision.
The main advantages of thermal evaporation technique are (i) simple; (ii) cheap;
and (iii) no radiation. The main disadvantages are (i) possible pollution caused
by the heater at high temperature; (ii) due to the limited quantity of evaporation
source that the heater can be placed, this technique cannot be used for thick
film evaporation; (iii) it cannot be used for refractory metal evaporation. These
problems can be partially solved in electron beam evaporation.
16.2
Electron Beam Evaporation Technique
The machine used for electron beam evaporation (e-beam evaporation) is called
e-beam evaporator. Its structure is basically the same as the thermal evaporator.
The process chamber is either bell-jar type or door-opening type. Figure 16.4 is a
door-opening e-beam evaporator. The main difference between e-beam and ther-
mal evaporations is that the heater is different. Electron beam evaporation uses an
electron gun as the heating source, and the crucible that carries the evaporation
source is made into a bowl. Figure 16.5 is a photo of crucibles. This type of crucible
can carry more sources and achieve thick film evaporation.
The heater for e-beam evaporation is an electron gun, as shown in Figure 16.6.
The electrons emitted from the filament are accelerated by a voltage of about
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 235]
228
16 Metal Processes
Figure 16.4
Electron beam evaporation.
Figure 16.5
Crucibles for e-beam evaporation.
10 kV. They are directed by a magnetic field to the evaporation source placed in
the crucible. The huge kinetic energy generated by the acceleration is converted
into heat energy and produces a higher temperature than thermal evaporation at
the evaporation source. So this technique can evaporate metals including some
refractory metals (such as molybdenum) and dielectrics. In addition, because the
crucible is placed in a water-cooled seat, its temperature is low, and pollution is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 236]
16.2 Electron Beam Evaporation Technique
229
Direction of
sublimated
material
Heated
region
Ingot
Water cooled holder
Magnetic field
(out of the screen)
Path of the
electron beam
Filament
+
–
+
+
–
Figure 16.6
The basic structure of electron gun.
small. Its biggest disadvantage is that high-energy electrons can generate X-rays,
which can have a bad influence on some devices, especially optoelectronic devices.
Since thermal evaporation and electron beam evaporation have similarities,
both are done by heating the evaporation source to make the metal sublimate
and deposit on the surface of the sample. So, an electron beam evaporation can
also have the function of thermal evaporation. Figure 16.7 is a schematic diagram
of the thermal evaporation and electron beam evaporation systems. An e-beam
evaporator is shown in Figure 16.4. When the door is opened, the structure
inside the process chamber is as shown in the left picture of Figure 16.8. From
which we can see the electron gun and the substrate holder. The picture on the
right is the e-beam spot generated when the electron beam hits the evaporation
source.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 237]
230
16 Metal Processes
Melt
Melt
Substrate
Substrate
Resistive heating
filament
Pump
Power
supply
Power
supply
Electron
Electron
beam emitter
(a)
Pump
(b)
Evaporant
Evaporant
beam
Figure 16.7
The structures of thermal evaporation (a) and E-beam evaporation (b).
Source: [2] / Taylor & Francis.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.8
The internal structure of e-beam evaporation chamber (a) and e-beam
spot (b).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 238]
16.3 Magnetron Sputtering Deposition Technique
231
16.3
Magnetron Sputtering Deposition Technique
Although electron beam evaporator can evaporate some refractory metals, it is
difficult to evaporate tungsten. Sputtering technique can solve this issue, which
was introduced in 15.1. The sputtering process uses Ar+ to physically bombard the
surface of the material to be deposited, the tiny particles are sputtered out from the
surface, and these particles are deposited on the surface of the sample to achieve
the purpose of the deposition. Metals including tungsten and dielectrics can be
deposited by sputtering technique. The material to be deposited is usually made
into a circular disc which is called a sputtering target (target). The sputtering
process uses DC power or RF power to create the plasma, and the basic structure
of the process chamber is CCP. DC power source is used to deposit metals but
cannot be used to deposit dielectrics. RF power source can be used to deposit
metals and dielectrics. Therefore, in the process, the RF power is more commonly
used and is often used in combination with magnetron, which is called “mag-
netron sputtering” technique. The sputtering equipment that uses this technique
is called a magnetron sputtering machine. Here, we are going to discuss this
technique.
Figure 16.9 is a control panel of a magnetron-sputtering tool. From here, we
can see an RF power supply and a matchwork controller. The process chamber of
the tool also adopts the bell-jar type or the door-opening type (see Figure 16.10),
the left side of the figure is the bell-jar type, and the structure after the bell-jar is
removed; the right picture is the door-opening type, the internal structure behind
the door. They all have a wafer holder for placing samples or wafers. There are
targets, which can be metal materials or dielectric materials. Below a target is a
Figure 16.9
The control panel of a magnetron sputtering tool, the photo shows an RF
power supply and a match work controller.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 239]
232
16 Metal Processes
Wafer
Wafer holder
Target
(a)
(b)
Magnetron
gun
Figure 16.10
The internal structures of the magnetron sputtering machine. (a) bell-jar
type, (b) door-opening type (Kurt J. Lesker) with shutter covering the gun (two guns).
Source: (a) Cooke Vacuum Products.
magnetron, which is used as a cathode. The plasma can be concentrated on the
target surface under the action of magnetic field, making a high-density plasma
(HDP). Argon is introduced into the chamber, and the ionized Ar+ is attracted by
the cathode, and then is accelerated to sputter the target surface. Combining with
HDP, the target can be sputtered out in the form of tiny-particles and deposited on
the sample surface. The magnetron adopts a planar structure, ring-shaped, and
rectangular. In modern equipment, a ring-shaped planar magnetron is basically
used, as shown in Figure 16.11. Due to the action of magnetic field, the intensity
of the plasma projected on the target surface is distributed in a circular ring or
rectangular ring. This whole set is called target gun, or gun for short. Figure 16.12
shows a working magnetron-sputtering machine with the plasma discharge on top
of its gun. Because of the annular distribution of plasma on the target surface, after
using for a while, an annular groove will appear on the target surface, as shown in
Figure 16.13.
During the sputtering deposition, the plasma is concentrated on the target
surface, which generates a lot of heat; so the target gun must be connected to the
cooling water. From the metal target, it is easy to transfer the heat to the cool-
ing water. From the dielectric target, it is not easy to transfer the heat to the
cooling water. Therefore, the maximum sputtering power for dielectric deposition
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 240]
16.3 Magnetron Sputtering Deposition Technique
233
Cathode
Pole piece
Permanent
magnets
S
N
S
S
S
N
N
N
N
N
S
S
Permanent
magnets
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.11
The magnetrons with ring-shaped (a) and rectangular (b). Source: [3]
Greene et al. 2017 / with permission of AIP Publishing LLC.
Gun
Figure 16.12
When the tool is in use, the plasma glow on the top of the target gun.
is much smaller than that for metal deposition. The annular groove only appears
on the metal target. The dielectric target does not have obvious groove.
During metal deposition, oxygen can be introduced to the chamber. The ionized
oxygen reacts with metal tiny particles to form metal oxides, such as Al2O3 and
TiO2. The oxides deposit on the sample surface to create metal oxide films.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 241]
234
16 Metal Processes
Figure 16.13
Two metal targets, the one on the left is the surface after multiple uses for
a long time, and the one on the right is the surface with few uses for a short time.
16.4
The Main Differences Between Electron Beam
(Thermal) Evaporation and Sputtering Deposition
Thermal and electron beam evaporation use heating method to evaporate metals,
while magnetron sputtering uses momentum impact to complete metal deposi-
tion. These two different methods have different effects on the growth of metals:
(1) The step coverage of sputtering deposited metal is better than that of electron
beam and thermal, as shown in Figure 16.14. On a substrate with photolitho-
graphic patterns, when the metal film is evaporated by thermal and electron
beam methods, both methods use heating to sublime the metal from a solid
state to a gaseous state and evaporate to the surface of the sample. The kinetic
energy of the metal tiny particles is small, and once they touch the surface
of the substrate at the bottom of PR opening, the particles will stop. So the
coverage of the photo resist step is not good.
The tiny metal particles are produced by sputtering, they are bombarded out
by Ar+, and have a lot of momentum. When these particles touch the surface
Substrate
Substrate
PR
PR
Thermal and e-beam
(a)
(b)
Sputtering
Metal particles
Metal particles
Figure 16.14
Thermal and e-beam evaporation (a), sputtering deposition (b).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 242]
16.5 Metal Lift-off Process
235
Figure 16.15
Schematic diagram
of metal connection.
Semiconductor
Dielectric film
Device A
Device B
Metal
Device C
of the substrate at the bottom of PR opening, they will bounce on the surface of
the substrate. After the film is created on the surface, the metal particles with
high momentum will also re-sputter out the deposited film at the bottom of
the PR opening. As a result of the bounce and re-sputtering, the metal particles
can better cover the sidewalls of the PR step. The coverage of the metal film is
better than that of thermal and electron beam. In the via (Section 11.1) filling
process, there is a similar situation.
(2) Because the sputtered metal particles have greater momentum, there is more
damage to the surface of the substrate and has an adverse effect on some
devices.
(3) In the metal interconnection process (refer to Figure 11.4), to improve the cov-
erage of the dielectric steps of the vias, the sputtering process should be used
to complete the metal film deposition, as shown in Figure 16.15.
E-beam and sputtering can also be used for the deposition of dielectric films. The
differences between the films done by e-beam and sputtering are the same as metal
deposition. In the paper of reference [4], SiO2 was deposited on GaN as gate dielec-
tric by sputtering. Due to the sputtering-induced surface damage, the electron
concentration and mobility of 2-D electron gas were reduced. This phenomenon is
consistent with the second difference mentioned above. The author used postan-
nealing treatment to remove the damage.
16.5
Metal Lift-off Process
After the evaporation or deposition of metal is finished, the metal covers the
entire surface of the sample. The patterns of metal on the sample surface must
be completed by an etch-back or lift-off process (Figure 16.1). As mentioned in
Chapter 15, in dry etching, metals are usually etched by chlorine-containing gases.
Some metals are not problematic, such as aluminum. The boiling point of the
product AlCl3 after reacting with chlorine is 180 ∘C (refer to Section 15.3). Some
metals are more difficult to etch, such as nickel. After reacting with the three
commonly used etch gases, oxygen, fluorine, and chlorine, the boiling points of
the reactants are all high (over 1000 ∘C). Metals can also be etched by wet method.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 243]
236
16 Metal Processes
Figure 16.16
Chromium etchant.
Figures 16.16 shows chromium etchant. However, due to the isotropy of wet
etching, it is not conducive to the preparation of small-size patterns. Therefore,
the lift-off process is the most used technology in semiconductor manufacturing.
As mentioned above, in the lift-off process, thermal, or electron beam evaporation
should be selected as much as possible to make the metal patterns.
The lift-off process is first to finish the photoresist patterns by photolithography,
and after the metal evaporates on the finished patterns, remove the photoresist
with a PR stripper or remover. The metal remains in the windows which are not
covered by the PR. The metal in other areas, together with the PR, is peeled off from
the sample surface by the PR stripper. The lift-off process has three characteristics:
Feature 1. The size of the metal pattern depends on the size of the lithography pat-
tern, so this technology can produce very small metal patterns. By using electron
beam lithography, nanosized metal structures can be made.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 244]
16.5 Metal Lift-off Process
237
Feature 2. Because the photoresist is removed to achieve metal lift-off, this
technology can be applied to any kind of metal.
Feature 3. As it does not involve metal etching, this technology can easily achieve
the evaporation and lift-off of multilayer metals.
From the above discussion, the key to lift-off is that the PR remover can contact
the photoresist. If the remover cannot contact the PR, the lift-off cannot be
achieved. Photoresist is divided into two types, positive PR and negative PR. The
pattern after development is shown in Figures 12.16 and 12.17. From these two
figures, we can see that the positive PR development profile is not conducive to
lift-off. During the evaporation process, the metal film can easily cover the entire
surface of positive PR. The development profile of the negative photoresist is
good for lift-off, because the metal film is easy to produce fractures, as shown in
Figure 16.17. Mostly, positive PR is used for the lithography, and the lift-off can
be realized by using acetone, which is cheap and easy to operate. To realize the
positive photoresist lift-off, it is necessary to make the following modifications to
its cross-section to make it conducive to the metal lift-off. The purpose of the mod-
ifications is to change the cross-section of the PR from the top wide and the bottom
narrow to the top narrow and the bottom wide after development. There are three
methods to modify the cross-section of positive photoresist after development:
Method 1. PR surface hardening technique
Corresponding to the positive PR AZ 1350, after exposure and before devel-
opment, immerse the sample in chlorobenzene (C6H5Cl) for 1–3 minutes to
harden the surface of the resist. After taking the sample out of the chloroben-
zene, it is blown dry with a nitrogen gun, and then developed. The cross section
obtained is shown in Figure 16.18a [5]. The article I quoted here was published
30 years ago, but it still has reference value.
Method 2. Image reversal technique
With the positive PR AZ 5214E, the positive and negative tones of the PR can
be reversed, and the same cross-section as the negative resist can be obtained.
Substrate
PR stripper
cannot attack
Metal
PR
PR stripper
can attack
Metal
PR
Substrate
Figure 16.17
PR proﬁle for lift-off. The left is not good (positive), the right is good
(negative).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 245]
238
16 Metal Processes
PR
Substrate
PR
Substrate
PR 2
PR 1
Substrate
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.18
Schematic diagram of the proﬁle of positive PR after modiﬁcation. (a) The
PR proﬁle of surface hardening, (b) the PR proﬁle of image reversal, (c) the PR proﬁle of
double-layer.
After exposure, put the sample on a hot plate for baking at the same temperature
as the soft bake for a few minutes. After baking, the sample is put to the aligner
again to do flood exposure (without photomask), and then developed. The PR
cross section as shown in Figure 16.18b [6] can be achieved.
Method 3. Double-layer photoresist technique
Before coating ordinary positive PR, spin the first layer of resist, lift-off resist
(LOR) or polyamic acid (PA) [5]. This resist layer is prebaked on the hot plate,
and then spin the second resist layer-ordinary positive RP. Soft bake the positive
PR on the hot plate, the temperature of the prebaking is higher than the tem-
perature of the soft bake. After exposure and development, the developing rate
of the first layer of resist is faster than that of the second layer. The cross section
of the PR after development is shown in Figure 16.18c.
In these three methods, to do the metal lift-off, the thickness of the metal film
should be less than the thickness of the photoresist. The thickness of the metal
is less than the thickness of the PR, which is the most common situation in the
process. The PVD thickness of metal is generally 100–500 nm, and the thickness
of PR is 1–2 μm.
In the double-layer PR process, the first layer of resist can also be replaced by
SiO2. This technique is called SiO2 assisted lift-off process [5]. At this time, the
prebaking step is not needed, but etching is required. The dry etching is used first
and then followed by wet etching to increase the undercut of SiO2, which is ben-
eficial to lift-off. If the thickness of the metal and SiO2 is controlled so that the
metal is slightly thinner than SiO2, a near-planar structure after metal lift-off can
be achieved. Figure 16.19 shows the difference between double-layer PR lift-off
and SiO2 assisted lift-off.
Here we have an example of SiO2-assisted lift-off. The left photo of Figure 16.20
is the developed photoresist and SiO2. The photo clearly shows the structure
of the PR with a wide top and a narrow bottom, which is more obvious than
that in Figure 12.17. The right photo of the figure shows the case where the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 246]
16.5 Metal Lift-off Process
239
Substrate
(a)
(b)
Substrate
Metal
SiO2
Metal
Figure 16.19
The structure after lift-off. (a) The pattern after the double-layer PR lift-off
and (b) the pattern after SiO2 assisted lift-off.
5.0 kV 10.6 mm x 15.0 k SE(M) 5/17/2019 11:15
(a)
(b)
5.0 kV 9.5 mm x 9.00 k SE(U) 5/17/2019 10:13
3.00 μm
5.00 μm
0.92 μm
2.19 μm
Ni
509 nm SiO2
575 nm
PR
68.70°
Figure 16.20
The left is the cross-view of the PR and SiO2 after development. The right
is the situation after the Ni lift-off without SiO2 etching.
metal nickel (Ni) does lift-off without SiO2 etching. The Ni is not lifted off at all
and covered the entire sample surface. After the dry and wet etching of SiO2,
the Ni is easily and smoothly lifted off, and the patterns are perfect, as shown
in Figure 16.21.
If we must use dry etching to etch the metal, be careful when removing resist
after etching. For positive PR, the commonly used stripper is acetone. In the dry
etching process, due to the action of plasma, the surface of photoresist changes,
resulting in a hard shell that is not soluble in acetone. The greater power is, the
longer etch time is, and the thicker hard shell will be. This phenomenon also
occurs when we do dry etching of Si, SiO2, and Si3N4. If we put the sample flat in
the liquid, as shown in Figure 16.22a, acetone can remove the PR under the hard
shell, but the hard shell remains on the sample surface, as shown in Figure 16.23.
Therefore, after dry etching, when placing the sample in acetone, place it upright,
as shown in Figure 16.22b, so that the hard-shell falls into the solution instead
of remaining on the sample surface. If the etching power is big and etching
time is long, use oxygen plasma to etch the resist for several minutes before
putting the sample into acetone. If necessary, it should be assisted by ultrasonic
vibration.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 247]
240
16 Metal Processes
SiO2
Ni
Figure 16.21
After SiO2 etched, the patterns of Ni lift-off.
Container
Container
Acetone
Acetone
Sample
Sample
X
√
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.22
Put the sample into acetone after dry etching. The left is wrong, and the
right is correct. (a) Don’t lay the sample ﬂat in acetone after dry etching, (b) place the
sample upright in acetone after dry etching.
Figure 16.23
Hard shell of photoresist left on the sample surface.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 248]
16.6 Metal Selection and Annealing Technology
241
16.6
Metal Selection and Annealing Technology
In order to obtain a good Schottky barrier and ohmic contact, the choice of metal
must meet certain conditions.
For silicon, when the work function of metal (refer to 6.3) is larger than that of
n-type silicon or smaller than that of p-type silicon, the contact between Si and
metal can obtain Schottky contact, that is, rectifying contact [7] (refer to 5.3). For
ohmic contact, the surface of the substrate must be heavily doped, and the barrier
height established by the selected metal should be small (refer to 6.3).
For III–V materials, the situation is more complicated. According to the situa-
tion, it can be divided into four basic types: ideal or near ideal Schottky barrier,
Bardeen barrier, oxide barrier, and close contact barrier [8]. Ohmic contact is also
heavily doped, and the n-type semiconductors are main option. In addition, there
are four points that need to be considered:
(1) The adhesion between metals and semiconductors,
(2) The compatibility between metals and semiconductors,
(3) The compatibility between metals,
(4) The appropriate annealing temperature.
We discuss metal selection and annealing as below.
16.6.1
The Selection of Metals
Al is the most used metal in semiconductor processing. Al has low price, low
resistivity, simple process, and good adhesion. But in the process, Al also has some
problems. Two common problems are electromigration and dissolution of silicon.
Electromigration refers to the migration phenomenon of metal under the action
of current and temperature, which may break the metal connection and make the
chip scrap. This phenomenon is more likely to occur under high-current density
and high frequency. Today, the devices that make up microchips are getting smaller
and faster. If not handled well, electromigration will have a significant impact on
the reliability of the microchips. To overcome this problem, 4–5% Cu is generally
added to Al (see Figure 11.4). The dissolution of silicon means that silicon
dissolves and diffuses in Al when processed or used at a higher temperature, and
corrosion pits appear on the surface of the silicon, which degrades or even fails the
device characteristics. To overcome this problem, 1–2% silicon can be added to Al.
Gold is another commonly used metal. The resistivity of gold is lower than that
of aluminum. Its electromigration characteristic is better than that of aluminum,
and its ductility is good. As it is easy to create a deep-level trap and recombination
center in silicon (see Figure 5.6), it is generally avoided in silicon processing. Gold
has been widely used in GaAs chips. However, the surface contact characteristics
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 249]
242
16 Metal Processes
of gold and GaAs are not very good, it cannot meet the specifications of Schottky
barrier manufacturing. Therefore, a multilayer-metal process is required, such as
the Au/Pt/Ti structure of Schottky barrier. Ti is a barrier metal, Pt is a buffer layer,
and Au is conductive layer. In the Au/Ge/Ni structure of ohmic contact, Ni is the
adhesion layer, Ge is the buffer layer, and Au is the conductive layer.
In the processing, especially in wire bonding (discuss in Chapter 18), we should
avoid the contact between gold and aluminum. Gold-aluminum intermetallic
compounds will be created with the contact between two metals, such as Au5Al2,
Au2Al, AuAl, AuAl2 [9]. AuAl2 that is called purple plague can cause a big
reliability problem in wire bonding.
In addition to the abovementioned metal systems, there are copper inter-
connection technique, refractory metal tungsten technique, tungsten via plugs
(Figure 11.4), and polysilicon gate technique, etc., which will not be introduced
in this section.
16.6.2
Metal Annealing
In order to have a good Schottky barrier and ohmic contact, after the metal
is evaporated and deposited, the annealing process must be completed. This
process can make the metal and the semiconductor contact surface to produce
a shallow fusion and achieve the purpose of good contact. Metal annealing is
sometimes called sintering. It mainly has two techniques: furnace annealing and
rapid thermal annealing (RTA). Furnace annealing uses the tool that has same
structure as thermal oxidation furnace. RTA has another name Rapid Thermal
Processing (RTP). It uses halogen lamps as the heating source. The structure is
shown in Figure 16.24. The furnace annealing has a long temperature ramp-up
time, which is suitable for a long time (for example, half an hour or more)
annealing process. RTA has a short ramp-up time, which can reach 20–50 ∘C/s
and can achieve annealing in a few seconds to a few minutes. Because of its
short temperature ramp-up time and annealing time, so it is called RTA. The
metal annealing process mostly uses RTA. The temperature is 300–500 ∘C and
the time is 1–5 minutes. Depending on the device, it may take half to an hour
of annealing in a furnace, which requires us to do experiments to determine
the best conditions. Sometimes the annealing process cannot be completed at
the same time and needs more than one time. In this case, we should complete
higher-temperature annealing first, and then do lower temperature one.
The annealing process is mostly protected by introducing nitrogen gas to avoid
the reaction of oxygen to the metal at high temperature, which will deteriorate the
alloy structure. Sometimes a mixture of 95% N2 + 5% H2 is also used. This gas is
called forming gas. An example of annealing using forming gas is that when SiO2 is
used as a dielectric film, some oxygen may escape from the film during annealing,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 250]
References
243
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.24
RTA equipment (a) and internal structure (b).
and this oxygen may react with the metal film to increase the resistivity of the
metal and the surface becomes rough. The phenomenon has a serious impact
on aluminum. Using forming gas, the hydrogen in it can react with the escaped
oxygen to protect the metal film and improve the alloy properties of the metal.
References
1 饭田修一, 大野和郎, 神前熙等. (1979). 物理学常用数表, [日], 科学出版社, 1979,
198 页.
2 Sarangan, A. (2019). Nanofabrication Principles to Laboratory Practice, 54. CRC
Press.
3 Greene, J.E. (2017). Review Article: Tracing the recorded history of thin-film
sputter deposition: From the 1800s to 2017. Journal of Vacuum Science & Tech-
nology A 35, 05C204: 25.
4 Pang, L., Lian, Y., Kim, D.S. et al. (2012). AlGaN/GaN MOSHEMT with
high-quality gate-SiO2 achieved by room-temperature radio frequency mag-
netron sputtering. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 59 (10): 2650–2655.
5 廉亚光. (1991). 用正性光刻胶进行GaAs IC的非辅助直接剥离技术, 半导体情报,
年, 第28 卷, 第3 期, 53 页。
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 251]
244
16 Metal Processes
6 MicroChemicals, Basics of Microstructuring, Image Reversal Resists and Their
Processing.
7 电子工业生产技术手册7, 半导体与集成电路卷, 硅器件与集成电路, 581页,
国防工业出版社, 1991年。
8 电子工业生产技术手册8, 半导体与集成电路卷, 化合物半导体器件, 360 页,
国防工业出版社, 1992年。
9 Galli, E., Majni, G., Nobili, C., and Ottaviani, G. (1980). Gold-aluminum inter-
metallic compound formation. Electrocomponent Science and Technology 6:
147–150.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 252]
245
17
Doping Processes
In the manufacture of semiconductor microchips, it is necessary to change the
electrical properties of the original semiconductor substrate material (n-type,
p-type, and semi-insulating) to make basic device structures, such as p–n junc-
tions, heavily doped ohmic contact regions, and isolation zones. These structures
can be completed by doping processes. In silicon technology, photolithography,
oxidation, and doping are the troika of planar technology. The doping processes
mainly include two technologies, thermal diffusion and ion implantation. Since
there are no thermal oxidation and diffusion process in III–V semiconductors, the
doping is generally completed by ion implantation. Let us discuss the processes
below.
17.1
Basic Introduction of Doping
Regarding doping, we introduced in Section 5.2, phosphorus doping can make
silicon an n-type semiconductor, boron doping can make silicon a p-type semicon-
ductor, and Si doping can make GaAs an n-type semiconductor. In fact, not only
these three dopants, but other elements also have the same function. However,
these three elements are used the most.
As mentioned above, doping is mainly divided into thermal diffusion and ion
implantation. Thermal diffusion is to place the silicon sample at a high temper-
ature of 900–1200 ∘C. The dopant enters the silicon through diffusion. Thermal
diffusion is also referred to as diffusion. 900–1200 ∘C is obviously too high for
III–V materials. The doping technique for these kinds of materials is mainly ion
implantation. Ion implantation is to ionize the atoms or molecules to be doped,
and the ionized positive ions are injected into the semiconductor substrate or
sample in the form of high energy under the acceleration of the electric field. In
this sense, the working principle is like RIE and sputtering techniques, but the
whole set of equipment is much more complicated and expensive.
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 253]
246
17 Doping Processes
Thermal diffusion is a high-temperature process, and only SiO2 or Si3N4 can be
used as a masking film. We use SiO2 more often. In fact, silicon impurity diffu-
sion is often carried out simultaneously with thermal oxidation. It is suitable for
deep doping. Ion implantation is a room-temperature process, so SiO2, Si3N4 can
be used as a masking film, and photoresist can also be used as a masking film for
implantation, but the photoresist is more difficult to remove from the sample sur-
face than RIE. According to the difference of energy, ion implantation can realize
doping from shallow to deep, and it has been widely used in the manufacture of
silicon and III–V microchips.
17.2
Basic Principles of Diffusion
Impurity atoms in silicon are mainly diffused in six ways, please see Figure 17.1:
(1) Impurity atoms may reside on a normal lattice site; this is a substitutional
impurity.
(2) They may reside in an open space of the lattice; this is an interstitial impurity.
(3) For an impurity atom to behave as a dopant, it must be substitutional so that
it can ionize and either donate or accept electrons.
(4) Interstitial impurity atoms can diffuse fairly quickly because they do not need
to break any bonds.
(5) Substitutional impurity atoms diffuse fairly slowly because they must break
and make bonds in order to propagate.
(6) Moving an impurity atom from an interstitial into a substitutional position is
termed dopant activation [1].
In Figure 17.1, cases b, c, e, and f can form substitutional impurity. Boron and
phosphorus are substitutional impurities.
The earliest mathematical formula to explain the phenomenon of diffusion
is Fick’s law, which was proposed by the German scientist Adolf Eugen Fick
(September 3, 1829–August 21, 1901) in 1855. It can be divided into Fick’s first
law and Fick’s second law. If it is assumed that the impurity only diffuses in one
direction (the direction perpendicular to the sample surface), which is the case of
one-dimensional diffusion. The diffusion mode of the impurity in silicon can be
obtained by solving Fick’s second law:
𝜕N
𝜕t = D𝜕2N
𝜕x2
(17.1)
It is a partial differential equation and used to solve one-dimensional diffusion.
N = N (x, t) is impurity concentration in silicon, which is a function of diffusion
distance (x) and time (t). D is called diffusivity (or diffusion-coefficient), and its
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 254]
17.3 Thermal Diffusion
247
Interstitial transport
(a)
Direct exchange
(b)
Vacancy exchange
(c)
Kick-out
(f)
Frank–turnbull
(e)
Interstitial transfer
(d)
Figure 17.1
Atomic diffusion mechanisms in silicon.
unit is cm2/s. The higher the value of D, the faster the impurity. D follows Arrhe-
nius Eq. (15.1) and can be rewritten as:
D = D0 exp (−E∕kBT)
(17.2)
D0 is a constant related to the impurity. Typical activation energies (E in the
equation) for solid-state diffusion are about 3.3–4.4 eV [1]. In addition, impurities
have a maximum solubility in silicon, which is called solid solubility. At 1200 ∘C,
the solid solubility of boron is 5 × 1020 atoms/cm3; at 1150 ∘C, the solid solubility
of phosphorus is 1.3 × 1021 atoms/cm3 [2]. For comparison, we can refer to the
atomic concentration of major semiconductors listed in Section 6.3.
17.3
Thermal Diffusion
As mentioned above, thermal diffusion is the diffusion of impurities into the
silicon crystal at 900–1200 ∘C. This diffusion is mainly carried out in two ways,
constant source diffusion and limited source diffusion, which is also the most
used two-step technique in the diffusion process: the first step is predeposition,
using constant source diffusion; the second step is redistribution, using limited
source diffusion. Although the solving results of Fick’s second law are somewhat
different from the actual situations, the overall trend is consistent with the process
results. By revising this law with other factors, we can get results consistent with
reality. In this chapter, we will give a brief introduction to the one-dimensional
situation to understand how diffusion works in silicon.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 255]
248
17 Doping Processes
t1
Nsub
Ns
Log scale
(a)
(b)
t2
t3
t4
t4>t3>t2>t1
x
t1
Nsub
Log scale
t2
t3
t4
t4>t3>t2>t1
x
Figure 17.2
Schematic diagram of impurity distribution for constant source diffusion (a)
and limited source diffusion (b). Source: [3] Wolf and Tauber.
Constant source diffusion refers to the constant surface concentration during
the diffusion process, which is the case with predeposition. Predeposition means
that the doping source is first deposited on the surface of the sample for a short
time, so it can be considered that it forms a uniformly deposited layer with a small
thickness on the silicon surface. If the time is prolonged, the diffusion will advance
to the inside of the silicon wafer, but the surface concentration will not change.
By solving Fick’s second law, the concentration distribution of impurities can be
obtained as a complementary error function (erfc) distribution.
Limited source diffusion means that the total amount of impurities is constant
during the diffusion process, and this is the case for redistribution. Redistribution
means that after the predeposition is completed, the impurity source is removed,
and the impurities continue to diffuse at high temperature and advance into the
silicon. Since there is no impurity source, the total amount of impurities in the
diffusion process is the impurities deposited on the surface during pre-deposition.
The redistribution process is sometimes called drive-in diffusion. By solving
Fick’s second law, the concentration distribution of impurities can be obtained
as a Gaussian function. Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss (April 3, 1777–February 23,
1855) was a German mathematician and physicist.
The two distribution curves are shown in Figure 17.2. The “Log Scale” in the
figure is an exponential coordinate, x is pointing from the surface of the silicon
wafer to the inner direction, t is time, Ns is the surface concentration, its maxi-
mum value is the impurity solid solubility at diffusion temperature, and Nsub is
the substrate background doping concentration.
17.4
Diffusion and Redistribution of Impurities in SiO2
SiO2 plays an important role in the doping process. It mainly affects thermal
diffusion in two aspects. One is that the redistribution process is often carried
out at the same time as the thermal oxidation process. The other is that the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 256]
17.4 Diffusion and Redistribution of Impurities in SiO2
249
thermal oxide film acts as a diffusion mask and is widely used in the process.
So it is necessary to discuss the diffusion behavior of impurities in SiO2 and the
redistribution at the Si–SiO2 interface. In this section, we still use boron and
phosphorus as examples. To discuss this issue, we need to introduce segregation
coefficient m, which is defined as the ratio of the equilibrium concentration
of impurities in silicon NSi to the equilibrium concentration of NSiO2 in silicon
dioxide:
m =
NSi
NSiO2
(17.3)
According to the experimental results, the m value of boron is 0.1–0.3, and the
m value of phosphorus is about 10 [2]. The segregation coefficient is the first
factor that affects the redistribution of impurities in thermal oxidation. Two
circumstances are possible: (i) the oxide takes up the impurity (m < 1); and (ii)
the oxide rejects the impurity (m > 1).
Another factor that affects the redistribution is the diffusivity of dopant impurity
in the oxide. The larger the diffusivity, the faster the diffusion rate. If the diffusivity
in SiO2 is too large, the impurities will quickly diffuse through the SiO2 film. In
the worst case, the SiO2 cannot be used as a masking film for impurity diffusion.
For the commonly used impurities of boron and phosphorus, their diffusivities in
SiO2 are much smaller than those in Si. The D0 of B and P in silicon is 10.5 cm2/s.
The D0 of B in SiO2 is 2.8 × 10−4 cm2/s when temperature is lower than 1100 ∘C
and 5.8 x 10−11 cm2/s when temperature is higher than 1100 ∘C. The D0 of P in
SiO2 is 1.59 × 10–11 cm2/s [4]. So we can use SiO2 as a masking layer for boron and
phosphorus diffusion.
The third factor affecting redistribution is the rate of oxidation. During thermal
oxidation, the thickness of the oxide layer continues to increase, and the Si–SiO2
interface moves with time. Therefore, the rate of the Si/SiO2 interface movement
also has an important influence on the redistribution.
The four cases described in Figure 17.3 use the substrate impurity concentration
as an example to illustrate the redistribution of impurities at the Si–SiO2 inter-
face. Combined with the predeposited impurity distribution, we can estimate the
redistribution of the interface when doing the process of thermal oxidation and
impurities drive-in. In the figure, a and b indicate that the segregation coefficient
is less than 1, and SiO2 accumulates impurities. Case a is the slow diffusion in the
oxide layer, which is the case with boron. Case b is the fast diffusion in the oxide
layer, when thermal oxidation contains H2 (a method of wet oxidation), this is the
case with boron. In the figure, c and d are the segregation coefficients greater than
1, and SiO2 repels impurities. Case c is the slow diffusion in the oxide layer, which
is the case for phosphorus. Case d is the fast diffusion in the oxide layer, which is
the case for gallium.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 257]
250
17 Doping Processes
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2 
Si
Si
Si
Si
1
1
(a)
(b)
1
1
1
1
1
N
Nsub
1
X (μm)
X (μm)
X (μm)
X (μm)
(c)
(d)
m > 1
m < 1
N
Nsub
N
Nsub
N
Nsub
Figure 17.3
Schematic diagram of the redistribution of impurities at the Si–SiO2
interface. Source: [3] Wolf and Tauber.
17.5
Minimum Thickness of SiO2 Masking Film
Although the diffusivities of boron and phosphorus in SiO2 are much smaller than
those in Si, impurities are still diffused in SiO2. Therefore, if SiO2 is used as a mask-
ing film for diffusion, the minimum thickness of SiO2 that needs to be masked
must be considered. In the previous section, the D0 of B and P in SiO2 showed that
the diffusivity of B is larger than that of P. That means the diffusion rate of B in
SiO2 is larger than the rate of P. The purpose of quoting the data in Section 17.4 is
to indicate that the diffusion rates of B and P in SiO2 are much smaller than those
in Si, so that we can use SiO2 as mask to do B and P diffusion process. Actually,
according to the gases passing into the diffusion tube, the diffusion rates of B and
P in SiO2 are different. In some cases, B has faster rate; in some cases, P has faster
rate. For more details, please refer to reference [5]. Borosilicate and phosphosili-
cate (see Section 17.7) are commonly used diffusion techniques. The techniques
usually use N2 during the processing. In this situation, the diffusion rate of B
in SiO2 is smaller than P. If the ratio of substrate surface concentration (Ns) to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 258]
17.6 The Distribution of Impurities Under the SiO2 Masking Film
251
Figure 17.4
The
thickness of SiO2 needed
to mask B and P vs.
temperature and time [6].
Source: Chinese Technical
Books.
1
10
10–3
10–2
10–1
10
1
10
P
B
T = 1200 °C
T (h)
1100
1000
900
1200
1100
1000
900
102
t (m)
Thickness (μm)
103
substrate background concentration (Nsub) is 3 × 103, the required thickness of
SiO2 as a function of time and temperature is shown in Figure 17.4.
17.6
The Distribution of Impurities Under the SiO2
Masking Film
When impurities diffuse through the masking film, the impurity atoms not
only diffuse vertically into the silicon substrate but also diffuse laterally along
the interface between the masking film and silicon. Based on the substrate
background concentration Nsub, if the concentration of the impurity on the
surface of the substrate Ns is higher, the depth of impurity diffusion (vertical and
horizontal) is greater, as shown in Figure 17.5. The dotted line in the figure is
the erfc distribution, and the solid line is the Gaussian distribution. For a given
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 259]
252
17 Doping Processes
3
3
2
1
0
2
1
0
104
erfc function
Gaussian function
0.62
0.58
0.77
0.78
0.80
0.81
0.87
y1/x1 = 0.90
103
102
10
1
Dopants
Diffusion mask
Ns/Nsub =
2
3
y/2√Dt
2√Dt
x
Figure 17.5
Lateral diffusion of impurity under the mask [6]. Source: Chinese Technical
Books.
Ns/Nsub, yj/xj in the figure is the ratio of horizontal diffusion depth and vertical
diffusion depth at the interface between mask and semiconductor.
17.7
Diffusion Impurity Sources [2]
The boron and the phosphorus sources used for the diffusion of silicon impurities
are divided into solid planar diffusion sources (PDS), portable liquid sources, and
coated latex sources. The PDS is made into the same shape as the silicon wafer.
It is placed in the quartz boat at the same time as the silicon wafer, put the boat
into the quartz tube to be heated to diffuse impurity into the silicon wafer, as
shown in Figure 17.6. The portable liquid source is like wet oxidation by passing
oxygen to the water bottle and bringing the water vapor into the quartz tube.
The process uses nitrogen to pass into the bottle containing the liquid source
and carry the source into the quartz tube. The coated latex source is the same
as the PR coating process. The source is first coated on the surface of Si wafer
through a spinner and then diffused in the tube. Below we will briefly describe
each of them.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 260]
17.7 Diffusion Impurity Sources
253
Dopant wafer
Si wafer
Figure 17.6
Placement of dopant wafer and silicon wafer on a quartz boat.
There are four main sources of boron:
(1) Planar boron nitride (BN) source. The diffusion mechanism of this diffusion
source is, when it is heated in an oxygen atmosphere, a layer of boron trioxide
is formed on the surface of the source:
4BN + 3O2 →2B2O3 + 2N2
(17.4)
This step is called activation. The activation temperature is usually
1000–1200 ∘C. During predeposition, B2O3 reacts with Si, reducing boron
atoms to diffuse into silicon to complete p-type doping:
2B2O3 + 3Si →3SiO2 + 4B
(17.5)
The product in Eq. (17.5) includes SiO2 and B, so this product is called borosil-
icate glass (BSG). In the process, except for O2 used in the activation step, N2
is used in all other steps.
(2) Boron glass–ceramic planar source. The diffusion source is a mixture of B2O3
and multiple oxides. It contains 50% B2O3, 20–40% SiO2, 20–30% Al2O3, and
5–15% MgO + BaO. Its diffusion mechanism is carried out according to reac-
tion Eq. (17.5). One of the reasons is that B2O3 has a low melting point (460 ∘C)
and others have high melting points. During the process, only B2O3 escapes
from the source in large quantities to finish the B diffusion process. There is
almost no diffusion process for other metals Mg and Ba.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 261]
254
17 Doping Processes
(3) Trimethyl borate [B(OCH3)3] source. It is a colorless and transparent liquid
with a boiling point of 67.8 ∘C and a melting point of −29.2 ∘C. When in use,
it is carried to the quartz tube with nitrogen, and the thermal decomposition
reaction occurs when the temperature is higher than 500 ∘C:
B(OCH3)3 →B2O3 + CO2 + H2O + C + ⋅⋅⋅
(17.6)
Then return to reaction Eq. (17.5).
(4) Silica latex boron source. The diffusion source is a kind of latex containing
boron. The source is made by dissolving B2O3 into silica latex. It is spun on
the surface of the silicon wafer by spin coating and prebaking at 300 ∘C. The
solvent in the source is volatilized and undergoes other chemical reactions to
form a boron containing SiO2 layer on the silicon surface. At high temperature
(1000–1200 ∘C), boron diffuses into the silicon. The reaction mechanism also
complies with Eq. (17.5).
There are three main sources of phosphorus
(1) Planar phosphorous source. It is a solid sintered from silicon pyrophosphate
(SiP2O7) and aluminum metaphosphate [Al(PO3)3] into a wafer shape. At the
diffusion temperature, the following reactions occur:
SiP2O7 →SiO2 + P2O5
(17.7)
Al(PO3)3 →AlPO4 + P2O5
(17.8)
2P2O5 + 5Si →5SiO2 + 4P
(17.9)
The product in Eq. (17.9) includes SiO2 and P, so this product is called phos-
phosilicate glass (PSG). The phosphorus atoms in PSG diffuse into silicon to
complete n-type doping. The molecular structure of AlPO4 in Eq. (17.8) is very
stable, and at the diffusion temperature, aluminum does not be released to
diffuse into silicon. N2 is used in the process.
(2) Phosphorus oxychloride (POCl3) source. It is a colorless and transparent liquid
with a melting point of 1.25 ∘C and a boiling point of 105.3 ∘C. It is carried into
the quartz tube with nitrogen gas and reacts with oxygen and silicon in the
tube at high temperature. So besides N2, O2 is also used in the process:
4POCl3 + 3O2 →P4O10 + 6Cl2
(17.10)
P4O10 + 5Si →5SiO2 + 4P
(17.11)
(3) Silica latex phosphorus source. The source is made by dissolving P2O5 into
silica latex. Its use method is the same as that of silica latex boron source, and
the reaction equation is the same as (17.9).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 262]
17.8 Parameters of the Diffusion Layer
255
17.8
Parameters of the Diffusion Layer [2]
The parameters of the diffusion layer include structural parameters and electrical
parameters. The structural parameter of diffusion refers to the geometric position
of the p–n junction formed by diffusion, that is, the distance between the p–n junc-
tion and the surface of the diffusion layer. It is called junction depth, which is also
represented by the symbol xj, and its expression is
xj = A
√
Dt
(17.12)
In the formula, D is the diffusivity of impurities in silicon, t is time, and A is a
constant related to the ratio of surface concentration to substrate concentration.
The electrical parameters of the diffusion junction are expressed by the sheet
resistance of the diffusion layer. A semiconductor thin layer that has a square sur-
face, the resistance in the direction of current parallel to one side of the square is
called the diffusion layer sheet resistance, as shown in Figure 17.7. The symbol of
sheet resistance is Rs, and the unit is Ω:
Rs = 1
𝜎xj
(17.13)
In Eq. (17.13), 𝜎is the average conductivity of the diffusion layer. Its unit is
(Ω ⋅cm)−1=
1
Ω ⋅cm. Conductivity is the reciprocal of resistivity (relationship 1.4), so
sheet resistance can also be written as:
Rs = 𝜌
xj
(17.14)
In the formula, 𝜌is the average resistivity of the diffusion layer. The definition of
sheet resistance is very useful in the process. The sheet resistance has nothing to do
with the specific size l of the square, so once the sheet resistance is measured, the
resistance of a diffusion layer can be easily obtained. Please see Figure 17.8, which
is a schematic diagram of a strip diffusion layer. The “Diffusion area” in the figure
is the area of impurity diffusion layer. The number of squares of this diffusion layer
Figure 17.7
Schematic diagram of diffusion
layer sheet resistance.
l
l
xj
p
n
Current
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 263]
256
17 Doping Processes
Diffusion area
l
w
Figure 17.8
Schematic diagram
of a strip diffusion layer.
is the ratio of length and width l/w, and the resistance R of the layer is the sheet
resistance multiplied by the number of squares:
R = Rs ⋅l
w
(17.15)
17.9
Four-Point Probe Sheet Resistance Measurement
The measurement of sheet resistance mainly adopts the four-point probe method.
Figure 17.9 is a schematic diagram of a four-point probe testing a sample.
It consists of four probes arranged in a line on the same plane and at equal
distances. The distance between the two probes is s = 1 mm. When measuring,
press the four probes on the surface of the sample to be measured at the same
time, the two outer probes are applied with a constant small current, and the
inner two probes are used to measure voltage. For rectangular samples, a/d ≥4.
If the size of the sample is much larger than the probe pitch, then the sheet
resistance Rs is [2]
Rs =
π
ln 2
V
I = 4.5324V
I
(17.16)
Figure 17.10 is a photo of a four-point probe. The four-point probe method is not
only used to measure the sheet resistance, but also used to measure the resistance
of metals after evaporation or sputtering.
w
d
w
a
b
s
s
s
s
s s
+I
–I
v
+I
–I
v
Figure 17.9
Schematic diagram of measuring sheet resistance with four-point probe.
Source: [3] Wolf and Tauber.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 264]
17.10 Ion Implantation Process
257
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.10
A photo of four-point probe (a, JANDEL RM3000) and four probes (b, Arrow
point).
17.10
Ion Implantation Process
Ion implantation is also an important means of doping process. In the early semi-
conductor manufacturing, diffusion was the basic process for making p–n junc-
tion. But when the device entered the submicron size, ion implantation became
the standard process of doping. Compared with thermal diffusion, ion implanta-
tion has the following main advantages:
1. A wide range of doping from shallow to deep can be achieved.
2. It is room-temperature process. So, SiO2, metal, and photoresist can be used as
masking film.
3. In addition to silicon, this technology can also be used for doping of
III–V materials.
4. The lateral diffusion is small, which is beneficial to the manufacture of small-
sized devices.
5. It can break through the limit of solid solubility of impurities.
6. It can realize some structures’ fabrication that cannot be realized by diffusion
process.
The main disadvantages are
1. The equipment is complex and expensive.
2. The throughput is lower than diffusion.
3. The semiconductor crystal structure is damaged, and high-temperature anneal-
ing is required to repair the crystal structure.
Ion implantation equipment is also called ion implanter. The implanter provides
acceleration energy from 0.2 keV to 2 MeV [3] for the ions to be doped. The dif-
ference between the minimum energy and the maximum energy is 10 000 times.
The commonly used energy unit eV in the microscopic world was introduced in
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 265]
258
17 Doping Processes
Horizontal and
vertical beam
deflector
Target
Electrostatic
accelerator
Wafer
chamber
Ion
beam
Magnetic
particle
filter
Slits
Ion
source
Figure 17.11
Schematic diagram of an implanter. Source: [7] Phelps / IOP Publishing.
Chapter 2. Its physical meaning is the energy obtained by an electron through a
potential difference of 1 V. Based on rough calculations, we can think that all ions
with a charge can obtain 1 eV of energy when passing through a potential dif-
ference of 1 V. To have an intuitive understanding of the energy of an implanter,
we use the RIE equipment introduced in Section 15.2 to make a comparison. It is
mentioned in this section that when the DC bias voltage of the RIE equipment
exceeds 500 V, the system alarms. If 500 V is used as an example, when an ion
passes a bias voltage of 500 V, an acceleration energy of 500 eV=0.5 keV can be
obtained. The energy provided by an RIE tool to the ion is equivalent to the lowest
energy range of the ion implanter. Figure 17.11 is a schematic diagram of an ion
implanter.
The implanter uses current to identify the strength of the ion beam. Normally,
the current range is 1 μA to 30 mA, and the current of the special purpose
implanter is 50–100 mA. Through the current, we define the implantation
dose F [3]:
F = It
qA
(17.17)
The unit of F is the number of implanted ions per square centimeter (atoms/cm2).
In the formula, I is the ion beam current, the unit is ampere; t is the implantation
time, the unit is second; q is the charge of an ion (usually equal to an electron
charge = 1.6 × 10−19 coulomb); A is the area of the ion beam, the unit is square
centimeters.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 266]
17.11 Theoretical Analysis of Ion Implantation
259
17.11
Theoretical Analysis of Ion Implantation
The total length of the path taken by an ion from entering the target (sample) sur-
face to the stopping point is called the range, denoted by R. The projection length
of R in the incident (X) direction is called the projected range, denoted by Rp. The
projection length of R in the plane which is perpendicular to the incident direc-
tion is called the projected lateral or transverse range and is represented by Rt.
Figure 17.12 is a schematic diagram of these three quantities. We use 𝒾to repre-
sent the number of ions injected into the target. The Rp of each ion is different,
which is represented by Rpi. The Rpi of all ions incident on a unit area is added
up, expressed as ∑
iRpi, and then divided by the injection dose F, and we get the
average projected range Rp [8]:
Rp =
∑
i
Rpi∕F
(17.18)
Similarly
Rt =
∑
i
Rti∕F
(17.19)
The concentration distribution of impurity in silicon after implantation is well
explained with Gaussian function. The quantities mentioned above are closely
related to the ion implantation energy. The impurity distribution and junction
depth can be obtained by these quantities. When a lot of impurities are implanted
into silicon, their distribution is a statistical distribution. In statistics, we use stan-
dard deviation to represent the dispersion of a quantity. For the projected range
Rp, the standard deviation (projected straggle) is ΔRp. Its expression is
ΔRp =
[
∑
i
(
Rpi −Rp
)2
∕Φ
]1∕2
=
[
ΔRp
2]1∕2
(17.20)
The standard deviation of the lateral range (projected lateral straggle) ΔRt has
similar result. We mainly consider the distribution in the incident direction here.
The lateral distribution is much smaller than the thermal diffusion, so we will
Figure 17.12
Schematic
diagram of range, projection
range, and lateral component
after ion implantation into the
sample.
X
Ion beam
R
Rp
Semiconductor
Rt
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 267]
260
17 Doping Processes
not discuss it. Then the theoretically deduced expression for the distribution of
implanted ion concentration N is
N(x) =
Φ
√
2πΔRp
exp
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
−(x −Rp
)2
2ΔRp
2
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
(17.21)
The maximum point of concentration is at x = Rp, and the expression is
N(x) =
Φ
√
2πΔRp
≈0.4Φ
ΔRp
(17.22)
p-type (or n-type) impurity ions are implanted into n-type (or p-type) substrate.
When the concentration of implanted impurities is equal to the substrate concen-
tration Nsub, the depth is called junction depth xj. Its expression is [2]
xj = Rp + ΔRp
(
2 ln Nmax
Nsub
)1∕2
(17.23)
17.12
Impurity Distribution after Implantation
According to formula 17.21, the distribution of ion implantation is different from
thermal diffusion. The maximum point of the concentration during diffusion is on
the surface, while the peak of the implantation concentration distribution is at Rp.
Figure 17.13 shows the results of boron implantation in amorphous silicon with
0
1017
1018
Concentration (atoms/cm3)
1019
1020
1021
Boron in silicon
30 keV
100
300
800
Measured
4-Moment
Gaussian
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Depth (μm)
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Figure 17.13
Atom distribution graph of boron implanted into amorphous silicon
without annealing. Source: [3] Wolf and Tauber.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 268]
17.12 Impurity Distribution after Implantation
261
different energies. The figure shows atomic concentration distribution graph.
“4-MOMENT” is a simulation model. For thermal diffusion, the peak of impurity
concentration is on the substrate surface (Figure 17.2). For ion implantation, the
peak of impurity concentration is below the substrate surface, the higher the
implantation power, the deeper the peak of concentration.
The reason why the above figure uses amorphous silicon as an example is
because when ions are implanted into single crystal silicon, due to the orderly
arrangement of the crystal lattice, it seems that there is “openness” along the
crystal direction, and the size of the openness is different in different crystal
orientation. After implantation, the depth of ions entering the silicon along the
openness is greater than the value predicted by theory and model. This phe-
nomenon is the channeling effect of ion implantation. Figure 17.14 is a schematic
diagram of the channeling effect of implantation and silicon crystal openness.
To avoid the channeling effect, during the implantation process, the sample
surface and the ion implantation direction are not perpendicular, that is, the ion
direction and the openness direction are at an angle of 0∘, but a certain angle.
Figure 17.15 shows a schematic diagram of the channeling effect of different
deflection angles. The “Normalized impurity concentration” in the figure is
a method of digital simplification in mathematics. Here, assuming that the
<111>
<100>
(a)
(b)
<110>
Figure 17.14
Schematic diagrams of: (a) the trajectory of ions entering the “openness” at
different angles. (b) the “openness” in different crystal orientation of silicon. Source: [3]
Wolf and Tauber.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 269]
262
17 Doping Processes
Depth (μm)
Normalized impurity concentration
(atoms/cm3)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
10
102
103
104
0° to <110>
Q = 1.2 × 1012/cm2
Q = 5 × 1012/cm2
32P : Si
Room
temperature
long “tail”
2° to <110>
8° to <110>
3° to <110>
Figure 17.15
Phosphorus impurity proﬁles for 40 keV ion implantation to silicon at
various angles from the ⟨110⟩axis. Source: [9] Adapted from Bo Cui.
substrate concentration is 1, the implanted concentration is expressed as the
ratio of the substrate concentration. Generally the substrate concentration is
1016 atoms/cm3, so the ordinate range of the figure is from 1017 to 1020 atoms/cm3.
Q is the implantation dose F mentioned above, the abscissa is the implant depth,
and the implanted impurity is a radioactive isotope of phosphorus, phosphorus-32
(32P). The nucleus of 32P has 15 protons and 17 neutrons, one more neutron
than the most common isotope of phosphorus, phosphorus-31. The figure shows
that for the silicon ⟨110⟩axis, when the implantation angle is 8∘, the implanted
channeling effect is the smallest. “Long ‘tail’” is produced by the channeling
effect.
17.13
Type and Dose of Implanted Impurities [2]
The impurity implantation energy has been mentioned above, and the range
is from 0.2 keV to 2 MeV. In this section, we briefly introduce the commonly
used implant impurities and doses. The specific selection should be determined
according to the needs of the actual device. For p-type doping, the commonly used
implanted ions are B+ and BF2
+, and BF2
+ is used for shallow implantation. For
n-type doping, the commonly used implanted ions are P+, As+, Sb+, and PF2
+. In
addition, O+ and N+ are used to form an insulating layer, and Ar+ is implanted to
form a high resistance layer. The dose range is from 1010 to 1018 atoms/cm2.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 270]
17.14 The Minimum Thickness of Masking Film
263
17.14
The Minimum Thickness of Masking Film
When doing implantation, we can use different masking films. The most used is
SiO2. Or Si3N4, photoresist, and metal can be used as masking films. With the same
implantation conditions, the thickness of Si3N4 can be thinner (85%) than that of
SiO2, and the thickness of photoresist is thicker (1.8 times) than that of SiO2 [10].
When implanted, the projected range of ions in Si is close to that in SiO2, as shown
in Figure 17.16. The masking film must meet the minimum thickness require-
ment: the concentration of implanted ions into the substrate through the masking
film is more than two orders of magnitude lower than the substrate concentra-
tion. In mathematics, 1 order of magnitude is 10, 2 orders of magnitude are 102,
3 orders of magnitude are 103, and so on. The minimum thickness of different
0.003
0.01
0.1
Projected range (μm)
1
2
Rp IN Si
Rp IN SiO2
B
P
AS
100
10
Energy (keV)
1000
Figure 17.16
The projected range of impurities in Si and SiO2. Source: [3] Wolf and
Tauber.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 271]
264
17 Doping Processes
masking materials is different and should be selected according to the implanta-
tion conditions. In the actual implantation process, formula 17.24 can be used to
estimate the minimum thickness of the masking film. Note that all parameters in
the formula refer to the values in the corresponding masking material [2].
dmin = Rp + 4ΔRp
(17.24)
17.15
Annealing Process
After implantation, the integrity of silicon lattice is destroyed by the impact of
high-energy particles, resulting in various defects. The impurity atoms entering
the silicon do not reach the substitutional position to activate the electricity. The
annealing process is to perform high-temperature treatment on the sample after
ion implantation. This process can restore the structure of silicon lattice and
push the impurity atoms to reach the substitutional position to generate electrical
activation.
Commonly used annealing processes are conventional furnace annealing and
rapid thermal annealing (RTA). The conventional furnace annealing equipment is
0
1E16
1E17
Boron concentration (atoms/cm3)
1E18
1E19
1E20
1E21
0.5
1
Depth (μm)
As-implanted
950 °C, 30 min
950 °C, 90 min
1050 °C, 90 min
1000 °C, 90 min
1000 °C, 60 min
1.5
2
Figure 17.17
The distribution of B impurity concentration for different conventional
annealing temperatures and times. Source: [11] Boo et al. / Hindawi Publishing
Corporation / CC BY 3.0.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 272]
17.15 Annealing Process
265
the same as the thermal oxidation furnace. Nitrogen is used to protect the sample
during annealing, or using oxygen, so that annealing and oxidation can be per-
formed simultaneously. The annealing time of this process is long, the impurities
are pushed deeply into the silicon, and the impurity concentration after annealing
is redistributed obviously. It is suitable to make deep junctions. For RTA, the heat
treatment time is short, and the change of the impurity concentration distribution
after annealing is relatively smaller. For III–V semiconductors, conventional
furnace annealing is not suitable, because long-term, high-temperature heat
treatment will cause greater damage to these semiconductor structures. There-
fore, RTA must be used (refer to 16.6.2). When annealing III–V semiconductors,
cover the front and back of the sample with polished silicon wafers to avoid
possible material decomposition. The commonly used protective gas for RTA is
nitrogen. Helium, argon, and forming gas can also be used.
Figure 17.17 is an impurity distribution diagram with different furnace anneal-
ing conditions after boron implantation. “1E16” in the figure is 1016, and so on;
“As-implanted” is no annealing. In the case of low temperature and short time, the
profile still has peak of concentration. Figure 17.18 is the distribution of boron con-
centration after RTA. After annealing, the four-point probe is used to determine
the activation rate of impurities by measuring the sheet resistance. The results in
these two papers show that a short time (10 seconds) of RTA annealing can meet
Figure 17.18
Time is
10 seconds, the distribution of
B concentration for different
RTA temperature. Source: [12]
Mikoshiba and Abiko.
0
1016
1017
1018
1019
1020
1021
1100 °C
1000 °C
900 °C
800 °C
As Implanted
BF2 : (100) Si
    30 keV, 5 × 1015 cm–2
10 s
RTA
1022
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Depth (μm)
Boron concentration (cm–3)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 273]
266
17 Doping Processes
the specifications of device manufacturing. However, furnace annealing needs
to take long time (30 minutes even more). The junction depth is very shallow in
RTA, which is good for the manufacture of small feature size devices.
17.16
Buried Implantation
Figure 17.13 shows that, unlike the diffusion process, the peak of impurity in
implantation process is not on the silicon surface. The dose and energy of implan-
tation can be controlled separately. In this way, by controlling the energy and thick-
ness, we can adjust the concentration peak to the surface or any area under the
surface of silicon through the masking films, such as SiO2, Si3N4, and photoresist.
Plus the dose controlling, the parameters of a device can be precisely controlled.
The most common examples are
1. The doping of D, S, and G regions in modern CMOS devices, and ICs is finished
by implantation through the pad oxide (Section 13.2).
2. Realize shallow implantation.
The high-energy deep implantation without masking film can realize the buried
implantation layer under the silicon surface. The most used field of this technol-
ogy is the preparation of SOI (Silicon-on-Insulator). SOI means that the silicon is
on the top of insulating layer. It is the opposite of the structure produced by the
dielectric film growth or deposition on silicon surface. SOI has been widely used
in silicon microchips’ manufacturing.
17.16.1
Implantation through Masking Film
Figure 17.19 is the impurity concentration distribution diagram of phosphorus
implantation through SiO2 masking film. In the figure, P2
+ is phosphorus dimer
ion. Dimer implants need low dose and high power. This technique is also called
molecular ion implantation. BF2
+ and PF2
+ mentioned in Section 17.13 are also
molecular ion implantation. It can be seen from the figure:
(a) Through masking film implantation, the peak of impurity concentration can
be adjusted to the surface of silicon and other semiconductor substrates.
Different film thicknesses can use different implantation energies to achieve
this goal.
(b) We can use low energy to achieve shallow implantation. If a shallower layer is
required, it can be assisted by masking film implantation.
(c) If the SiO2 is gate dielectric of a MOS device, then through this technique,
the doping of the gate channel can be adjusted. This is the precise threshold
voltage control technology.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 274]
17.16 Buried Implantation
267
0
–5
15
35
Depth from the Si–SiO2 Interface (nm)
5 nm SiO2
10 keVP2
+
As Implanted
Silicon
Annealed
1 × 1014
Atomic phosphorus concentration (cm–3)
SiO2
1 × 1015
1 × 1016
1 × 1017
1 × 1018
1 × 1019
55
75
95
Figure 17.19
Concentration distribution curve of P implanted through SiO2. Source: [13]
Spizzirri et al.
17.16.2
SOI Manufacture
There are three main structures of SOI. [3] The first structure is Silicon-on-
Sapphire (SOS), and sapphire is Al2O3. The second structure is Separation by
IMplanted Oxygen (SIMOX). The third structure is wafer bonding (WB).
The first structure is SOS. SOS technology is limited to fabrication of MOS
devices. The structure is epitaxial growth of (100) silicon crystal on the surface
of sapphire. Because the lattice constants of these two materials are different,
this growth is heteroepitaxial growth. The epitaxial process is the technology
of growing a thin layer of crystal on another crystal surface. The growth of
homogeneous materials, such as regrowing silicon on the surface of silicon, is
homoepitaxial. The growth of different materials is heteroepitaxial. This book
does not discuss epitaxial growth. Due to the different lattice constants, the
heterogeneously grown silicon material has a high defect density and cannot be
used for device fabrication. To improve the situation of defects, a high concen-
tration of silicon is implanted into the epitaxial silicon layer to make silicon at
the interface of silicon and sapphire become amorphous. After high-temperature
treatment, the amorphous silicon at the interface becomes crystalline silicon.
This recrystallization process can greatly reduce the defect density so that
the quality of this silicon crystal film can meet the specifications of device
manufacturing. Figure 17.20 is a schematic diagram of the SOS manufacturing
process flow.
The second structure is SIMOX. Figure 17.21 is an example of a SIMOX
manufacturing process flow [3]. This technology is also called Buried
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 275]
268
17 Doping Processes
Ultra thin silicon
SiO2 (later removed)
Sapphire
Sapphire
Amorphous
Silicon film
Silicon film
Crystallization defects
(a) Silicon film formation
(b) Implantation of silicon ion
(c) Heat treatement and
surface oxidation
Figure 17.20
SOS
structure process ﬂow.
Source: [14] Nakamura
et al. / Oki Electric
Industry Co., Ltd.
Si
O+,150 kev, 2.6 × 1018 cm–2
Si
Si substrate
Si
Si substrate
O+
SiO2, buried oxide-BOX
1150°C, N2 anneal
Figure 17.21
Schematic
diagram of SIMOX (BOX)
process ﬂow.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 276]
17.16 Buried Implantation
269
B
B
B
B
B
A
A
A
A
A
A
Oxidation
Initial silicon
H+ implantation
Wafer bonding
Splitting (Smart Cut)
Annealing and polishing
SOI wafer
New initial wafer A or B
Figure 17.22
Schematic diagram of wafer bonding process ﬂow.
Oxide – BOX – process. If the thickness of the silicon on the BOX is not
enough to make device, epitaxial technology can be used to grow thicker silicon
crystal layer. Different devices have different requirements for materials.
According to needs, the implantation energy and dose of oxygen ions vary within
a certain range. If we want to grow an oxide layer on silicon surface, we can
anneal the wafer in an oxygen atmosphere.
The third structure is WB. Figure 17.22 is a schematic diagram of the WB process
flow, which mainly contains the following six steps:
(1) Prepare two silicon wafers (Initial Silicon) A and B for bonding.
(2) Oxidize A and B to be about 0.5 μm.
(3) Proton H+ implantation is performed on A, and the implantation depth is
about 0.2 μm under the SiO2 layer. When a hydrogen atom is ionized and loses
an electron, it becomes a nucleus with only one positive charge. Since the
proton in the nucleus is a positive charge, a hydrogen ion H+ is often called a
proton.
(4) Clean A and B, and then one oxide layer is laminated to another oxide layer.
Heat treatment is performed below 400 ∘C to make the two wafers adhere
closely together. This is the wafer bonding.
(5) Subsequently, the two bonded wafers are annealed at ≤600 ∘C. The bubbles
will be generated at the peak of proton implantation of A wafer, causing wafer
A to split from the implantation site (Splitting). This technique of cutting
wafers is called Smart Cut, and the cut wafers can be reused.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 277]
270
17 Doping Processes
(6) These smartly cut two bonded wafers are annealed at 1100 ∘C [3] to remove
defects. After the annealing is completed, polish the cracked silicon surface
(CMP).
So far, an SOI wafer using the WB method has been finished.
References
1 Darling, R.B. (2013). EE-527, MicroFabrication, Solid-State Diffusion, Winter.
2 电子工业生产技术手册7, “电子工业生产技术手册” 委员会, 半导体与集成电
路卷, 硅器件与集成电路223页, 182页, 259至273页, 244至245页, 305页, 330页,
333–334页, 340页, 国防工业出版社, 1991年。
3 Wolf, S. and Tauber, R.N. Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Process Technol-
ogy, 2e, vol. 1, p. 328, 330, p. 297, p. 360, p. 371–372, p. 380–383, p. 256–261.
4 ECE Illinois, ece444, GT10-Silicon Diffusivity Data.
5 Ghezzo, M. and Brown, D.M. (1973). Diffusivity summary of B, P, As, and Sb
in SiO2. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 120 (1): 146–148.
6 [美] H. F. 沃尔夫编. (1975). 半导体工艺数据手册, 天津半导体器件厂译, 国防
工业出版社, 523页, 359页。
7 Phelps, G.J. (2004). Dopant ion implantation simulations in 4H-silicon carbide.
Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering 12: 1139–1146.
8 电子工业生产技术手册8, “电子工业生产技术手册” 委员会, 半导体与集成电路
卷, 化合物半导体器件, 257–258页, 国防工业出版社, 1992年。
9 Bo Cui, E.C.E. Ion implantation, Chapter 8. In: . University of Waterloo,
SlidePlayer. https://dokumen.tips/documents/chapter-8-ion-implantation-
ii.html
10 Agah, M. Ion implantation, Chapter 8. In: . Virginia Tech, SlideServe.
https://pdfslide.net/documents/chapter-8-ion-implantation-instructor-prof-
masoud-agah.html?page=16
11 Boo, H., Lee, J.H., Kang, M.G. et al. (2012). Effect of high-temperature
annealing on ion-implanted silicon solar cells. International Journal of
Photoenergy 2012: 921908, 6 pages.
12 Mikoshiba, H. and Abiko, H. (1986). Junction depth versus sheet resistivity in
BF2
+-implanted rapid-thermal-annealed silicon. IEEE Electron Device Letters
EDL-7 (3): 190–192.
13 Spizzirri PG, Wayne D. Hutchison, Nikolas Stavrias, et al., “ESR studies of ion
implanted phosphorus donors near the Si-SiO2 interface”, ResearchGate2010.
14 Nakamura, T., Matsuhashi, H., Nagatomo, Y. et al. (2004). Silicon on sapphire
(SOS) device technology. Oki Technical Review 71 (200), No. 4: 66–69.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 278]
271
18
Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
So far, we have discussed the main technologies used in semiconductor
manufacturing processes. In addition to these, there are other technologies used
in the fabrication of microchips, such as epitaxy, molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE),
metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), and chemical–mechanical
polishing (CMP). These technologies involve more issues on material, chemical,
vacuum, and so on. Some machines and processes are complicated. In the
university clean room, most users do not use such machines and technologies, so
these processes are not discussed in this book.
To make high-quality microchips, we need to carefully control each step of the
processes. Process control monitor (PCM) is very important because the details
of each step of the process can be obtained through PCM. PCM is to use various
patterns to monitor the process. These patterns can be designed together with the
device patterns and placed on the same photomask. The patterns can be measured
to achieve the purpose of understanding the process quality. In this chapter, we
use four examples to illustrate the design of PCM patterns. After that, the chip
packaging and some other issues are briefly discussed.
18.1
Dielectric Film Quality Inspection
The dielectrics used in semiconductor microchips are mainly SiO2 and Si3N4
films. There are many parameters to indicate quality of the films. The commonly
used ones are stress, refractive index, and breakdown voltage. Among them, the
breakdown voltage VB is the most important parameter. Figure 18.1 is the best
structure for measuring VB, the metal–insulator–metal sandwich structure. To
avoid misalignment in lithography causing the two layers of metal to contact each
other, the area of the insulator should be slightly larger than the area of the metal
layers. The fabrication of the entire structure can be carried out simultaneously
with the device fabrication, and the area of the dielectric film (insulator) should
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 279]
272
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
Insulator
Metal 2
Substrate
Cross view
Top view
Probe
Metal 1
Metal 1
Metal 2
Probe
Figure 18.1
Pattern structure for measuring dielectric breakdown voltage.
Figure 18.2
A photo of probe station. Source: Signatone.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 280]
18.2 Ohmic Contact Test
273
Figure 18.3
The I–V curve of
breakdown voltage.
V
I
VB
0
be as close as possible to the maximum insulation area of the device. Once the
structure is completed, use a probe station to measure the VB of the film.
Figure 18.2 is a photo of a probe station. In the photo, the probes are indicated by
a arrow. Below the probes is the wafer to be tested. Figure 18.3 is the I–V curve
obtained by measuring VB of the dielectric film. Before the breakdown occurs,
there is no current. Once the breakdown occurs, the current will rise suddenly,
and the voltage in this point is VB. The fewer the number of pinholes in the film
(refer to chapter thirteen), the higher the breakdown voltage and the better the
quality of the film are; vice versa.
As discussed in Chapter 13, the higher the temperature for dielectric film
growth, the lesser the pinholes in the film. So, higher temperature process of
dielectric film can provide higher breakdown voltage of the film. If the film is
done by lower temperature, we are able to increase the breakdown voltage of the
film by higher temperature annealing. For example, plasma-enhanced chemical
vapor deposition (PECVD) film may be annealed at the temperature from 400 to
600 ∘C to increase the breakdown voltage. Due to the stress of film, the annealing
temperature cannot be very high. Annealing at very high temperature may cause
the film to crack. Therefore, we should optimize the annealing conditions by
doing experiments to meet the needs of different device manufacturing.
18.2
Ohmic Contact Test [1]
After the ohmic contact process is completed, the resistance of the contact needs to
be measured to observe whether the resistance meets the specifications. There are
many methods for measuring contact resistance. Transmission line measurement
or transfer length measurement (TLM) is a widely used method. It obtains ohmic
contact resistivity by measuring the resistance of the pattern. This resistivity is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 281]
274
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
l1
l2
w
R1
R2
Heavy doping area
Figure 18.4
Ohmic contact test pattern.
also called specific contact resistivity, and the unit is Ω cm2. The pattern used to
test the resistivity is shown in Figure 18.4. l1 and l2 are the distances between two
near metal contact vias, R1 and R2 are the corresponding resistances, and w is the
width of the heavy doping area. When measuring, the probes are stuck on three
squares of metal film.
The formula of specific contact resistivity is shown below:
𝜌c = Rc ⋅Ac
(18.1)
𝜌c in the formula is the specific contact resistivity, Rc is the contact resistance, and
Ac is the contact area. The expression of Rc is as follows:
Rc = R2l1 −R1l2
2(l1 −l2)
(18.2)
In general, the specific contact resistivity of metal and Si ρc ≈10−5–10−7Ω cm2,
metal and metal 𝜌c < 10−8Ω cm2 [2].
18.3
Metal-to-Metal Contact
In semiconductor interconnection technology, metal-to-metal (or silicide,
Figure 11.4) contact is the basic process, and it is very important to control the
quality of metal-to-metal contact in the process flow. The contact between two
layers of metal is generally achieved through the via in the dielectric film between
the metals. If the via is not well done, for example, after dry or wet etching, there
are insulating residuals left on the metal surface of the via, then the next layer of
metal cannot have good contact with this layer of metal. The contact resistance
increases. So, we need to test the contact between two metals to determine
whether the process meets the specifications. Figure 18.5 is the pattern used to
measure the contact between metals. The SiO2 in the figure is called inter-metal
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 282]
18.3 Metal-to-Metal Contact
275
Metal 2
SiO2
Si
Probe
Top view
Cross view
IMD
Via
Metal 1
Figure 18.5
The pattern used to test the metal-to-metal contact.
V
I
R=
a
b
V
I
c
Vr
0
Figure 18.6
The test curve obtained from the pattern in Figure 18.5.
dielectric (IMD). The size of the via should be the same as the smallest size of via
in the interconnection.
From the size of the pattern, the thickness of the metal and the resistivity, and
according to the formula shown in Figure 1.3, we can calculate the resistance of
the test pattern. Perform probe measurement on the pattern shown in Figure 18.5,
and the result is shown in Figure 18.6. If the result is curve a, the value is very
close to the theoretically calculated value, it means that the contact between the
metals is good. If the result is b, the resistance increases, it may be caused by two
cases: case 1, during dry etching of the vias, some metal films can be sputtered out,
cover the vias’ surface and up edge; cases 2, the metal in the vias has voids. If the
curve is c, it means that there is a residual of dielectric film between the metals.
As shown in Figure 18.7, the residual remains on the contact surface of the two
layers of metals. The voltage Vr from the straight line to the rising inflection point
is the breakdown voltage of the insulating residual. The thicker the residual, the
bigger the Vr.
Let us discuss more about the curve b in Figure 18.6.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 283]
276
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
Silicon
Metal 1
Interface
Metal 2
SiO2
Figure 18.7
Schematic diagram of two-layer
metals contact. Metal 2 used as via metal is a
common situation in the clean room at university.
Case 1. This problem often occurs when the size of via is greater or equal to
0.5 μm and the aspect ratio is smaller than 0.5. The SiO2 via is etched by
fluorine-containing gases in reactive-ion etching (RIE). But F cannot etch most
metals, such as Al. RIE has DC bias and can create physical sputtering during
dry etching. If the etching time setting is not accurate and SiO2 is over etched,
the metal will be exposed to F plasma. In this case, the metal surface will be
physically bombarded, and some metal particles from the film will be deposited
on the sidewall and the up edge of the via. Rough surface of sidewall and up
edge of the via makes the connection between metal 2 and metal 1 not good,
and the contact resistance becomes bigger. One solution of this problem is that
the dry etching of via should be done by under-etching, leave a 10–50 nm SiO2
film at the bottom of the via, and then use buffered oxide etch (BOE) to remove
this thin film. Due to BOE can etch aluminum, be careful when the metal is Al.
Case 2. As the size of the device becomes smaller and smaller, the size of dielec-
tric via also becomes smaller and smaller. It becomes more and more difficult
for the metal made by physical vapor deposition (PVD) to fully fill the via. As
mentioned in Section 16.4, the step coverage of sputtering is better than ther-
mal and e-beam. However, the sputtered metals still have void issue (refer to
Section 13.3). One problem of the voids is to increase the contact resistance of
the metals. To overcome the voids, a collimator can be inserted in the space
between the target and the wafer to increase the coverage [3]. However, a col-
limator still cannot solve the problem. So, other techniques are also used. They
are planarization in multilevel interconnects, sloped-sidewall vias, and raising
the substrate temperature to increase the surface-migration ability of atoms.
Even so, when the feature size gets smaller further, sputtered Al still cannot
meet the needs of via filling. Several technologies have been investigated for
completely filling vertical small vias. The process of chemical vapor deposition
(CVD) – tungsten (W) plugs is the most widely used technology in the fabri-
cation for complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) down to about
0.35 μm [3].
Why is tungsten chosen? There is because WF6, the compound of tungsten and flu-
orine, has a boiling point of 17.1 ∘C, which is a gas under the process pressure.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 284]
18.4 Conductive Channel Control
277
That is also why we can etch tungsten with fluorine-containing gas. In turn, we
can use the gas characteristics of WF6 to achieve CVD deposition of W. CVD-W
provides superior via-filling-capabilities. It can be finished by reduction reac-
tion of WF6 with H2 or SiH4 in CVD chamber at the temperatures from 300 to
below 450 ∘C.
The hydrogen–reduction–reaction is given by:
WF6(gas) + 3H2(gas) →W(solid) + 6HF(gas)
(18.3)
The silane–reduction–reaction is given by:
2WF6(gas) + 3SiH4(gas) →2W(solid) + 3SiF4(gas) + 6H2(gas)
(18.4)
Since W does not adhere well to SiO2, a thin TiN adhesion layer is first formed
on SiO2 by sputtering or CVD. Sputtering-TiN is done by introducing N2 to
the chamber as reactive gas during Ti sputtering process to produce TiN film.
CVD-TiN is finished by the reaction of TiCl4 (boiling point is 136.4 ∘C) and NH3
in CVD chamber. In these two techniques, Si may react with N2 to create Si3N4.
So, a thin Ti film should be made before TiN as a contact-forming layer [4]. Ti film
is created by sputtering or CVD. During the sputtering process, if N2 is not input,
there will be a Ti film. During the CVD process, if NH3 is not input, there will
be a Ti film. So, the structure of W-plug is Ti–TiN–W. Usually, CVD-W process is
finished by blanket process, which means that W, TiN, and Ti films are deposited
onto the whole surface of the wafer. After the deposition is done, CMP (Section
10.4) is used to remove excess W, TiN, and Ti from the surface of the wafer and
leave them only inside the vias. Right now, some companies (for example, Kurt J.
Lesker) supply TiN targets for TiN sputtering process.
The electric resistivity of TiN can be 270 μΩ cm by using sputtering deposition
[5]. In addition, the resistivity of tungsten is 4.89 μΩ cm, which is nearly twice that
of aluminum (2.5 μΩ cm), and that of titanium is 42 μΩ cm [6]. Therefore, under
the premise of meeting the specifications of device manufacturing, the thinner
the films of Ti and TiN, the better. Aluminum is still used as the main metal for
interconnection. Please refer to Figure 11.4.
18.4
Conductive Channel Control
In the manufacture of metal–semiconductor field effect transistor (MESFET), the
thickness (depth) of the gate conductive channel is a parameter that needs to be
carefully controlled, refer to Figure 6.10. The gate channel layer can be completed
by MBE, MOCVD, or ion implantation. But for different device requirements,
the thickness of the formed channel needs to be adjusted, generally thinned. This
process is called a recess etching process. To accurately control the thickness to
be reduced, we need to design a pattern for process monitoring, Figure 18.8 is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 285]
278
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
Conductive channel
S
D
Probe
Etch down
PR
IDSS
Conductive channel
G
Recessed gate
S
D
Figure 18.8
Control pattern for recess etching process of MESFET device.
the process monitoring pattern for recess etching. After completing the source
(S) and drain (D), perform gate lithography to finish gate pattern, and then dry
or wet etching (etch down) on the pattern. After the etching is completed, use
a probe station to measure the saturation current IDSS through the gate channel
between the source and drain (refer to Figures 6.7 and 6.11). If the IDSS meets
the requirements of the device, stop the etching. Otherwise, continue to etch,
until the design requirements are met. After that, the gate metal is made, thus
completing the manufacture of the recessed gate MESFET.
We have used four examples to discuss how to use PCM patterns to control and
monitor the processes. Different processes need to use different PCM patterns. In
order to make high-quality microchips, each step of the process requires careful
controlling and testing.
18.5
Chip Testing
When the microchips on the wafer are finished, we need to test them. For semi-
conductor devices and ICs, the probe station is the most important test equipment
(Figure 18.2). Diodes and transistors, four probes can meet the requirements. For
the testing of integrated circuits, probe cards are needed. Figure 18.9 is a photo
of the probe card. If a bad die is found, the machine puts a drop of dye on the bad
one to separate it from the good ones.
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.9
Probe card (a), probe card installed to the probe station and testing ICs (b).
Source: Accuprobe Corporation.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 286]
18.6 Dicing
279
18.6
Dicing
After all dies are tested, the wafer must be diced. This process is called dicing and
separates each die on the wafer. The equipment used to cut wafers is called a wafer
dicing machine. Figure 18.10 is a wafer dicing machine. The core part of the dicing
machine is the saw or diamond blade, through which each die on the wafer is
separated, as shown in Figure 18.11. After the dies are separated, throw away the
one with dye.
Figure 18.10
Wafer dicing machine. Source: Dynatex International.
Figure 18.11
The wafer is dicing into dies. Source: Rainer / Adobe Stock.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 287]
280
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
18.7
Packaging
After a die is separated and selected, it must be packaged, refer to Figures 7.1
and 7.3. Different microchips require different packages, please see Figure 18.12.
In most cases, the die and the case are packaged together by wire bonding. The
bonding process is to use very thin metal wires, usually aluminum or gold wires,
to connect the die and the leads of the case together, as shown in Figure 18.13.
Figure 18.14 is a wire bonding photo of an integrated circuit and a simple bond-
ing tool. In addition to the bonding techniques described in this section, there are
many other bonding techniques, which will not be described here. At this point,
a complete device or IC product is fully made. After final function testing, relia-
bility testing and other special testing if it is needed, the product can be sold to
customers.
SO
HBGA
SQFP
LQFP
HLQFP
HTQFP
TQFP
PGA
PLCC
PQFP
SOP
SOT23
PQFP100L
SOT26
SOT363
SSOP 16L
VSO
SSOP
HSOP
PMFP
BGA
QFN
QFP
HTSSOP
TSSOP
Figure 18.12
Packages for different types of semiconductor chip.
Die attach
Die
Leadframe pad
Lead
Epoxy mold
compound
Bond
wire
Figure 18.13
Packaging process for semiconductor chip. Source: [7] Joiner.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 288]
18.8 Equipment Operation Range
281
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.14
Wire bonding (a) and a simple wire bonding machine (b).
Source: (a) Reproduced with permission of First Level Inc.
18.8
Equipment Operation Range
In the manufacturing of semiconductor microchips, a lot of equipments are
needed. In these machines, there are many electronic components, such as power
supplies and mass flow controllers. When operating the equipment, we cannot
use these components at full scale. The range should be controlled between 10%
and 90%. For example, an MFC with a nitrogen range of 100 sccm (Figure 14.17).
The working range should be 10–90 sccm. To understand this issue, a brief
introduction of switch circuit is given. The position of a switch in the circuit is
shown in Figure 4.1. The commonly used switch is to turn on and off the circuit by
opening or closing two metal sheets, as shown in Figure 18.15. When the switch
is off, no current flows through the circuit (the current is zero), and the voltage
Figure 18.15
Commonly used electrical switches. Source: Reproduced with permission
of Nidec Copal Electronics Corp.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 289]
282
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
Rise time
100%
90%
50%
10%
0%
Fall time
Pulse width
Voltage
Figure 18.16
The rise time and fall time of a switch circuit. Source: [8] Tektronix.
on both sides of the switch is high (equal to the power supply voltage). When the
switch is on, current flows through the circuit (large current), and the voltage on
both sides of the switch is low (equal to zero). But in the control circuit composed
of microchips, such mechanical switches cannot meet the requirements. We
use transistors to achieve similar switching functions. Refer to Figure 6.3, in the
application of the transistor in this figure, the “saturation mode” is equivalent to
the switch on, because it is a large current and low voltage, the "cut-off mode"
is equivalent to the switch off, because it is a small current and a large voltage.
But when the transistor changes from saturation to cut-off, it takes a certain
amount of time to complete, and vice versa. When such a switch is regularly
switched between saturation and cutoff under the control of a periodic signal,
the circuit sends out a series of pulse (on and off) signals. The time required for
the conversion is the rise time and fall time, as shown in Figure 18.16. In order
to have good linear control and avoid the noise fluctuations of the minimum
and maximum signals, which is the situation often encountered in the actual
operation of a control circuit, the rise time and fall time are selected as 10–90%
and 90–10%. 10–90% is a general principle followed by circuit design. So, for all
power supplies, mass flow controllers and other electronic components, their
operating range should be set between 10% and 90%.
18.9
Low-k and High-k Dielectrics
In the production of integrated circuits, the most used material for MOSFET gate
dielectric and interlevel dielectric (ILD, refer to Chapter 11) is SiO2. In order to dis-
cuss the k value, it is necessary to introduce the relative permittivity of the dielec-
tric material. The k value of a dielectric is its relative permittivity 𝜀r. The absolute
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 290]
18.9 Low-k and High-k Dielectrics
283
Figure 18.17
The structure of a parallel plate
capacitor.
A
Conductive plates
Dielectric
d
permittivity 𝜀0 has been introduced in formula (4.3), which refers to the
permittivity of vacuum, and its value is:
𝜀0 = 8.854 × 10−12 F∕m
(18.5)
The “F” is farad and “m” is meter. The relative permittivity 𝜀r refers to the ratio
of the permittivity of dielectric to that of vacuum. The measurement method is to
firstly measure the capacitance CA of the two plates in air (air permittivity and vac-
uum permittivity are basically the same). After adding a certain dielectric between
the plates, the capacitance CD is measured. The relative permittivity is:
k = 𝜀r = CD∕CA
(18.6)
The relative permittivity is also called the dielectric constant. In most cases, we
use 𝜀r to represent the relative permittivity of dielectric. The k value of the most
important dielectric SiO2 is 3.9 [9]. We discussed capacitors in chapter 4. To further
discuss the k , we need to do more about capacitors. Figure 18.17 is a structural
diagram of a capacitor.
The capacitance C is given by the following formula:
C = 𝜖0𝜖rA
d
= 𝜖0kA
d
(18.7)
As the feature size of ICs becomes smaller and smaller, and the operating speed
becomes faster and faster. In the selection of dielectric, with SiO2 as the standard,
there are two directions, low-k and high-k . Low-k means smaller value than SiO2,
high-k means larger value than SiO2. Low-k is used in ILD, and high-k is used in
gate dielectric.
18.9.1
Copper Interconnection and Low-k Dielectrics
When metal is used as an interconnection “wire” on the dielectric film, the
interconnection metal and the metal or conductive layer under the dielectric
form a plate capacitor. We assume that the resistance of the metal is R and
the capacitance of the capacitor is . When an electric signal passes through
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 291]
284
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
this structure composed of resistors and capacitors, the signal is delayed. The
expression of the delay time is as follows:
= RC
(18.8)
As the IC gets faster and faster, this delay becomes a key factor hindering operation
speed. It can be seen from formula (18.8) that in order to reduce , the resistance
R and the capacitance C must be reduced. Since the birth of integrated circuits, Al
has played a leading role in the interconnection process due to its low price, easy
processing, and good compatibility with silicon and silicon dioxide. The electric
wires used in our daily life are made of Al or Cu. The resistivity of Cu (1.55 μΩ cm)
is less than that of Al (2.5 μΩ cm), and the price is not expensive. So, we naturally
think that if copper is used replacing aluminum in the IC, the delay time of metal
interconnection will be reduced. The power consumption also can be reduced.
Power consumption is another important factor restricting modern integrated
circuits. One more thing is that Cu films exhibit much better electromigration
(Section 16.6) than those of Al. The upper limit of current density to prevent
electromigration for Cu is 5 × 106 A/cm2, whereas for Al it is 2 × 106 A/cm2 [3].
Unfortunately, the processing of copper in semiconductors is much more difficult.
There are mainly technical challenges in process listed below:
1. Dry etching cannot be used because the reactants of copper with oxygen, fluo-
rine, and chlorine are not volatile.
2. Copper cannot be in contact with silicon because it is easy to form deep energy
level (Figure 5.6).
3. Copper easily diffuses through SiO2.
4. Copper does not adhere well to SiO2.
5. Unlike Al, copper does not form a dense, self-passivating oxide on its surface.
Therefore, it was not used in semiconductor manufacture until 1997 when IBM
realized the copper interconnection process [10], which was a sensational event
in semiconductor field at that time.
Cu interconnects are primarily finished by electrochemical deposition (electro-
plating and electroless plating) technologies [11]. To overcome the challenges (3)
and (4), the barrier layers of Tantalum (Ta) and Tantalum Nitride (TaN) or Ti and
TiN are formed before Cu deposition. This process has a special name-Damascene
Process. It has two options: single damascene and dual damascene. Due to less
steps and lower cost, dual damascene process is widely used in copper intercon-
nects manufacturing. Figure 18.18 is the schematic diagram of dual damascene
process flow. As discussed in Section 15.4, we may design a recipe in RIE that it
etches SiO2 only, not Si3N4 (or etching rate is very slow). Therefore, Si3N4 can
be used as etch stop layer. Si3N4 capping passivates Cu surface. Figure 18.19 is
a photo of copper multilevel interconnects made in IBM. In the figure, we may
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 292]
18.9 Low-k and High-k Dielectrics
285
Substrate
SiO2
Si3N4
Photoresist
Si3N4 etching and
PR removal
Substrate
SiO2 deposition and
trench patterning
Via patterning
Substrate
Via and trench
etching and PR
removal
Substrate
Substrate
Cu
Barrier layers
formation and
Cu plating
Substrate
Cu trench
Via
CMP, annealing, and
Si3N4 capping
Si3N4 capping
Barrier
layer
Etch stop
SiO2
Si3N4
SiO2
Si3N4
SiO2
Si3N4
SiO2
Si3N4
SiO2
Si3N4
Figure 18.18
A strategy for dual damascene process ﬂow [12].
see the W-plug between the devices (bottom in the figure) and one-level copper
interconnect. Other levels don’t use W-plug. The vias in one-level have small
sizes and need W to fill the openings. Aluminum interconnects have a similar
situation.
Copper realizes the low resistance of the interconnection wire, but this is not
enough, and the delay time should continue to be reduced. It can be seen from
formula (18.8) that in addition to resistance, capacitance can also be reduced.
Under a certain process node, the area of interconnection wire and the thickness
of ILD have certain requirements, which is equivalent to the fixed values of A and
d in the capacitor formula 18.7. 𝜀0 is also a fixed value. The only thing that can be
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 293]
286
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
Figure 18.19
Cross section of a
six-level copper wiring structure
fabricated by IBM. Source: [13]
Andricacos et al. 1999 / with
permission of IOP Publishing.
changed is k . This shows that by using low-k dielectric, the capacitance becomes
smaller and the delay time can be further reduced.
The Cu interconnect was developed by IBM in 1997 using SiO2 as the ILD at that
time. The damascene technology introduces a new set of elements of structure and
process that is distinctly different from conventional Al:Cu interconnect. Some
difficulties encountered in the development of low k dielectrics. It was fulfilled
in 2000 when IBM announced the development of Cu interconnects with SiLK, a
low-k dielectric developed by the Dow Chemical Company with k about 2.7 [9].
Right now, there are many available low-k materials and they can be classified
into different groups, please see Table 18.1.
18.9.2
Quantum Tunneling Effect and High-k Dielectrics
As the feature size of ICs, especially MOSFETs, continues to become smaller, the
thickness of gate dielectric continues to become thinner. The operation of the
device will enter the field restricted by quantum mechanics. One of the important
issues is the quantum tunneling (tunneling). The tunneling phenomenon is
very important in the application and manufacture of semiconductor devices.
Numerous devices are based on this phenomenon, including the Zener diode, the
Esaki diode, and the resonant tunneling diode. Also, the ohmic contacts made to
devices depend upon the tunneling behavior of electrons and holes [15].
For MOSFETs, the basic structures of energy band are shown in Figure 6.14. In
this figure, the energy band of SiO2 in the middle is very wide. So, there are poten-
tial barriers between gate metal and SiO2, and between Si and SiO2. For Al-SiO2–Si
MOS structure, Ref. [16] gives the measurement results of potential barrier height
values at Al-SiO2 and Si-SiO2 interfaces. Figure 18.20 is band diagram used in the
paper. The measurement results are around 3.65 eV for EBG and 4.40 eV for EBS.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 294]
18.9 Low-k and High-k Dielectrics
287
Table 18.1
A classiﬁcation of low-k dielectrics.
Classiﬁcation
Material
Dielectric
constant (k)
Silica based
SiOF (FSG)
∼3.5
SiCOH
∼2.8
Silsesquioxane (SSQ) based
HSQ
∼3.0
MSQ
∼2.5
Polymer
Poly(arylene ether) (PAE)
∼2.6
Polyimide
∼2.3
Parylene-N(-F)
∼2.4
Teflon (PTFE)
∼2.0
Amorphous carbon
C–C (–F)
∼2.0
Porous
Porous SiCOH, MSQ, PAE
<2.0
Air gaps
Air
∼1.0
Source: [14] Adapted from Cheng et al.
qϕM
qϕS
qϕF
qϕI
qχ
EBG
M
O
S
qVG
EBS
EG/2
Figure 18.20
Band diagram of the MOS system, at arbitrary gate potential V G, EBG, and
EBS are potential barrier heights at Al-SiO2 and Si-SiO2 interfaces, respectively.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 295]
288
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
Metal
Si
0
a
SiO2
V = V0
I
II
III
E
Figure 18.21
A diagram of one-dimensional
square potential barrier, the height is V 0 and
width is a.
By observing the structures of Figure 6.14 and referring to the above mea-
surement results, we may use a simple diagram in Figure 18.21 to describe a
typical MOSFET barrier structure: there is a high potential barrier V0 between
metal and Si. When a voltage is applied to the gate, electrons receive energy E
and impinge on the barrier V0. According to the theory of classical physics, if
E < V0, electrons cannot pass through the region II (the electrons and holes
in Si have the same situation), which is a necessary condition for a MOSFET
to work, because the gate dielectric cannot pass current. But, in actual devices,
due to the defects of the dielectric, a very small current may flow through the
SiO2 layer. This current is called gate leakage current, or leakage current for
short. Modern semiconductor technology is very mature, and the leakage current
caused by dielectric defects can be ignored. If E > V0, the electrons will move
across the region II (corresponding to dielectric breakdown) with no reflection.
However, according to quantum mechanics, the electrons with E < V0 have a
certain probability of passing through the barrier, and the electrons with E > V0
have a certain probability of reflecting from the barrier. Now let us introduce two
parameters to describe these phenomena. They are the probability of transmission
|T|2 and the probability of reflection |R|2. The probabilities of transmission and
reflection satisfy the following condition:
|T|2 + |R|2 = 1
(18.9)
The case we care about is E < V0. By solving the Schrödinger equation, we can
get the curves shown in Figure 18.22.
From this figure, we can see that even though E < V0, there is a certain probabil-
ity that an electron incident on the barrier will be transmitted. This phenomenon,
which is inexplicable within the context of classical physics, is called tunneling.
The smaller the width a, the larger the transmission probability |T|2. As mentioned
above, in the case of operating gate voltage, electrons cannot pass through SiO2 to
generate current in the gate dielectric. But when the SiO2 of the gate becomes thin-
ner to a certain limit, that is, when a in Figure 18.21 is small enough, the situation
changes. At this time, electrons will have sufficient probability to pass through
the SiO2 layer and create current. That means, there will be leakage current
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 296]
18.9 Low-k and High-k Dielectrics
289
Figure 18.22
Transmission
(solid-curve) and reﬂection
(dashed-curve) probabilities
for an electron of energy
E = (3/4) V 0 incident on a
square potential barrier, as a
function of the ratio of the
width of the barrier a to the
free-space de Broglie
wavelength 𝜆(Section 8.2).
Source: [17] Fitzpatrick.
1
0.8
0.6
|R|2, |T|2
0.4
0.2
0
0
0.5
1
a (λ)
1.5
2
flowing in the SiO2. This current is not caused by the defects in the SiO2 layer,
but by a quantum phenomenon-tunneling effect. So, this leakage current is called
tunneling current or tunneling leakage. Once this effect occurs, the device cannot
work normally. The tunneling current is closely related to the thickness of the gate
dielectric, and is also related to the voltage applied to the gate. The actual MOS
situation is much more complicated than the description above. Figure 18.23 is the
relationship between the tunneling current and the thickness of SiO2 and the gate
voltage. In the figure, Jg is the current density. From the figure, we understand that
the tunnel current includes direct tunnel current and trap-assisted elastic tunnel
current. A practical limit of 10–12 Å has been established based on the maximum
allowable tunneling current. Transistors with SiO2 film thickness of 10–12 Å can
be used in FETs despite the high leakage current density of 1–10 A/cm2 [9]. These
data are consistent with the results in the Figure 18.23. In such thin layers of SiO2,
leakage current will increase dramatically due to quantum tunneling. In this
case, the gate cannot control the channel (Figure 6.13) and “controllability”
(section 2.1) fails. When the technology nodes were 90 and 65 nm, the thickness
of the gate oxide is close to 1 nm. Therefore, since then, SiO2 as a gate dielectric
had been unable to meet the requirements. To avoid tunneling current, the
thickness of the gate dielectric must be increased. Please see the formula (18.7), if
we want to increase the thickness d, while keeping the capacitance constant, the k
needs to be increased. Which means that a high k dielectric is required. In 2008,
the high k dielectric was used for the first time at the 45nm technology node.
There are many high k dielectrics. Figure 18.24 is inorganic dielectrics.
Table 18.2 is organic and hybrid dielectrics. For 7-nm CMOS, Hafnium dioxide
(HfO2) is introduced to replace SiO2 [20].
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 297]
290
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
101
10–2
Jg (A/cm2)
10–5
10–8
0
1
2
3.61 nm
3.22 nm
2.91 nm
2.56 nm
2.19 nm
2.00 nm
1.55 nm
Vg (V)
3
Figure 18.23
Tunneling current density through gate oxides with thickness in the range
1.55–3.61 nm. Solid line: direct tunneling current density. Dotted line: trap-assisted
elastic tunneling current density. Dashed line: total tunneling current density.
Source: [18] Jiménes-Molinos et al. / AIP Publishing.
10
SiO2
Al2O3
ZrSiO4
HfSiO4 Y2O3
Si3N4
ZrO2 HfO2
La2O3
BaO
Ta2O5
TiO2
CaO
SrO
MgO
Band gap (eV)
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
0
10
20
30
K
40
50
60
Figure 18.24
Relation between band gap and dielectric constant for some metal
dielectrics. Source: [19] Wang et al.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 298]
18.10 End
291
Table 18.2
Summary of fabrication and k for representative polymer and
hybrid dielectrics.
Material
Fabrication
k
PVA
Spin-coating + UV
6.2
Cyanoethylated-PVA
Spin-coating + Annealing
12.6
CEP
Spin-coating + Annealing
13.4
Spin-coating + Annealing
6.3
P(VDF-TrFE)
Spin-coating + Annealing
10.4
P(VDF-TrFE-CTFE)
Spin-coating + Annealing
52
Acrylate polymer
Spin-coating + UV
5.1
Thiol–ene polymer
Spin-coating + UV
5.1
Cyano-containing polymer
Spin-coating + Annealing
7.2
Zirconium tetraacrylate
Spin-coating + UV
5.5
Zr-SANDs
Spin-coating + Annealing
6.0
Hf-SANDs
Spin-coating + Annealing
9.2
AT/PVP
Spin-coating + Annealing
6.6
Ta2O5/PI
Spin-coating + Annealing
5.5
HfO2/CLHB
Spin-coating + Annealing
6.0
ZrO2/CEP
Spin-coating + Annealing
16.6
GO/PVDF
Dip-coating + Annealing
15.6
Source: [19] Adapted from Wang et al.
18.10
End
From the above discussions, we can see that semiconductor technology has
pushed the industry to the physical limit, from the controllability of Newtonian
classical mechanics to the uncontrollability of quantum mechanics. In the
technology of CMOS, new structures and dielectrics have been developed to
replace conventional MOSFETs and SiO2 to catch up with Moore’s law, please
see Table 18.3. As the devices becomes smaller and smaller, the chip size gets
smaller and smaller, please see Figure 18.25. The structure of devices and circuits
has become complicated, and the manufacturing processes have become more
difficult. All these factors have made the design cost, especially the processing
cost, to increase rapidly, please see Figure 18.26. Therefore, it is impossible to
build an advanced semiconductor industry based on the capabilities of one
country alone. This task must be accomplished through the cooperation of the
strongest industrial countries in the world.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 299]
292
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
Table 18.3
Most signiﬁcant technology nodes over past 21 years.
Technology node
Year of
introduction
Key innovations
180 nm
2000
Cu interconnect, MOS options, six
metal layers
130 nm
2002
Low-k dielectric, eight metal layers
90 nm
2003
SOI substrate
65 nm
2004
Strain silicon
45 nm
2008
Second generation strain, 10 metal
layers
32 nm
2010
High-k metal gate
20 nm
2013
Replacement metal gate, double
patterning, 12 metal layers
14 nm
2015
FinFET
10 nm
2017
FinFET, double patterning
7 nm
2019
FinFET, quadruple patterning
5 nm
2021
Multi-bridge FET
Source: [20] Sicard / Etienne SICARD.
100 mm2
45 nm
32 nm
20 nm
14 nm
10 nm
7 nm
FINFET
5 nm
3 nm
2 nm
Logic
IO
Memory
Logic
IO
Memory
Logic
IO
Memory
Logic
I
O
Memory
Logic
I
O
Memory
Logic
I
O
Memory
Logic
I
O
Memory
Logic
I
O
Memory
Logic
I
O
Memory
50 mm2
19 mm2
10 mm2
5 mm2
3 mm2 2 mm2 1,5 mm2 1 mm2
GAA
FET
MOSFET
Figure 18.25
The spectacular reduction of feature sizes from 45 to 7 nm [20].
Source: [20] Sicard / Etienne SICARD.
In addition to silicon, germanium and III–V materials, there are other semi-
conductors. Two commonly used are II–VI materials, such as cadmium selenide
(CdSe) and cadmium sulfide (CdS), and IV–IV semiconductors, such as sil-
icon germanium (SiGe) and silicon carbide (SiC). Generally, semiconductor
microchips operate at low voltage and low current. However, with the advance-
ment of technology and the development of power electronics, semiconductors
are increasingly involved in the field of heavy industry. The HVDC (high-voltage
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 300]
References
293
Fab cost (million $)
130 nm
1450
2000
2500
4000
4850
6200
6700
7300
15
24
34
60
100
140
170
270
90 nm
65 nm
45 nm
28 nm
20 nm
14 nm
7 nm
130 nm 90 nm
65 nm
45 nm
28 nm
20 nm
14 nm
7 nm
Design cost (million $)
Figure 18.26
The extraordinary increase of the fab cost: more than 7 billion dollars for
a 10 to 7-nm process, and associated chip design cost as high as 270 million dollars for a
run in 7-nm [20]. Source: [20] Sicard / Etienne SICARD.
direct current) technology based on semiconductor power electronics has made
long-distance transmission of direct current possible. In the late 1990s, the silicon
insulated-gate bipolar transistors (IGBTs) started to be used for HVDC [22].
Recently, SiC has been involved in this field [23]. We discussed long-distance
transmission of alternating current in Chapter 4. There are many differences
in high voltage transmission systems between AC and DC. Two things we can
clearly observe are: (i) Usually, AC is a three-phase system and uses at least three
wires for electricity transmission. HVDC does not need to support three-phase
and uses only two wires for electricity transmission. (ii) DC does not use or uses
much less transformers than AC. Interestingly, the DC and AC dispute between
Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla (Section 4.4) is reopened today. If long-distance
transmission of direct current replaces alternating current, it will have a big
impact on the entire industrial system and our daily lives. At least, the electronic
products we use every day may not need small transformers (Figure 1.1).
References
1 电子工业生产技术手册7, 半导体与集成电路卷, 硅器件与集成电路, 653-660页.
2 Ali Javey, EE 143, Jaeger Chapter 7, Section 8: Metallization, UC Berkeley.
3 Wolf, S. and Tauber, R.N. (2000). Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Volume1-
Process Technology, Seconde, P.477-480, P.771-776, P.780. Lattice Press.
4 Wolf, S. Microchip Manufacturing, 297–301. Lattice Press.
5 Lima, L.P.B., Diniz, J.A., Doi, I., and Fo, J.G. (2012). Titanium nitride as elec-
trode for MOS technology and Schottky diode: alternative extraction method of
titanium nitride work function. Microelectronic Engineering 92: 86–90.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 301]
294
18 Process Control Monitor, Packaging, and the Others
6 物理学常用数表[日] 饭田修一等, 科学出版社, 1979, 134页。.
7 Joiner, B.(2006). Integrated circuit package types and thermal characteristics.
Electronics-Cooling (1 February).
8 Tektronix (2016). XYZs of oscilloscopes, Primer, P. 48.
9 Murarka, S.P., Eizenberg, M., and Sinha, A.K. (2003). Interlayer Dielectrics for
Semiconductor Technologies. Elsevier Academic Press, P. 15, P. 38, P. 64, P.329.
10 IBM (1998). Copper Interconnects: The Evolution of Microprocessors.
11 Hasegawa, M. (2007). Fundamental analysis of electrochemical copper depo-
sition for fabrication of submicrometer interconnects. Thesis submitted to
Waseda University. March 2007, P. 7.
12 Singer, P. Making the move to dual damascene processing: a look at several
different dual damascene processing strategies. Semiconductor International
20 (9): 79–82.
13 Andricacos, P.C. (Spring 1999). Copper On-Chip Interconnects, A Breakthrough
in Electrodeposition to Make Better Chips, 32–37. The Electrochemical Society
Interface.
14 Cheng, Y.L., Lee, C.Y. and Haung, C.W. (2018). Plasma Damage on low-k
Dielectric Materials. IntechOpen (5 November).
15 Singh, J. Quantum Mechanics Fundamentals & Applications to Technology, 127.
A Wiley-Interscience Publication.
16 Piskorski, K. and Przewlocki, H.M. (2006). Distribution of potential
barrier height local values at Al-SiO2 and Si-SiO2 interfaces of the
metal-oxide-semiconductor structures. Bulletin of the Polish Academy of
Sciences, Technical Sciences 54 (4): 461–468.
17 Fitzpatrick, R. (2010). Square Potential Barrier. The University of Texas at
Austin.
18 Jiménes-Molinos, F., Gámiz, F., Palma, A. et al. (2002). Direct and trap-assisted
elastic tunneling through ultrathin gate oxides. Journal of Applied Physics
91 (8): 5116–5124.
19 Wang, B., Huang, W., Chi, L. et al. (2018). High-k gate dielectrics for emerging
flexible and stretchable electronics. Chemical Reviews 118: 5690–5754.
20 Sicard, E. (2017). Introducing 7-nm FinFET technology in Microwind. HAL
(24 July).
21 Mistry, K. (2017, 2017). 10 nm technology leadership, Technology and
Manufacturing Day. Intel.
22 Fairley, P. (2013). Germany jump-starts the supergrid. IEEE Spectrum (May),
P. 37–41.
23 Bhattacharya, S. (2017). Transforming the transformer. IEEE Spectrum (July),
P. 39–43.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 302]
295
Index
a
Absolute temperature
36, 205
Acceptor
37, 38
Acetone
136, 237, 239, 240
Activation energy
205
Advanced semiconductor material
lithography (ASML)
156
Airy, George Biddell
129
Airy disk
129, 130
Akasaki, Isamu
87
Aligner
128, 141–143, 154
Alignment
116, 141–144
Alignment mark
152–156
Allen, Paul
64
Alloy
72, 242
Alternating current (AC)
1, 23, 30–32,
293
Aluminum (Al)
3, 5, 52, 113, 114, 206,
241, 242
Amano, Hiroshi
87
Ampere (A)
1, 2, 258
Ampère, André-Marie
2
Amplification mode
48
Amplitude modulation
74
AND gate
59
Ångström
66
Ångström, Anders Jonas
66
Anisotropic
182, 201, 202, 208
Annealing
162, 225, 235, 241–243, 257,
260, 264–266, 270
Anode
23, 27, 29, 43
Antenna
17, 18
ArF excimer laser
156
Argon
113, 115, 133, 193, 202, 205, 212
Arrhenius equation
204
Arrhenius, Svante
205
Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor
deposition (APCVD)
167
Atom
3, 8–14, 27, 37, 114, 148, 183
Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
174–177
b
Bake
136–138, 141, 147, 238
Band gap
12, 14, 35, 40, 82,
84–87, 105
Bardeen, John
14
Base
47, 48
Battery
3, 17, 23, 43–45
Bay Area
1, 5
Bell Labs
63, 100
Bias
44–47, 50, 51, 198, 202–204, 211
Binary operation
59
Bipolar transistor
47–49
Blackbody radiation
7
Black Silicon-Bsi
105
Bohr, Niels
8
Semiconductor Microchips and Fabrication: A Practical Guide to Theory and Manufacturing,
First Edition. Yaguang Lian.
© 2023 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Published 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 303]
296
Index
Boiling point
36, 111, 112, 190, 191,
206, 207, 235
Boltzmann, Ludwig Edward
36
Boltzmann’s constant
36, 40, 212
Bond
12, 37, 114, 132, 148–151
Boolean algebra
59
Boole, George
59
Boron (B)
37, 38, 249, 250, 252, 260
Borosilicate glass (BSG)
253
Bosch process
215–223
Bose-Einstein statistics
36
Boson
36
Boyle, Willard
100
Brattain, Walter
14
Brownian motion
8
Buffered oxide etch (BOE)
179, 276
Built-in potential
42, 43
Buried implantation
266–270
Buried oxide (BOX)
268, 269
c
Cable
2, 3, 94
Cable jacket
2, 3
Cadmium selenide (CdSe)
292
Cadmium sulfide (CdS)
292
California
1, 5, 63
California Institute of Technology
63
Capacitance
24–26, 31, 32, 183, 184,
187, 283, 285
Capacitively coupled plasma (CCP)
184
Capacitor
17, 24, 27, 28, 32, 71, 72, 99,
100, 189
Capacitor 1 (C1)
189
Capacitor 2 (C2)
189
Carbon
110, 114, 148, 209–210
Cassette
122, 181
Cathode
23, 27, 29, 43, 45, 50, 232
CD player
80
Central processing unit (CPU)
56
CF4 (Freon 14)
131, 149, 173, 183, 190,
191, 194, 204, 209
Chamber
120, 133, 167, 171, 184–188,
192, 200, 201, 207, 216
Characteristic impedance
188
Charge
2, 9, 10, 13, 26–28, 42–44,
94, 97
Charge carrier (carrier)
13, 33, 47
Charge-coupled device (CCD)
55, 97
Chemical mechanical polishing (CMP)
119
Chemical phenomenon
2
Chemical reaction
2, 113–115
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
112,
125, 138, 167, 182, 271, 273
CHF3 (Freon 23)
131, 173, 190, 191,
204, 209, 210
Chiller
194, 195
Chip
47, 61, 65, 66, 71, 72, 100, 102,
110, 158
Chlorine
113, 164, 173, 206,
207, 235
Circuit
23–32, 47–62, 66
Clapeyron, BenoÎt
206
Class-10
68, 69
Class-100
69
Classical physics
7, 288
Clausius–Clapeyron equation
206
Clausius, Rudolf
206
Clean room
40, 67–70, 141, 143, 152,
155, 195
Clean room garment
69
Coherence
78, 88, 90
Coil
18, 26, 30, 73, 74, 120, 133, 216
Collector
47, 48, 61, 103
Collision
83, 84, 114, 115, 133, 183, 184,
198, 205, 211, 212
Combination
26, 93, 161, 187, 225
Compact disc (CD)
80
Complementary MOS (CMOS)
57
Component
21, 23–26, 32, 56, 71, 120,
161
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 304]
Index
297
Compound
5, 33, 84, 100, 113, 114, 135,
148, 218, 242
Compound semiconductor
5, 33, 84,
100
Compressive stress
171–173
Computer
20, 21, 56, 59, 63, 72, 195
Conductance (G)
4, 14, 28
Conduction band
12–14, 33, 38, 40, 82
Conduction current
28
Conductivity
4, 13, 119, 216
Conductor
1, 3, 5, 12–15, 17, 21, 33–46
Conservation of momentum
83
Constant
14, 30, 54, 66, 256, 289, 290
Controlled decomposition oxidation
(CDO)
173
Controller
168, 231, 281, 282
Conversion factor
192–194
Converter
1, 2, 74
Copper (Cu)
3, 13, 52, 113, 216, 242,
284–286
Correction factor
192, 194
Coulomb (C)
26, 258
Coulomb, Charles-Augustin de
26
Coulomb’s law
26
Covalent bond
12, 37, 114, 148
Critical angle
92
Crucible
115, 116, 120, 227, 228
Cryopump
225
Crystal (material)
11–13, 36, 38, 84, 92,
110, 115–118, 120–122
Crystal axes
117
Crystal orientation
116, 119, 122, 261
Cutoff mode
49
Cylinder
176, 189–191, 200
Czochralski, Jan
116
d
Damascene process
284, 285
DC bias
197, 198, 202–204, 213, 216
Decimal operation
59
Deep RIE (DRIE)
218
Deep ultraviolet (DUV)
156
Dehydration bake
136–138
Deionized (DI) water
70
Delay time
284–286
Density
9, 38, 66, 67, 88, 95, 97, 215,
241, 290
Depletion
42, 43, 50–52, 54, 56, 57, 99
Deposition
74, 112, 120, 126, 131,
166–168, 171, 173–175, 182, 197,
213, 223
Detector
97, 100
Developer
138, 145, 147, 152
Developing
145–146
Device
4, 5, 15, 18, 19, 21, 24, 28, 40, 43,
50, 53–55, 57, 59, 65, 66, 71,
77–96, 100–102
Dichlorosilane (DCS)
169
Dicing
279
Die
1, 279, 280
Dielectric constant
283, 287, 290
Dielectrics
25, 109, 182, 235, 271–273,
282, 286
Diffraction
128, 129, 143
Diffusion
42–44, 128, 163, 170, 171,
245–247
Diffusion pump
225
Digital camera
97–100
Digital operation
59
Digital versatile disc (DVD)
80
Diode
19, 42–46, 52, 53, 61, 85, 95
Diode laser
88, 95, 96
Direct band gap
35, 82, 84, 86, 87
Direct current (DC)
23, 293
Displacement current
28
Display screen
213, 214
Distribution
38, 116, 232, 248, 251, 259,
265
Donor
37–41, 53, 54, 57
Dopant
119, 120, 122, 245, 246, 249, 253
Doping process
5, 248
Dose
258, 259, 262, 266, 269
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 305]
298
Index
Double-heterojunction (DH)
93
Double-layer PR lift-off
238, 239
Drain
50, 51, 56, 125, 126, 278
Drift velocity
34, 35, 100
Dry etching
197–223
e
Edge rounding
118, 119
Edison, Thomas
30, 293
EduardWeber, Wilhelm
26
Effective density
40
Einstein, Albert
7
Electrical signal
77
Electrical wire (wire)
2, 23
Electric charge
2, 13, 26–28, 55
Electric current (current)
1, 2, 12, 13,
25, 28, 54
Electric field
26–28, 33–35, 42, 43, 52,
55, 100
Electricity
1–3, 102, 105
Electric telegraph
18
Electrode
18, 19
Electrodynamics
2
Electromagnetic spectrum
74, 75
Electromagnetic wave
8, 17, 36, 75, 77
Electron
3, 4, 7–14, 17, 19, 48–50, 52,
77, 78, 82, 84, 85, 95–97
Electron affinity
52
Electron beam evaporation
225,
227–230, 234, 236
Electron beam lithography
139
Electron emission
9
Electron gun
227, 229
Electron-hole recombination
82
Electronics
14, 17, 19, 21, 32, 33
Electron tube
17, 19–21
Electron volt (eV)
14, 158
Element
5, 28, 33, 113, 114, 148, 157,
166, 200, 205, 218
Emission
78–80, 85, 88
Emitter
47, 48, 62, 86, 103
Energy (E)
5, 7, 8, 10–14, 24, 25, 28, 30,
33, 37, 38, 40, 43, 44, 52, 57, 58
Energy band
structure
12, 33, 35, 42, 52, 82, 84
theory
5, 7, 12, 13
Energy level
10–12, 38, 40, 57, 78, 79,
114, 284
ENIAC
20
Enthalpy
205, 206
Epitaxial growth
267
Epitaxy
120, 122, 271
Equipment
6, 59, 112, 115, 119, 138,
140, 152, 156–159, 162, 165, 167,
168, 171, 173, 176, 180, 184, 189,
190
Esaki diode
286
Etch-back
226, 235
Etcher
198, 200, 201
Etching
179–195
Excited state
10, 12, 78, 95, 98
Exclusive NOR gate (NXOR)
59
Exclusive OR gate (XOR)
59
Exposure
141, 142, 144, 146, 148, 152,
156, 158
Extreme ultraviolet (EUV)
158
Extrinsic semiconductor
38
f
Fabry, Charles
89
Fabry–Perot cavity
93–95
Fairchild Semiconductor
21, 63, 71
Fall time
282
Farad (F)
25, 26, 283
Faraday, Michael
14
Federal Standard 209E (FED-STD-209E)
68
Feng, Milton
102
Fermi-Dirac statistics
36, 38
Fermi level
38, 42, 52
Fermion
36, 38
Fick, Adolf Eugen
246
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 306]
Index
299
Fick’s law
246
Filament
226, 227, 229, 230
Film
74, 97, 107, 109, 161–171,
173–175, 182, 202, 207
Film growth
162, 163, 174, 202, 266,
273
Fleming, John Ambrose
19
Float zone
120, 121
Flow rate
187, 191, 192, 194, 195
Fluorine
113, 114, 131, 149, 152, 179,
183, 197, 198, 200, 206–209, 214,
218, 219
Forbidden band
12, 13, 38, 98
Forming gas
242, 243, 265
Forward power
195
Forward voltage
43–45, 85
IV-IV semiconductor
292
Four-point probe
256–257
Freon
190, 191
Frequency
1, 7, 8, 23, 28, 29, 32, 74, 85,
89, 167, 171, 187
Frequency modulation (FM)
75
Fume hood (Hood)
180, 181
Furnace
110, 112, 115, 116, 164, 165,
168, 242, 264, 265
g
Gallium arsenide (GaAs)
5, 35, 38, 52
Gallium nitride (GaN)
87
Gas
11, 70, 109, 114, 120, 133, 152,
162, 163, 169–171, 173–175,
177, 182, 184, 187, 189–192,
202
Gate
49, 50, 56, 57, 60, 65, 127, 128,
134, 159, 266, 278
Gates, Bill
64
Gauge
190
Germanium (Ge)
5, 33, 35, 38, 45, 52,
84, 109, 200, 218, 292
Gould, Gordon
78
Gravity
9, 115
Gray, Stephen
14
Grinding
116–118
Ground
48, 95
Ground state
10, 95, 98
h
Hafnium dioxide (HfO2)
289
Half of a pitch
66
Hard bake
136, 147–148
Henry, Joseph
26
Hertz (Hz)
8, 17, 18, 32
Hertz, Heinrich
8
Heteroepitaxial
267
Heterogeneous junction
93
Hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS)
138,
139
High density plasma (HDP)
232
High-frequency (HF)
167, 171
High technology (High-Tech)
1
High-voltage direct current (HVDC)
292, 293
High-volume manufacturing (HVM)
66
Hoerni, Jean Amédée
71
Hole
13, 34, 35, 37, 38, 44, 47, 82, 84,
101, 128
Holonyak, Nick
85, 87
Homoepitaxial
267
Hotplate
136, 137
Hydrogen
2, 9, 10, 111–113, 133, 148,
149, 166, 207, 209, 210
Hydrophilic surface
137
Hydrophobic surface
137
i
Ideal gas constant
205
I-line
144, 156
Imaginary unit
31, 32
Immersion lithography
156, 157
Impedance
31, 187, 188
Implantation
37, 128, 245, 246,
257–262, 269
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 307]
300
Index
Impurity
37, 41, 246–249, 252,
259–262
Incandescent lamp
77, 78, 80, 87
Incident power
188
Indirect band gap
35, 82, 84, 86, 87
Inductance
24, 26, 31, 32, 183,
187, 216
Inductively coupled plasma (ICP)
187,
197, 215–223
Inductor
17, 24, 26, 29, 30, 73–75, 133,
216
Information technology (IT)
14
Ingot
115–118, 120
Inorganic
148, 289
Input impedance
188
Input resistance
188
Input signal
48, 59
Input voltage
48
Institute of Environmental Sciences and
Technology (IEST)
68
Insulator
3, 5, 12, 13, 55, 266, 271
Integrated circuit (IC)
1, 21, 46–60
Intel 8080
64
Intel Corporation
21, 63, 64
Intensity
99, 129, 130, 135, 232
Interference
89–91
Interlevel dielectric (ILD)
127, 282
International Organization for
Standardization (ISO)
69
International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors (ITRS)
66
Internet
19
Intrinsic carrier concentration
40, 41
Intrinsic semiconductor
36, 38
Ion
257–258
Ionization
38–40, 133
Isolation
127, 161, 245
Isopropyl alcohol (IPA)
136
Isotropic
182, 198, 200–203,
208, 219
IT era
61
j
Joule (J)
14, 158
Joule, James Prescott
14
Junction field effect transistor (JFET)
49–51
k
Karlsuss
154, 155
Kilby, Jack St. Clair
21
l
Laser pointer
80
Laser printer
80
Lattice
14, 35, 37, 40, 66, 82, 84,
116–118, 132
Lattice plane
116–118, 179
LED lamp
80
Lee de Forest
19
Lift-off
225, 226, 235–240
Lift-off resist (LOR)
238
Light
8, 9, 23, 77, 78, 85–89, 91–94, 106,
128
Light amplification generated by
stimulated radiation
78
Light emitting device
77–82
Light-emitting diode (LED)
82–87
Light-emitting mechanism
78
Light ray
9, 128
Liquid
11, 110–112, 132, 137, 141, 206,
239, 252
Li, Xiuling
74
Load
23, 105, 169, 188, 189
Load C
189
Local oxidation of silicon (LOCOS)
127
Logic gate
59, 128
Los Angeles
63
Low-frequency (LF)
171
Low-κ dielectrics
283–286
Low pressure chemical vapor deposition
(LPCVD)
138, 168
Luminescence
77, 78, 102, 144
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 308]
Index
301
m
Macroworld
67, 68
Magnet
28
Magnetic field
28–30, 132, 133, 215
Magnetic flux
25, 26, 216
Magnetron sputtering
231, 234
Magnitude C
189
Maiman, Theodore H.
78
Manufacture
109–123
Marconi, Guglielmo Giovanni Maria
18
Mask
109, 128, 141–143, 155, 170, 200,
207, 208, 249–251
Mass (m)
8, 26
Mass-energy equivalence
8
Mass flow controller (MFC)
167,
189–194
Matching network (Matchwork)
187–189
Mathematics
10, 26, 32, 40, 261, 263
Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics
7, 40
Maxwell, James Clerk
8
Maxwell’s Equations
8, 17
Mean free path
202, 211, 212, 227
Mechanical pump
187, 225, 227
Medium wave (MW)
74
Melting point
109, 115, 226, 253, 254
Metal dielectrics
235, 290
Metal-insulator-semiconductor field
effect transistor (MISFET)
55–60
Metal ion bearing (MIB)
145
Metal ion containing (MIC)
145
Metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect
transistor (MOSFET)
47
Metal-semiconductor field effect
transistor (MESFET)
49, 52–55
Michelson-Morley experiment
7
Microchip
1, 11, 17, 33, 43, 47, 77, 109,
156, 161, 202
Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry
Systems (MITS)
64
Micrometer (μm)
68
Microprocessor (μP)
56, 64
Microscope
131, 134, 146, 147, 154,
155, 172
Microscopic particle
36, 40, 84,
158, 211
Microsoft Corporation
64, 198
Microwave
68, 75, 77, 187
Microworld
68
Milli-Ampere (mA)
1
Misalignment
155, 271
Mismatch
188
Mobile phone
21, 23, 59
Mobility
13, 33–35, 235
Modern physics
7, 8
Mole
149, 205
Molecule
113, 114, 148, 211, 212
Momentum
83, 84, 221, 234, 235
Morse, Samuel Finley Breese
19
Moore, Gordon
64, 65
Moore’s law
65, 66, 291
Morse code
19
Motherboard
62
Mountain View
63
n
NAND gate
59
Nanometer (nm)
66, 68
Nanoworld
68
N-channel
49–51, 54, 56, 57, 59, 125
N-channel depletion
56, 57
N-channel enhancement
56, 59, 126
N-channel MOS (NMOS)
127
Negative charge
2
Negative PR
138, 145, 147, 237
Neutral
3, 10, 115, 132, 182
Neutron
9, 262
Newton (N)
26
Newtonian mechanics
7, 83
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 309]
302
Index
Newton, Isaac
26
Nitrogen
113, 133, 136, 148, 149, 169,
179, 265
Nonvolatile product
131
NOR gate
59
Northern California
1, 5, 63
North pole
28
Notch
116, 117, 119
NOT gate
59–61
Noyce, Robert
21, 61, 64
N-type
37, 38, 40–44, 46, 52, 54, 56, 57,
59, 115, 120
Nucleus
9, 10, 27, 114, 262, 269
Numerical aperture (NA)
131
o
Ohm, Georg Simon
3
Ohm cm (Ω)
3
Ohmic contact
52–54, 71, 101, 154, 241,
242, 245
Ohm’s law
1–4
I-V curve
45, 48, 51, 53–55
Opening
61, 62, 71, 145, 146, 148,
170, 198, 200, 201, 226,
227, 234
Operation range
281–282
Optical fiber
80, 81, 93, 102
Optical radiation
77, 78, 97
Optic communication
80, 97, 101
Orbit
9, 10
Organic
135, 136, 145, 147–149, 152
OR gate
59
Orientation
116, 119, 122, 261
Oscillation frequency
17
Oscillator
17, 32
Output impedance
188
Output resistance
188
Output signal
48, 59
Output voltage
48, 59
Oxidation
71, 109, 161–165, 168, 170,
173, 221, 242, 245
Oxide
249
Oxygen
2, 70, 109, 113–115, 148,
149, 152, 162–164, 166, 169,
170, 183, 210, 214, 233,
235, 239
Ozone (O3)
167, 176
p
Packaging
271–293
Particle
8, 13, 26, 28, 36, 40, 69, 84, 115,
121, 132, 211, 212, 219, 231, 232
Passivation
161, 173, 210, 220, 221
P-channel
49, 50, 56, 57, 59
depletion
56, 57
enhancement
56, 57, 59
P-channel MOS (PMOS)
127
Periodic table
33, 34, 37, 113, 202
Permittivity
26, 282, 283
Perot, Alfred
89
Personal computer (PC)
21
Phase C
99, 189
Phosphorus (P)
37, 38, 40, 115, 148,
207, 245–247, 249, 250, 254, 262
Phosphosilicate glass (PSG)
254
Photoelectric effect
8–11
Photolithography (lithography)
135–159
Photomask
128, 135, 141, 142, 144,
152–156, 158
Photon
8–10, 33, 35, 77–96, 84, 95, 97,
98, 100
Photon radiation
82
Photoresist (PR)
71, 118, 135–141, 143,
145, 147, 149, 152, 158, 182, 183,
194, 197, 200, 207, 208, 237, 238
Photovoltaic device
80
Physical phenomenon
2
Physical sputtering
180, 182, 184, 198,
200–202, 215, 218, 219
Physical vapor deposition (PVD)
126,
276
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 310]
Index
303
Pitch
66, 256
Planar process
71–75
Planck, Max
7
Planck’s constant
7, 86
Planck’s equation
8
Plasma
115, 125, 131, 133, 148, 149,
162, 175, 177, 179, 183–185, 195,
197, 198, 214–218
Plasma-enhanced ALD (PE-ALD)
175
Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition (PECVD)
131, 273
Plastic
3, 5, 85, 86
Platen
120, 184, 185, 194, 198, 200, 207,
211–213, 215, 216, 220
p-n junction
42, 43, 47, 49, 50, 92–95,
105, 245, 255, 257
Polyamic acid (PA)
238
Polycide
57, 155
Polymer
149, 159, 207, 209
Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)
138
Polysilicon
57, 66, 72, 110–113, 115,
127, 168
Population inversion
88, 94, 95
Positive charge
2, 10, 13, 23, 27, 29, 100,
101, 269
Positive PR
38, 140, 145, 146, 237–239
Post-bake
147
Potential barrier
43–45, 52, 286, 288,
289
Potential energy
43, 44, 52
Pounds per square inch (psi)
190
Power
1, 17, 19, 21, 23–25, 27–32, 59,
61, 74, 97, 120, 144, 167, 171, 172,
184, 187, 188, 195, 197, 198,
202–205, 213
Power supply
23, 24, 27–29, 32, 100,
167, 171, 187, 188, 195, 200, 204,
213, 216, 217
Pre-bake
141
Precursor
175, 176
Pressure
3, 36, 110, 138, 143, 144,
166–170, 190, 191, 195, 197,
200–203, 206–213
Primary flat
116, 117, 119, 122
Probe
256, 257, 265, 272–275, 278
Probe card
278
Probe station
278
Process
2, 37, 47, 71–75, 125–133,
225–243, 245–270
Process control monitor (PCM)
271–293
Profile
120, 129, 146, 148, 182, 197–203,
207–211, 219, 221, 237
Projection range
259
Proton
9, 10, 27, 114, 126, 262, 269
PR removal
226, 285
PR stripper
236, 237
P-type
37, 38, 42–44, 46, 56, 57, 98, 105,
120
Pulse
17, 19, 100, 175, 282
Pump
131, 140, 168, 173, 184, 186, 187,
200, 207, 209, 211
q
Quantum mechanics
5, 7–12, 14, 36,
84, 286, 288, 289, 291
Quantum tunneling (tunneling)
286–291
Quantum well
93
Quartz boat
164, 165, 252, 253
Quartzite
110–113, 122
r
Radar
75, 77
Radiation
7, 17, 78, 82, 83, 87, 97, 105
Radical
138, 182–184, 214
Radio
17–20, 73, 74
Radio communication
17–21
Radio Corporation of America-RCA
120
Radio frequency (RF)
73, 187
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 311]
304
Index
Radio wave
17, 18
Rapid thermal annealing (RTA)
242,
264
Rate
87, 114, 115, 163, 164, 168, 180,
182, 187, 191, 194, 203–205, 209,
210, 215
Rayleigh criterion
130, 144, 156
Reactance
31
Reactive ion etching (RIE)
131, 276
Receiver
17, 18, 102
Recombination
82, 83, 87, 101, 241
Rectifier
46
Redistribution
248–250
Reflected power
188, 195
Reflection
91–93, 95, 105, 288,
289
Reflection probability
288
Reflow
147
Refraction
91, 92, 106
Refractory metal
226, 228, 231
Resistance (R)
2–4, 13, 24, 30, 52–54,
152, 164, 165, 188, 255, 256,
265
Resistive material
4
Resistivity
3–5, 13, 70, 119, 122, 225,
241, 243, 255, 273, 274
Resistor
4, 6, 24, 32, 45, 71, 72,
105, 127, 284
Resolution
97, 128, 129, 131, 143
Resonance
17, 88, 92, 95
Resonant cavity
89–91
Resonant frequency
32
Resonant tunneling diode
286
Resonate
32
Reverse power
188
Rise time
282
Roots blower
186, 187
Rubber
3, 173
Ruby laser
78, 79
Rutherford–Bohr model
9
Rutherford, Ernest
8
s
San Francisco
1, 63
Saturation mode
48, 49, 282
Saw
111, 118, 119, 279
Scalar
26
Scanner
142, 156–159
Scanning electron microscope (SEM)
146, 172
Schottky contact
52–54
Schottky effect
52, 53
Schrödinger equation
11, 12, 288
Schrödinger, Erwin
11
Scrubber
173
Secondary flat
116, 117
Self-alignment
155
Semiconductor
5, 61–75
Semiconductor device
1, 21, 88, 120
Semiconductor technology
1, 67, 113,
188, 288, 291
Semi-insulating material
5
Semi-insulator
5
Separation by implanted oxygen
(SIMOX)
267
SF6
131, 173, 190, 191, 193, 204, 210
Shallow trench isolation (STI)
127
Sheet resistance
255, 256, 265
Shell
10, 11, 132, 207, 239, 240
Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory
63
Shockley, William
14, 63
Short wave (SW)
75, 77, 131, 156
Showerhead
184, 185, 200, 213–215
ShujiNakamura
87
Siemens process
112, 115
Signal
19, 46, 48, 53, 59, 77, 80, 97, 100,
102, 103, 282, 284
Silicide (TiSi2)
57, 274
Silicon (Si)
1, 5, 10, 11, 14, 21, 35, 37,
38, 42, 45, 65–67, 74, 75, 84, 98,
99, 105, 109–123, 127, 140, 152,
162–170, 210, 216, 218, 221–223,
241
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 312]
Index
305
Silicon carbide (SiC)
292
Silicon dioxide (SiO2)
55, 109, 114, 152,
162–168, 170, 177, 179, 214, 249,
284
Silicon germanium (SiGe)
52, 200, 218,
292
Silicon insulated-gate bipolar transistor
(IGBT)
293
Silicon nitride (Si3N4)
74, 169–173, 180
Silicon-on-insulator (SOI)
266
Silicon-on-sapphire (SOS)
267
Silicon valley
1, 5, 63
Single crystal silicon
115, 116, 261
Single-element semiconductor
5
SiO2 assisted lift-off
238, 239
Smart cut
269
Smith, George E.
59
Snellius, Willebrord
92
Snell’s law
92
Solar cell
80, 97, 105–106
Solar panel
80, 82, 106
Solid
12, 13, 115, 136, 149, 163, 170,
200, 206, 226, 247
Solid-state electronics
21
Solvent
109, 110, 141, 145, 147
Source
20, 23–25, 30, 31, 50–56, 83, 86,
101, 125, 129, 130, 167, 176,
187–189, 247, 248
Southern California
63
South pole
28
Special theory of relativity
8
Spectrum
74, 75, 144, 158
Speed of light (c)
8, 17, 86, 92, 158
Spinner
140, 147, 252
Spontaneous emission
77–79, 85
Spontaneous radiation
78
Standard atmosphere (atm)
36, 206
Standard cubic centimeters per minute
(SCCM)
191
Standard cubic feet per hour (SCFH)
191
Standard liters per minute (SLPM)
191,
192
Stepper
142, 143
Stimulated emission
77–80, 95
Stimulated radiation
78
Stripped wire
2, 3
Strutt, John William
131
Sublimation temperature
149, 190, 206
Sublime
234
Switch
23, 24, 29, 48, 59, 175, 281, 282
Symbol
4, 5, 14, 23–26, 36–38, 47, 117
t
Tantalum nitride (TaN)
284
Target
182, 231–233, 258, 259, 276, 277
Technology node
66, 128, 292
Teflon
209, 210, 220, 221
Telegram
19, 20
Telegraph
17–19
Telephone
20
Television (TV)
20
Temperature
5, 13, 14, 36, 40, 41, 70,
132, 137, 138, 148, 149, 161–166,
190, 191, 197, 205–207, 211, 242,
245
Tensile stress
171–173
Terminal
47, 50
Tesla, Nikola
29, 293
Tetra methyl ammonium hydroxide
(TMAH)
145
Thermal activated ALD (TA-ALD)
175
Thermal evaporation
225, 227, 229,
230, 234–235
Thermodynamics
3, 205
Three-core wire
2, 3
III-V material
86, 162, 206, 207, 211,
241, 245, 257, 292
Threshold current
88, 94, 95
Titanium (Ti)
52, 226, 277
Titanium nitride (TiN)
293
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 313]
306
Index
Tool
77, 118, 128, 143, 201, 212, 231,
280
Torr
110, 168, 200
Traitorous eight
64, 71
Transformer
31, 32, 73, 74, 293
Transistor
47–60
Transistor laser
80, 101–104
Transition process
79
Transmission
19, 31, 273, 288, 289, 293
Transmission probability
288
Transmitter
17, 18
Tube
17, 19–21, 47, 74, 164, 165, 168
Tune C
189
Tungsten (W) via plug (W-plug)
276
Turbomolecular (Turbo) pump
186
Turbomolecular pump (turbo pump)
186
Two-core wire
2
II-VI material
292
u
Ultra-high purity
70, 109
Ultraviolet (UV)
128, 135, 136, 141
Undercut
198, 202, 238
Unipolar transistor
49
University of Illinois
173, 219, 221
v
Vacuum
19–21, 26, 52, 92, 110, 136,
167, 185
Vacuum pump
186–187
Vacuum tube
19–21
Valence band
12, 13, 33, 35, 38, 82
Valence electron
10–12, 33, 37, 113, 114
Valve
190, 201
Vector
26, 28, 35, 132
Velocity
13, 34, 35, 83, 132, 133
Via
275, 276
Volatile product
200
Volt (V)
3, 14, 52, 158
Volta, Alessandro
3
Voltage
1–3, 13, 23, 26–28, 31–34,
43–45, 51, 52, 56, 57, 59, 74, 98
Voltage converter
1, 2, 74
Voltaic pile
3
Volts alternating current (VAC)
w
Wafer
62, 66, 67, 109–111, 118–120,
122, 126, 127, 135, 136, 138, 140,
152, 158, 170
Walter H. Schottky
52
Water
2, 36, 70, 91, 92, 109, 114,
136–138, 156, 163
Watt (W)
1, 2, 30
Watt, James
30
Wave
8, 24, 35, 36, 74, 84, 85,
89–91, 158
Waveguide
93
Wavelength
58, 75, 84, 85, 87,
131, 144
Weber (Wb)
26
Wet etching
179–182
William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin
36
Wire
bonding
242, 280, 281
insulation
2, 3
Wireless telegraphy
17, 18
Work function
52, 241
x
Xenon difluoride (XeF2)
198
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
