# madou_vol3_2011
# Extracted from: 2011-Madou_Marc_vol3_Fundamentals_of_Microfabricat.pdf
# Total PDF pages: 642
# Page numbering: from PDF page labels
# ============================================================


[Page A]
[empty page]

[Page i]
[empty page]

[Page ii]
[empty page]

[Page iii]
Marc J. Madou
CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton   London   New York

[Page iv]
MATLAB® is a trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. and is used with permission. The MathWorks does not warrant the accuracy of the text or exercises in 
this book. This book’s use or discussion of MATLAB® software or related products does not constitute endorsement or sponsorship by The MathWorks 
of a particular pedagogical approach or particular use of the MATLAB® software.
CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2011 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20110720
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4398-9524-5 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and 
information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and 
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission 
to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact 
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides 
licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment 
has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

[Page v]
I dedicate this third edition of Fundamentals of Microfabrication to my family in the US and 
in Belgium and to all MEMS and NEMS colleagues in labs in the US, Canada, India, Korea, 
Mexico, Malaysia, Switzerland, Sweden and Denmark that I have the pleasure to work with. 
The opportunity to carry out international research in MEMS and NEMS and writing a textbook 
about it has been rewarding in terms of research productivity but perhaps even more in cultural 
enrichment. Scientists have always been at the frontier of globalization because science is the 
biggest gift one country can give to another and perhaps the best road to a more peaceful world.

[Page vi]
[empty page]

[Page vii]
vii
Contents
Roadmap 
ix
Author 
xi
Acknowledgments 
xiii
PART I
From Traditional Manufacturing to Nanotechnology
Introduction to Part I 
2
 1 Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) 
Manufacturing Compared 
3
 2 Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics 
49
 3 Nanotechnology: Top-Down and Bottom-Up Manufacturing Approaches Compared 
117
 4 Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly 
185
 5 Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS 
239
 6 Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling 
285
PART II
Scaling Laws, Actuators, and Power and Brains in Miniature Devices
Introduction to Part II 
358
 7 Scaling Laws 
359
 8 Actuators 
387
 9 Power and Brains in Miniature Devices 
475

[Page viii]
viii   Contents
PART III
Miniaturization Application
Introduction to Part III 
526
 10 MEMS and NEMS Applications 
527

[Page ix]
ix
Roadmap
From MEMS to Bio-MEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications consists of ten chapters in three 
parts. In Part I, we compare available manufacturing options for microelectromechanical systems 
(MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS), introduce inspection options for the produced 
parts (metrology), and summarize available modeling software for MEMS and NEMS. Nonlithography-
based (traditional) manufacturing techniques are contrasted with lithography-based ( nontraditional) 
methods in Chapter 1. In Chapter 2, we investigate nature as an engineering guide, and we contrast 
top-down and bottom-up approaches in Chapter 3. In Chapter 4 we learn about packaging, assembly, 
and self-assembly from integrated circuits to DNA and biological cells. In these chapters we aim to help 
the reader decide upon an optimized manufacturing option to tackle specific manufacturing problems. 
We then introduce some selected new MEMS and NEMS processes and materials in Chapter 5. Finally, 
we cover metrology techniques for MEMS and NEMS and summarize MEMS and NEMS modeling in 
Chapter 6. 
Of the three chapters in Part II, the first deals with scaling laws, the second with actuators, and 
the third with issues surrounding power generation and the implementation of brains in miniaturized 
devices. In Chapter 7, on scaling laws, we look at scaling from both intuitive and mathematical points 
of view. We are especially interested in deviations from linear scaling, where downscaling reveals new 
unexpected physical and chemical phenomena. The scaling chapter also constitutes an introduction to 
the subsequent treatises on actuators in Chapter 8 and on power and brains in Chapter 9. An actuator—
like a sensor—is a device that converts energy from one form to another. In the case of an actuator, one 
is interested in the ensuing action; in the case of a sensor, one is interested in the information garnered. 
Scaling enables one to compare various actuator mechanisms, such as those proposed to propel a rotor 
blade, bend a thin silicon membrane, or move fluids in fluidic channels. Power generation poses quite 
a challenge for miniaturization science; the smaller the power source, the less its total capacity. We 
will consider the powering of miniaturized equipment, as well as the miniaturization of power sources 
themselves, in Chapter 9. In the same chapter, we also discuss the different strategies for making micro-
machines smarter. 
In Part III, Chapter 10, we review the MEMS and NEMS markets. Today, the MEMS field has made the 
transition out of the laboratory and into the marketplace with a plethora of new products, including a strong 
entry into the consumer electronics field (mobile phones, cameras, laptop computers, games, etc.). If MEMS 
is entering adolescence, the word nano still seems to derive from a verb that means “to seek and get venture 
capital funding” instead of from the Greek noun for dwarf. Today, the market dynamics for MEMS and 
NEMS commercial products are very different, and we treat MEMS and NEMS applications separately in 
this chapter. 
As highlighted in Chapter 1, which compares nonlithography-based (traditional) and lithography-based 
(nontraditional) manufacturing, we hope that a better understanding of how to match different manufactur-
ing options with a given application will guide the identification of additional killer applications for MEMS 
and NEMS and encourage more companies and research organizations to innovate faster based on their 
 in-house manufacturing tools and know-how.
Note to the Reader: From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications was originally com-
posed as part of a larger book that has since been broken up into three separate volumes. From MEMS to 

[Page x]
x   Roadmap
Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications represents the third and final volume in this set. The 
other two volumes include Solid-State Physics, Fluidics, and Analytical Techniques in Micro- and Nanotechnology 
and Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology. Cross-references to these books appear 
throughout the text and will be referred to as Volume I and Volume II, respectively. The interested reader is 
encouraged to consult these volumes as necessary.

[Page xi]
xi
Author
Dr. Madou is the Chancellor’s Professor in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (MEA) at the University 
of California, Irvine. He is also associated with UC Irvine’s Department of Biomedical Engineering and the 
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science. He is a Distinguished Honorary Professor at 
the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India, and a World Class University Scholar (WCU) at UNIST in 
South Korea. 
Dr. Madou was Vice President of Advanced Technology at Nanogen in San Diego, California. He special-
izes in the application of miniaturization technology to chemical and biological problems (bio-MEMS). He 
is the author of several books in this burgeoning field he helped pioneer both in academia and in industry. 
He founded several micromachining companies.  
Many of his students became well known in their own right in academia and through successful MEMS start-
ups. Dr. Madou was the founder of the SRI International’s Microsensor Department, founder and president of 
Teknekron Sensor Development Corporation (TSDC), Visiting Miller Professor at UC Berkeley, and Endowed 
Chair at the Ohio State University (Professor in Chemistry and Materials Science and Engineering).
Some of Dr. Madou’s recent research work involves artificial muscle for responsive drug delivery, carbon-
MEMS (C-MEMS), a CD-based fluidic platform, solid-state pH electrodes, and integrating fluidics with DNA 
arrays, as well as label-free assays for the molecular diagnostics platform of the future. 
To find out more about those recent research projects, visit http://www.biomems.net.

[Page xii]
[empty page]

[Page xiii]
xiii
Acknowledgments
I thank all of the readers of the first and second editions of Fundamentals of Microfabrication as they made 
it worthwhile for me to finish this completely revised and very much expanded third edition. As in previous 
editions I had plenty of eager reviewers in my students and colleagues from all around the world. Students 
were especially helpful with the question and answer books that come with the three volumes that make up 
this third edition. I have acknowledged reviewers at the end of each chapter and students that worked on 
questions and answers are listed in the questions sections. The idea of treating MEMS and NEMS processes 
as some of a myriad of advanced manufacturing approaches came about while working on a WTEC report 
on International Assessment Of Research And Development In Micromanufacturing (http://www.wtec.org/
micromfg/report/Micro-report.pdf). For that report we travelled around the US and abroad to visit the lead-
ing manufacturers of advanced technology products and quickly learned that innovation and advanced 
manufacturing are very much interlinked because new product demands stimulate the invention of new 
materials and processes. The loss of manufacturing in a country goes well beyond the loss of only one class of 
products. If a technical community is dissociated from manufacturing experience, such as making larger flat-
panel displays or the latest mobile phones, such communities cannot invent and eventually can no longer 
teach engineering effectively. An equally sobering realization is that a country might still invent new tech-
nologies paid for by government grants, say in nanofabrication, but not be able to manufacture the products 
that incorporate them. It is naïve to believe that one can still design new products when disconnected from 
advanced manufacturing: for a good design one needs to know the latest manufacturing processes and new-
est materials. It is my sincerest hope that this third edition motivates some of the brightest students to start 
designing and making things again rather than joining financial institutions that produce nothing for society 
at large but rather break things.

[Page xiv]
[empty page]

[Page 1]
PART I
From Traditional 
Manufacturing to 
Nano technology
 In ten years the only manufacturing left in the United States will be 1) those 
facilities vital to the defense industry, 2) those industries that are uniquely 
high-tech, 3) those that cannot absorb long-distance freight charges, and 4) those 
industries that service “on the spot” instantaneous demand (although even that 
is questionable).
Mechanics
1000 μm
100 μm
10 μm
1 μm
0.1 μm
Lathing/milling
Lasers/extrusion press
Lithography
Fine mechanics
Micromechanics
Nanomechanics
 From macromachining to nanomachining.

[Page 2]
2   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Introduction to Part I
Chapter 1  Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) 
and Lithography-Based 
(Nontraditional) Manu facturing 
Compared
Chapter 2  Nature as an Engineering Guide: 
Bio mimetics
Chapter 3  Nanotechnology: Top-Down and 
Bottom-Up Manufacturing Approaches 
Compared 
Chapter 4  Packaging, Assembly, and  Self-Assembly
Chapter 5  Selected Materials and Processes for 
MEMS and NEMS
Chapter 6  Metrology and MEMS, NEMS Modeling
Introduction to Part I
In Part I, we compare available manufacturing options 
for microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)  and 
nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS), introduce 
inspection options for the produced parts (metrol-
ogy), and summarize available modeling software 
for MEMS and NEMS. Nonlithography-based (tra-
ditional)  manufacturing techniques are contrasted 
with lithography-based (nontraditional) methods in 
Chapter 1. In Chapter 2, we investigate nature as an 
engineering guide, and we contrast top-down and 
bottom-up approaches in Chapter 3. In Chapter 4 we 
learn about packaging, assembly, and self-assembly 
from integrated circuits (ICs) to DNA. In these 
chapters, we aim to help the reader decide upon an 
optimized manufacturing option to tackle specific 
manufacturing problems. We then introduce some 
selected MEMS and NEMS processes and materials in 
Chapter 5. Finally, we review metrology techniques 
for MEMS and NEMS and summarize MEMS and 
NEMS modeling in Chapter 6. 

[Page 3]
3
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Why Use Miniaturization 
Technology?
From Perception to Realization
Beyond Si-Based MEMS
Serial, Batch, and Continuous 
Manufacturing Options
Comparison Table
Design from the Package Inward
Decision Tree for the Optimized 
Micromanufacturing Option
Scaling Characteristics of 
Micromechanisms
Partitioning
Fluid Propulsion Methods and 
MEMS Integration 
Heating and Cooling and MEMS 
Integration
Sample Introduction 
Manufacturing Technique of the 
Disposable Cassette
Substrate Choice
Checklist
Questions
References
1
Nonlithography-Based 
(Traditional) and 
Lithography-Based 
(Nontraditional) 
Manufacturing 
Compared
1995–02, America lost 2 million industrial jobs, mostly to China. China 
lost 15 million of such jobs, mostly to machines.
Fortune
Despite the shrinking of America’s industrial work force, our country’s 
overall industrial output increased by 50% since 1992.
Economist
Charlie Chaplin’s Modern Times.

[Page 4]
4   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Introduction
Micromachining, or microelectromechanical sys-
tem/nanoelectromechanical system (MEMS/NEMS), 
is emerging as a set of new manufacturing tools to 
solve specific industrial problems rather than as a 
monolithic new industry with generic solutions for 
every manufacturing problem. It is important to 
evaluate the merit of using one certain MEMS/NEMS 
technique above all the other available micromanu-
facturing options [say, lithography-based LIGA* (i.e., 
nontraditional manufacturing) vs. nonlithography 
computer numerical control machining (CNC) (i.e., 
traditional manufacturing)] so as to find the tech-
nique that is optimal for the application at hand—in 
other words, one needs to zero-base the technologi-
cal approach to the problem.1 For example, micro-
machinists are often not aware of the capabilities 
of traditional machining (nonlithography) and use 
Si micromachining for parts that could have been 
made better with a more conventional manufactur-
ing technology. By applying the right tool to the 
machining job at hand, we hope that micromachin-
ing will lead to many more successful commercial 
applications than there are today. 
We start this chapter by listing reasons why one 
might want to miniaturize a given device at all. We 
follow this with a short treatise on the maturation 
of MEMS into a bona fide manufacturing technique 
that is complimentary today to traditional manufac-
turing methods. We go on contrasting serial, batch, 
and continuous manufacturing processes and distin-
guish between lithography-based (nontraditional) 
and nonlithography-based (traditional) manufac-
turing methods, capturing all of this in a large com-
parison table. In this same context, we explore the 
difference between truly three-dimensional (3D) 
manufacturing with equal versatility of machining 
along all three axes and the more constrained manu-
facturing methods, such as lithography-based tech-
niques, where the capabilities in one dimension (say 
* LIGA is a German acronym for “Lithographie, Galvanoformung, 
Abformung,” which in English is (x-ray) lithography, electroplat-
ing, and molding. It is a process in MEMS/NEMS that was developed 
in the early 1980s by a team under the leadership of E. Becker and 
W. Ehrfeld at the Institute for Nuclear Process Engineering [Institut 
für Kernverfahrenstechnik (IKVT)] at the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research 
Center. For details, Volume II, Chapter 10.
the height or z-axis) are very different from those in 
the other two dimensions (say the x, y plane). We 
then justify our recommendation to design MEMS 
from the package inward rather than starting from 
the MEMS itself. Finally, we introduce a decision tree 
to help determine the best manufacturing choice for 
a miniature device when given its detailed specifi-
cations. The utility of this decision tree is demon-
strated using, as an example, the micromanufacture 
of a disposable glucose sensor with glucose meter.
Why Use Miniaturization Technology?
Over the last twenty years, many MEMS applications 
have proven their mettle in the marketplace, and 
consumer electronic applications that started 
emerging over the last five years (MEMS are now 
found in iPods, computers, cameras, GPSs, etc.) have 
catapulted MEMS once more in the public eye. A long 
list of reasons confirms why miniaturization presents 
so many opportunities for product inno vation in 
so many different areas. Some of the most obvious 
reasons for miniaturization are summarized in 
Table 1.1. Usually, not all those reasons apply at once. 
For example, the small dimensions of micromachines 
might be crucial in medical and space applications 
but often lack importance in the auto motive industry, 
where cost is the more important driver.
TABLE 1.1 Why Use Miniaturization Technologies?
• Minimizing of energy and materials consumption 
during manufacturing
• Redundancy and arrays
• Integration with electronics, simplifying systems 
(e.g., single-point vs. multipoint measurement)
• Reduction of power budget
• Taking advantage of scaling when scaling is working 
for us in the microdomain, e.g., faster devices, 
improved thermal management
• Increased selectivity and sensitivity
• Minimal invasiveness
• Wider dynamic range
• Exploitation of new effects through the breakdown 
of continuum theory in the microdomain
• Cost/performance advantages
• Improved reproducibility
• Improved accuracy and reliability
• Self-assembly and biomimetics with nanochemistry
• More intelligent materials with structures at the 
nanoscale

[Page 5]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   5
In Volume I, Chapter 1, when analyzing Moore’s 
law describing the exponential growth in integrated 
circuit (IC) transistor density, we pointed out that 
similar exponential improvement in technology 
sophistication pertains to engineering skills in 
optics, genetics, and magnetic storage density. 
Humankind seems “hard-wired” to continue to 
innovate at an ever-increasing rate (see also Ray 
Kurzweil’s Accelerating Returns, in Volume II, 
Chapter 2). Miniaturization is just one of the most 
important means by which humankind is shaping 
its own destiny rather than being at the mercy of 
evolution. Adaptation through evolution operates 
at a pace too slow to produce humans who thrive 
in the ever faster environmental changes they have 
created for themselves. In other words, we might 
have no choice but to adapt through ever-increasing 
technology sophistication rather than our DNA.
From Perception to Realization
MEMS Finally Succeeds in the Market
In the early 1980s, Si micromachining seemed often 
applied to show the world that University X also had 
a clean room or that research group Y could make a 
yet longer-lasting surface micromachined micromo-
tor. The earlier predicament of Si-based microma-
chining as the “GaAs of the 1980s and early 1990s” 
[that is, a very good technology with little accep-
tance from an entrenched and highly standardized 
industry (think also Mac vs. PC)] had something to 
do with the intellectual/philosophical climate of sil-
icon MEMS research and development in the early 
1980s. Francis Bacon (1561–1626) explained how, 
in the advancement of knowledge, one is easily mis-
led by what he calls “idolatry.” Two of the “idols” 
he identifies point in the direction of a universal 
tendency to oversimplify, often manifested by the 
assumption of more order in a given body of phe-
nomena than actually exists, and a tendency to be 
struck by novelty.2
Both idols apply to how Si micromachining 
became misrepresented. Little commonality exists 
between the many different microdevices made 
possible by micromachining. Actually, MEMS 
products represent discontinuous innovations—
they are not simply incremental improvements on 
a previously existing technology. Each new 
product requires some new thinking on the part 
of the developers. The striking visual aspects of Si 
micromachined devices easily give a sense of novelty 
to any observer. This second idol drove most of the 
interest in micromachining by the popular press 
and the efforts of many academics. This climate 
contributed to overly optimistic expectations for 
very fast results, with a market size dwarfing the IC 
industry, and an overemphasis on Si as an answer 
to all miniaturization problems. In Chapter 10, on 
MEMS and NEMS applications, we suggest that a 
realistic number for the market of Si MEMS prod -
ucts today is less than 3% of the IC market (even 
the $6.3 billion MEMS sales in 2006, i.e., 3% of the 
$211 billion IC market for 2006, does include non-Si 
devices). Subsequently, government and industry 
funding sources experienced a hangover.
Bacon’s idols aside, the very large academic 
involvement in the micromachining field had some 
other explanations. The IC industry technologically 
and financially outdistanced universities and forc-
ibly pushed the latter to explore topics requiring 
lower startup expenses and areas where innovation 
still seemed likely. It was a perfect fit, as microma-
chining is an excellent topic for numerous PhD 
topics. In the 1980s, Si micromachining became a 
favored filler for clean room overcapacity, especially 
in Europe, where the IC industry suffered major 
setbacks against US and Japanese competition. By 
the end of the century, it was apparent that the Si 
micromachining industry was still very small com-
pared with the IC industry (less than 3%) but had 
large numbers of people involved in its research and 
development. Middlehoek and Dauderstadt esti-
mated, as early as 1994, that about 10,000 research-
ers worldwide were involved in Si sensor research 
and that $7.5 billion had been spent over the preced-
ing twenty-five years.3 Many MEMS researchers have 
now switched to nanotechnology (NEMS) research 
instead.
Another major shortcoming in Si MEMS, as 
practiced in academia, pertains to the lack of 
interdisciplinary teams. More than any other field, 
microengineering requires interdisciplinary team-
work rather than specialists. Multidisciplinary 
work from the design phase on is crucial in the 

[Page 6]
6   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
development of a successful sensor product. Many 
of the participating university groups characterize 
themselves as multidisciplinary, but the opposite 
is often true; this lack of multidisciplinary focus 
continues to obstruct the production of more 
practical results. It reminds us of a statement by 
C.P. Snow (1905–1980), who remarked that the 
separate departments at a university had ceased to 
communicate with one another. The prefix uni in 
university, he said, lost its meaning as the institution, 
striving for more and more power as government 
funds replenished research dollars, had turned into 
a loose confederation of disconnected mini-states 
instead of an organization devoted to the joint search 
for knowledge and truth.
For micromachining to lose the stigma of a 
technology looking for an application, used in 
research backrooms and excess industrial clean 
rooms only, it became important for MEMS to realize 
some product successes. These industrial successes 
started appearing principally in the early to mid-
1990s and include pressure sensors (on a small 
scale as early as 1972 at National Semiconductor), 
accelerometers (1992, 
from Analog 
Devices), 
projection displays (digital mirror devices from TI 
in 1995), ink-jet nozzles (thermal ink-jet from HP, 
1984), electrokinetic platforms (Caliper and Agilent, 
1999), fiber optic switches (NTT, 1995), and the 
first digital mirror device-based products (Texas 
Instruments, 1996). The first mechanical MEMS 
applications in industry were modest success stories 
only, with dollar evaluation in initial public offerings 
for mechanical MEMS companies typically only 
in the $5 million to $45 million range. Ever since 
biotechnology and information/communication 
industries started taking an interest in MEMS, huge 
stock market success stories began to appear, and 
large corporations bought small MEMS companies 
for billions of dollars. But today, many investors still 
cringe when they hear the terms MEMS or NEMS, 
because of the ill-fated optical MEMS bubble of the 
late 1990s and a BIOMEMS field that never seems to 
live up to its promises.
Fortunately, as we will learn in Chapter 10, on 
MEMS and NEMS applications, mechanical and 
optical MEMS in consumer electronics, started 
taking off over the last five years, and even MEMS for 
large optical switches in telecommunications is now 
regaining a foothold. The real MEMS breakthroughs 
continue to originate overwhelmingly from start-up 
companies (e.g., Illumina and Cepheid) and large 
corporations (e.g., ADI and Bosch) rather than 
academia. Micromachining in industry is more 
correctly seen as a diverse set of tools to solve 
practical problems in the crafting of subminiaturized 
3D structures rather than as a goal by itself. The 
multidisciplinary approach and matrix organization 
of MEMS teams in industry further explains their 
more impressive MEMS accomplishments.
In academia, with its very vertical departmental 
structure and isolation from practical manufacturing 
and application understanding, miniaturization sci-
ence is still often hyped beyond recognition in order 
to secure grants, tenure, or money from government 
agencies, large corporations, and venture capitalists. 
Describing academic MEMS efforts as unbiased fun-
damental work or fine-tuning of micromachining 
skills, rather than proclaiming each new result as the 
latest breakthrough in sensor technology or analyti-
cal chemistry, would often serve society better.
The new wave of nanomachining and nano-
chemistry efforts, mostly grounded in the funda -
mental research phase at this stage, holds the 
promise that university scholars might regain the 
miniaturization playing field in the near future. 
We can only hope that the hype surrounding nano-
technology settles down and that funding agencies 
and companies give researchers and scientists 
enough time to realize the stupendous opportuni-
ties that nanotechnology holds. To realize the 
economic potential of MEMS and NEMS, society 
will need a new generation of engineers who are 
comfortable with chemical and biological issues 
as well as many different types of micro- and 
nanomanufacturing considerations. Academia will 
have to become more matrix organized, if only to 
prepare the proper workforce for the coming age 
of nanomachining. From the fundamental point 
of view, micromachining and nanomachining are 
also of extreme interest, as these fields provide an 
excellent opportunity for operating experiments 
in a regime where continuum theory breaks down, 
holding the potential for discovery of important new 
chemical and physical phenomena. Unfortunately, 

[Page 7]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   7
mounting funding pressures in the United States 
are forcing scientists to sell research as development 
and development as manufacturing. By putting 
their work in the context of a practical solution too 
early, academics might have lost some of industry’s 
trust in the capabilities of micromachining and 
nanomachining. A breakthrough in deep, cryogenic 
etching or yet thicker vertical photoresist walls 
should stand by itself and does not necessarily need 
to be illustrated with the fabrication of wheels for 
micromotors! A better practice in the future might be 
to compare these new academic results (say, on new 
deep UV photoresists) with other, more traditional 
approaches so that the work becomes of generic 
value to a potential user for his or her own specific 
application.
Beyond Si-Based MEMS
New Si-based MEMS products are only a small part 
of the total projected MEMS markets, and there is 
ample room for non-Si-based companies in the 
MEMS markets of the future (e.g., microplastic 
molders, microelectroplaters, microceramic parts 
producers, etc.). Market predictions from the 1980s 
and early 1990s about the Si MEMS revolution 
were very mistaken; it is only by broadening the 
definition that MEMS is living up to the numbers 
that were quoted at that time. In Chapter 10 of this 
volume on MEMS and NEMS markets, we will see 
that when including non-Si MEMS, which many 
market studies do include now, and especially when 
also counting nonlithography-based MEMS (e.g., 
precision engineered microproducts; see below) 
(which very few market studies do yet), MEMS might 
very well constitute 10% of all current IC sales.
The market does not care about the type of minia-
turization method employed for a new product, and 
for some time the Si micromachining community, 
especially in the United States, did not appreciate 
the tremendous accomplishments of alternative 
miniaturization methods. The HP Kittyhawk Per sonal 
Storage Module, a 1.3-inch disk drive, a compact disc 
(CD) optical pickup, and IBM’s thin-film magnetic 
read-write head shown in Figure 1.1 are triumphs of 
precision engineering, and none involve Si-MEMS. 
The Kittyhawk (Figure 1.1a), introduced by HP in 1992, 
never caught on and seems to have been introduced 
before its time (Sony has continued its efforts on 
a similar MiniDisc). Kittyhawk was discontinued 
in September 1994. Approximately 160,000 units 
were sold (compared with a projected two-year 
sales of 700,000 units). In 1996, largely because of 
Kittyhawk’s failure, Hewlett Packard closed its Disk 
Memory Division and exited the disk drive business. 
(The story of HP Kittyhawk was described in a Jan 
26, 2006 Harvard Business School business case, 
“Hewlett-Packard: The Flight of the Kittyhawk.”64)
CD optical pickups and CD technology in general 
are other marvels of precision engineering, funded 
by billions of dollars in research and development 
(R&D) at Philips and Sony (see Figure 1.1b and 1.1c). 
This technology has not been exploited nearly as well 
as it should outside its traditional application area. 
We envision many nontraditional applications for 
this platform, such as its use as a sample preparation 
station and a molecular diagnostic tool as explored in 
this chapter, in Volume I, Chapter 6, and in Chapter 
5, this volume. In diagnostic applications, the same 
CD technology may be used to read both analytical 
data (e.g., as a color change of a chromophore) and 
information (in the form of pits on the CD), to serve 
as a very inexpensive microscope (see Volume I, 
Figures 6.93 and 6.94) or as a high-precision x-y stage, 
etc. In this respect, one could legitimately ask the 
question, why are optical pickup heads not included 
in MEMS market studies when hard disc drive read-
write heads often are? (See Chapter 10, this volume.) 
The answer is that these choices were made quite 
arbitrarily, underscoring the need to identify the 
criteria/definitions of MEMS and the manufacturing 
means used to make the microcomponents covered 
in any MEMS marketing report. The thin-film 
magnetic heads, shown in Figure 1.1d, are an excellent 
example of the commercial success one can achieve 
when identifying the correct machining option and 
materials combinations for a miniaturization task at 
hand. At $10 billion in sales in 2007, the thin-film 
magnetic head is still the most successful MEMS 
product today. The manufacture of the thin-film 
head is principally based on photolithography and 
electroplating of the coils and does not involve any 
Si. In 2009, read-write (RW) heads are still projected 
to have a market the size of all other Si MEMS 

[Page 8]
8   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
applications put together (see RW in Figure 10.15, 
this volume).
Because there are few established engineering 
rules and practices available to decide upon an ideal 
manufacturing technique from the wealth of options 
available for a given microapplication, good matches 
of machining methodology and application are 
often missed or rediscovered. Figure 1.2 illustrates 
the evolution of the types of manufacturing meth-
ods attempted for the construction of microfluidic 
elements. In the 1960s, microfluidic elements were 
principally made from photoglass; after attempting 
(a)
Disc
Label side
Readout side
(T+,T-)
(S+,S-)
Diﬀraction grating
Laser diode package
Photodiode
(laser power
control)
Polarizer
COM
PD
Laser diode
Return beams
Note: 
LD
Sled movement
Infomation
layer (pits)
Tracking coil moves
side-side, not shown
Track direction in/out of diagram
1.2mm
F
E
N
S
E
A B
C D
F
Objective
lens
Focus coil
Permanent
magnets
N
S
F+
F-
Quarter wave plate
Collimating
lens
Turning mirror
Polarizing beam splitter
Cylindrical lens
Photodiode array
(data readout,
focus, tracking)
First order beams
(tracking)
Main beam
(data readout & focus)
A,B,C,D
Commericial pickups may
combine required functions into
fewer components.
(b)
FIGURE 1.1 Triumphs of mechatronics. (a) HP’s Kittyhawk. (From http://www.homebrewcpu.com/Pictures/kitty-
hawk.jpg.) (b) CD optical pickup. General three-beam optical pickup organization. (From http://www.repairfaq.
org/REPAIR/ F_cdfaq1.html.) (c) Physical realization embodied by the Sony KSS361A Optical Pickup (see http://www.
repairfaq.org/REPAIR/kss110c.gif). (d) The evolution of magnetic read-write heads. From 1980 on, the magnetic 
coils were made by semiconductor-type technology (lithography and Cu plating) (http://dspace.cusat.ac.in/dspace/
bitstream/123456789/2121/1/ GIANT%20MAGNETORESISTANCE%20EFFECT.pdf.)

[Page 9]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   9
to craft the same devices by dry etching in Si in the 
1980s at Stanford, LIGA was employed in the early 
1990s. But by the mid-1990s, photoglass was rediscov-
ered as the best machining option for some microflu-
idics applications. One might hope that by following 
a decision process flow researchers can avoid these 
costly loss and rediscovery cycles in the future.
As pointed out above, recent market studies 
cover Si and non-Si technology miniaturization 
applications, thereby achieving earlier projected 
large revenues that were expected to derive from 
Si micromachining alone. Some early market data 
on Si-based miniaturization were misleading in 
another way: they included big commercial successes 
Laser diode
Laser diode
Magnet
Pole piece
Tracking coil
Focus coil
Tracking pivot
Focus pivot
5 mm
Photodiode
array
Objective lens
Top view
Laser power adjust
Diﬀraction
grating
Optical
alignment
screws
Turning mirror mount
Photodiode array
Sony KSS361A optical pickup
Beam
splitter
Bottom view
(c)
Ferrite inductive MnFe
Read-write head
Wire wound coil
Machined pole pieces
Gap width controlled
  by ﬁlms and assembly
  tolerances
Tin-ﬁlm inductive
Read-write head
Coil, role geometries
  controlled by
  semiconductor-type process
NiFe poles
Two-contact structure
Tin-ﬁlm inductive write
MR read head
Write wide-read narrow
Four-contact structure
SAL 
NiFe MR ﬁlm
Tin-ﬁlm inductive write
GMR read head
Write wide-read narrow
Four-contact structure
Pinned, free ﬁlms
Antiferromagnetic
  exchange ﬁlm
CIP operation
1980
1990
1997
>2003
Perpendicular thin ﬁlm
Inductive write
CPP read head
1970
(d)
FIGURE 1.1 (Continued)

[Page 10]
10   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
in Si sensors such as simple photodiodes, charge-
coupled detectors (CCDs), and Hall elements. The 
latter were, for the most part, developed before 1970 
and are almost exclusively based on standard Si 
manufacturing techniques.
Serial, Batch, and Continuous 
Manufacturing Options
In serial manufacturing, a manufacturing station 
produces one product at the time. As an example 
for serial machining consider focused ion-beam 
milling, a  mechanical removing technique detailed 
in Volume II, Chapter 6. Vasile et al., for example, 
describe a lathe mounted 20-keV Ga ion beam as the 
cutting tool for in-vacuum micromachining.4,5 The 
ion beam they use is 0.3 µm in diameter, and they 
crafted tungsten needles, hooks, tuning forks, and 
specialized scanning probe tips. Two of their tungsten 
microstructures are shown in Volume II, Figure 6.33. 
Start-to-finish fabrication time for one of the objects 
shown here is about 2 hours! It should be noted that 
this expensive serial manufacturing technique might 
not make much sense for mass production of inex-
pensive consumer products but could be justified, for 
example, for the fabrication of an atomic force micro-
scope probe tool set that could not be produced oth-
erwise. On the other hand, to make a microshovel, 
as also shown in Volume II, Figure 6.33, is merely a 
fancy demonstration of the capabilities of this tech-
nique (call it a micro-“BS shovel”*).
In batch fabrication, a “group” or “batch” of id en-
tical products is produced in one single machining 
step. Batch fabrication techniques lend themselves 
to economies of scale that are unavailable with 
serial techniques. The use of batch processes is 
widespread throughout the manufacturing industry, 
producing a diverse range of products, including ICs, 
* BS used to stand for bullshit; now it stands for Bush Shit.
1965
1988
1993
1994
Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center
LIGA
Stanford University
Dry etching of Si
Fluid Ampliﬁer Associates, Inc.:
Photoformed glass
IMM
reintroduces
photoformed glass
FIGURE 1.2 The rediscovery of photoformed glass for the manufacture of microfluidics.

[Page 11]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   11
pharmaceuticals, polymers, biochemicals, food pro-
ducts, and specialty chemicals. In the more advanced 
manufacturing techniques used for micromachin-
ing and nanomachining, batch fabrication typically 
involves some sort of a mask containing a desired 
repeated pattern that is positioned between the tool 
and work-piece. Then, that mask design is transferred 
to the work-piece using, for example, light (as in 
photolithography; Volume II, Chapter 1) or an 
abrasive slurry (as in abrasive jet machining; Volume 
II, Chapter 6). Alternatively, the tool itself contains 
an array of patterns that is transferred to the work-
piece, for example, mechanically, through a slurry (as 
in ultrasonic machining; Volume II, Chapter 6), or 
thermomechanically (as in hot embossing; Volume 
II, Chapter 10). Most nontraditional micromachining 
carried out today, such as IC fabrication, relies on 
batch fabrication; that is, repetitive features are 
simultaneously defined on a work-piece. In the case 
of IC fabrication, an array pattern is photolitho-
graphically defined on a silicon wafer, and many 
wafers are then processed further to fabricate desired 
structures. We present as an example of batch 
fabrication, an array of finished CCD image sensors 
(to use, for example, in a digital camera), produced 
all in parallel on the same Si wafer, as shown in 
Figure 1.3. After production, these sensors need to be 
cut out of the Si wafer.
It is important to recognize that the use of a mask 
severely restricts the machining possibilities in the 
direction perpendicular to the mask. The resulting 
products, when using a mask, are projected shapes 
of the image on the mask only, with limited oppor-
tunities to shape the sidewalls of the work-piece per-
pendicular to the image on the mask. To illustrate 
this, think about precision mechanical machining, 
which is truly 3D since a diamond tool can cut in any 
direction, and contrast this with using a photomask 
in photolithography or a patterned tool in ultrasonic 
machining, where material removal forces work 
only in one direction and the resulting shapes are 
principally 2D. In the latter case, the dimension per-
pendicular to the mask may have differing heights 
(and indeed, we could say that we are dealing with a 
2½D structure), but the shape of the sidewall can be 
modified only in a separate machining step.
Beyond batch manufacturing, the ultimate in 
automation of manufacturing is continuous or web-
based manufacturing, with a web moving from 
supply roll to take-up roll [also called roll-to-roll 
(R2R) manufacturing*], with visions of low-cost 
photovoltaics (PVs), thin-film transistors (TFTs), large-
area organic light-emitting diode (OLED) lighting, 
flexible displays, low-cost sensors, radio frequency 
identification (RFID) tags, etc. (see Figure 1.4). In 
this case, the product is made continuously, small 
or large, on flexible substrates, as shown in Figure 
1.5. The flexible substrates replacing glass or Si must 
possess the desirable optical properties, thermal 
stability, low coefficient of thermal expansion, sur-
face smooth ness, and moisture and solvent resis tance. 
Today, polymer films and stainless steel are the two 
flexible substrates of choice. R2R manufactur ing 
dramati cally increases throughput, with a significant 
reduction of capital and device costs.
Gordon Moore has argued that the only industry 
“remotely comparable” in its rate of growth to the 
semiconductor industry is the printing industry. 
It is worth noting that newspaper printing consti tutes 
a continuous process; here, we promote the idea of 
continuous (beyond batch) miniaturization processes 
that, like a printer connected to a personal computer, 
will print out miniature objects in a continuous 
mode. Many of the manufacturing techniques 
we encountered in Volume II are already or can be 
modified to a roll-to-roll operation. This includes older 
* Not to be confused with “run-to-run” or “run-by-run” control in 
semiconductor manufacturing.
FIGURE 1.3 Charge-coupled detector (CCD) image sensors 
are formed on Si wafers and then cut apart. CCDs have 
replaced film as the image capture medium of preference. 
(Courtesy of IBM.)

[Page 12]
12   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
technologies, such as doctor blade, ink-jet printing, 
laser machining, lamination, punching, drying and 
curing (in roll format ovens), picking and placing, hot-
embossing, and sputtering (with cylindrical targets; 
see Volume II, Figure 7.12), and newer methods, such 
as imprint lithography [nanoimprint lithography 
(NIL) and step-and-flash imprint lithography (SFIL)], 
dip-pen lithography (DPL), etc. Soft lithography 
(patterning with flexible stamps; see Volume II, 
Figure 2.55) constitutes yet another possible means 
of transferring lithography patterns to a web-based 
process. In this case, the soft lithography pattern on 
the rubber stamp might be rolled up around a cylinder 
to ink a substrate continuously.
Processes, such as lithography, that need critical 
alignment and registration are the more challenging 
to incorporate in an R2R manufacturing process. But 
roll-to-roll or in-line equipment is also available for 
lithography. For illustration, in Figure 1.6, we show 
the lithography equipment procured by The Center 
for Advanced Microelectronics Manufacturing at 
Binghamton University in New York (http://camm.
binghamton.edu). Established in 2005, this center 
is meant to spearhead development of next genera-
tion R2R electronics manufacturing capabilities. In 
Figure 1.6a we show a wet stripper/developer from 
Hollmuller-Siegmund that can handle a web of 
a width up to 15 in. The in-line lithography setup 
(Figure 1.6b) is from Azores Corporation and can 
handle webs that are 8 in. wide (expandable to 24 
in.). This g-line machine comes with an accuracy of 
about 4 µm and can process photosensitive material 
at a speed of 230–760 mm/min. Hole-punch patterns 
are used for alignment. Many governments are taking 
notice of this important trend in electronics manu-
facturing. In Korea, for example, the Department of 
Printed Electronics Engineering in the World Class 
University (WCU) program of Sunchon National 
Passive
PE
display
by Aveso
OLED
RFID R2R
RFID
antenna
Flexible solar
cell
by Sharp
TFT by
inkjet/lithography
combo Source: Epson news
Flexible TFT & e-paper
Source: Toppan news
Circuit board
with metal ink
TFT-SRAM
(16 bits)
Source: Epson news
FIGURE 1.4 Examples of printed products on flexible 
substrates. For acronyms such as RFID, OLED, and TFT, 
please refer to the text.
FIGURE 1.5 Roll-to-roll (R2R) manufacturing. Production 
in kilometers and use and sale in centimeters.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.6 In-line lithography equipment. (a) wet strip-
per/developer from Hollmuller-Siegmund (can handle a 
web up to 15 in. wide). (b) in-line lithography setup from 
Azores Corporation can handle webs that are 8 in. wide 
(expandable to 24 in.).

[Page 13]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   13
University has been launched to lead in the fields of 
printed RFID and flexible lighting through Korean 
Government support that started in 2009.
Advances are being made continuously in “ink” 
technologies and printing processes and control; 
organic and printable electronics are expected to be 
a $35 billion industry by 2015 and reach over $300 
billion in 2025, that is, almost twice the size of the 
Si industry today.
In Example 1.1, at the end of this chapter, we intro-
duce a scenario for the continuous manufacture of 
polymer/metal-based biosensors—beyond batch.
Comparison Table
In Table 1.2, the most popular manufacturing tech-
niques in crafting micromachines are compared. 
These tools are used to fabricate microstructures 
either in serial (Se), parallel (Ba for batch), or contin-
uous (C) mode; the techniques can be organized in 
many different other ways, for example on the basis 
of the type of energy involved in the machining or 
as nonlithography-based (i.e., traditional—group 1) 
or lithography-based (i.e., nontraditional—group 2), 
i.e., truly 3D vs. truly 2½D. Table 1.2 is a listing of 
lithographic and nonlithographic miniaturization 
techniques with their respective resolutions, defined 
here as the smallest lateral features that have been 
generated. As a very rough rule of thumb, one might 
say that with dimensions below 100 µm one needs 
to switch from mechanical tooling (group 1) to opti-
cal tooling (group 2) to cut into a material.
Wet bulk micromachining, a very popular MEMS 
technique, had its genesis in the Si-based IC industry, 
but further development required the adoption 
and adaptation of several different processes and 
materials. Si-based wet bulk micromachining 
techniques involve anisotropic etching in the bulk of 
the material, often resulting in stunningly beautiful 
scanning electron microscope micrographs, are one 
of the most visual and “sexy” micromachining tools 
used—the MTV of miniaturization science. But in the 
trend toward miniaturization, almost a law of nature 
ever since the first oil crisis and the IC revolution, 
many other precision machining techniques on 
many different materials have also found commercial 
applications. Wet bulk Si micromachining, the most 
traditional form of Si micromachining (dominated 
by electrical engineers), has found acceptance in 
traditional precision machining circles (dominated 
by mechanical engineers) and vice versa: silicon 
micromachinists are starting to look at precision 
engineering techniques as a way to extend their 
tool kit. The most important characteristic for both 
disciplines is the ever-increasing quest for improved 
accuracies, higher aspect ratios, and reduced cost, and 
practitioners have recognized the complementary 
nature of their respective fields.
Whereas mechanical sensor manufacture is mov-
ing toward more integration of sensing functions 
with electronics, embodied in increased reliance on 
surface micromachining mostly involving the depo-
sition and etching of thin films on top of a Si sub-
strate, which is most compatible with IC fabrication, 
chemical and biosensors are moving away from inte-
gration and toward hybrid thick technology. This 
trend in chemical and biological sensors is caused 
by the need for modularity and the tremendous 
compatibility problems that arise when attempting 
to integrate chemical sensor materials with ICs. 
From Table 1.2, Si micromachining then emerges 
as only one of the many options for precision 
machining. To emphasize the need for microma-
chinists to look beyond Si as the ultimate substrate 
and/or building material, we have presented many 
examples of non-Si micromachinery throughout this 
book. The need to incorporate new materials and 
processes is especially urgent for progress in chemi-
cal sensors and microinstrumentation, which rely 
on non-IC materials and often are relatively large. 
The renewed interest in some of the non-Si-based 
machining methods stems principally from two 
major deficiencies of IC-based machining tech-
niques: the difficulty of creating truly 3D microstruc-
tures and the problem of interfacing microstructures 
with the macroworld. A machining method with a 
range that covers macroscopic- to microscopic-scale 
devices is needed, as often micromachines cannot 
easily be handled. Laser beam machining (LBM), 
electrodischarge machining (EDM), ultrapreci-
sion machining, dry reactive ion etching (DRIE), 
LIGA, and pseudo-LIGA techniques are steps in that 
direction, forming so-called “handshake technolo-
gies,” bridging the micro- and macroworlds. These 

[Page 14]
14   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 1.2 MEMS Miniaturization Methods: Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional)
Machining Method
Material/
Application
Typical Min/Max Size 
Feature
IC 
Compatible?
Tolerance
Important 
Reference on 
Technique
Aspect Ratio 
(Depth/
Width)
Initial Investment 
Cost/Access
Group 1: Traditional Techniques (Not Involving Photolithography-Defined Masks)
Chemical milling (S), 
(Ba)
Almost all metals
From submillimeter to 
a few meters (x, y); 
max thickness (z) ±1 
cm
Yes
Lateral 
tolerance 
0.25–0.5 mm
Harris6 
~1
Low/good
Electrochemical 
machining (S/A), (Ba)
Hard and soft 
metals, turbine 
blades, pistons, 
fuel-injection 
nozzles
Minimum-size devices 
larger than in 
chemical milling 
because of 
contacting need
Fair
Lateral 
tolerance 
<10 µm
(A) 
Romankiw,7,8 
(S) Phillips9 
(S) 100
~$400,000/good
Electrodischarge 
machining (S), (Se)
Hard, brittle, 
conductive 
materials used 
for tools and dies
Minimum holes of 0.3 
mm in 20-mm-thick 
plate
No
Lateral 
tolerance 
5–20 µm
Kalpajian10 
100
High/good: 
equipment with 
numerical control 
is common
Electrodischarge wire 
cutting (S), (Se)
Hard, brittle 
materials; many 
punch-and-die 
applications
Minimum rods 20 µm 
in diameter and 3 
mm long
No
Lateral 
tolerance 
1 µm
Saito11 
>100
High/good: does 
not require 
special electrodes

[Page 15]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   15
Electron beam 
machining (S/A), (Se)
Hard-to-machine 
materials
(S) Most suited for 
large numbers of 
simple holes 
(<0.1 mm)
Fair
(S) ~10% of 
feature size 
(5 µm on a 
50-µm hole)
Taniguchi12
(S) 10 is 
typical but 
100 is 
possible
Very high/fair 
~$100,000 when 
using a modified 
scanning electron 
microscope
Continuous deposition 
(A), (C); e.g., doctor’s 
blade technology, 
tape casting
With all materials 
available in inks, 
e.g., glucose 
sensors
Most suited for 
inexpensive 
disposables, from 100 
µm to a few 
millimeters
No
15 µm
Harper,13 Fiori 
and De 
Portu14 
Low/good
Focused ion-beam on 
a lathe (S/A), (Se)
Very pure IC 
materials
From submicrons to 
millimeters
Yes
(S) 50–100 nm
Vasile et al.5 
High/poor
Hybrid thick film (A), 
(Ba)
Wide variety of 
materials 
available in inks
Minimum feature size 
90 µm
Fair
12 µm
Harper13 
~$30,000/good
Laser beam machining 
(S/A), (Se)
Complex profiles 
in hard materials
(S) Holes from 10 µm 
to 1.5 mm at all 
angles
Fair
1 µm
Helvajian15 
(S) 50
~$50,000 but up to 
~$400,000 for a 
five-axis system/
good
Plasma-beam 
machining (S/A), 
(Se/Ba)
Very-high-
temperature 
materials
(A) Only used for thick 
films >25 µm; (S) for 
very thick films >2.5 
mm
No
(A) 20 µm for 
a 25-µm-thick 
film; (S) 
typical ± 3 
mm but 0.8 
mm is 
possible
Pfender16 
~$600,000/fair
(Continued)

[Page 16]
16   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 1.2 MEMS Miniaturization Methods: Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) (Continued)
Machining Method
Material/
Application
Typical Min/Max Size 
Feature
IC 
Compatible?
Tolerance
Important 
Reference on 
Technique
Aspect Ratio 
(Depth/
Width)
Initial Investment 
Cost/Access
Stereolithography (A), 
(Se)
Polymeric 
photosensitive 
materials
Maximum 10 × 10 × 10 
mm (x, y, z)
Yes
Minimum 
solidification 
5, 5, 3 µm 
(x, y, z)
Ikuta,64 stereo 
lithography17 
$100,000–500,000/
good
Ultraprecision 
mechanical 
machining (S), (Se)
Form-stable 
materials
From submillimeters 
(e.g., 0.2-mm hole) to 
meters
No
1 nm 
Boothroyd and 
Knight18
$400,000/good
Ultrasonic machining 
(S), (Se)
Hard and brittle 
materials
Holes from 50 µm to 
75 mm
No
Lateral 
tolerance 
10 µm
Bellows and 
Kohls19 
2.5 µm for a 
250-µm 
hole
$20,000/good
Microdispensing (A), 
(Se/Ba)
Wide variety of 
materials 
available in inks, 
especially suited 
to biomaterials
Minimum membrane 
volume: nanoliters to 
microliters
Yes
~3% volume
Li et al.20
Medium/poor
Injection molding, hot 
embossing (A), (Ba)
Plastics, ceramics, 
and metals
Minimum 250 µm; 
maximum several 
centimeters
No
±0.13% (e.g., 
±2.6 µm for a 
1.998-mm 
diameter)
Sakai,21 Rak22
>5
Medium/good

[Page 17]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   17
Powder blasting (S), 
(Se)
Ceramics and hard 
materials >40 
HRC
Minimum 50 µm up to 
several millimeters
No
1–2 µm
Belloy et al.23
Medium/poor
Abrasive water jet (S), 
(Se)
Metals, plastics, 
and ceramics
Min 0.8 mm typical, 80 
µm possible
No
±50 µm
Waterjet24
>100
$80,000–200,000/
poor
Machining Method
Material/
Application
Typical Min/Max 
Size Feature
IC 
Compatible?
Tolerance
Important 
Reference on 
Technique
Aspect Ratio 
(Depth/Width)
Shape and 
Height/Depth
Initial 
Investment 
Cost/Access
Group 2: Nontraditional Techniques (Involving Photolithography-Defined Masks)
Photofabrication (S)
Plastic, glass 
(ceramic), 
e.g., fluidic 
elements
Max x, y = 40 × 
40 cm and 
max z = 
0.6 mm
Yes
Lateral 
tolerance 
20 µm
Trotter25
~3 for 
photoplastics; 
~20 for 
photoglass
x, y is free; z up 
to 6 mm
Medium/
poor to 
medium
Photochemical milling 
(S)
Printed circuit 
boards, lead 
frames, 
shadow 
masks
Max 60 × 60 cm, 
max thickness 
<0.5 mm
Yes
13 µm 
(printed 
circuits)
Allen26
~1
x, y is free; z up 
to 0.5 mm
Medium/
good
Wet etching of 
anisotropic materials 
(S)
Crystal Si, 
GaAs, quartz, 
SiC, InP
Max wafer size, 
min feature a 
few microns
Fair
1 µm
Kern27
100
x, y, z shape 
locked in by 
crystallography, 
z height of the 
wafer
Low/good
Dry etching (S)
Most solids
Max wafer size, 
min feature 
submicron
Good
0.1 µm
Manos and 
Flamm28
10
x, y shape free; z 
up to 200 µm
High/good
Poly-Si surface 
micromachining (S/A)
Poly-Si, Al, Ti, 
etc.
Max wafer size, 
min feature 
submicron
Good
0.5 µm
Johnstone and 
Parameswaran29 
x, y free; z 
0.1–10 µm, but 
preferably 1–2 
µm
High/fair
(Continued)

[Page 18]
18   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 1.2 MEMS Miniaturization Methods: Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) (Continued)
Machining Method
Material/
Application
Typical Min/Max 
Size Feature
IC 
Compatible?
Tolerance
Important 
Reference on 
Technique
Aspect Ratio 
(Depth/Width)
Shape and 
Height/Depth
Initial 
Investment 
Cost/Access
Si on insulator (S)
Crystalline Si
Max wafer size, 
min feature 
submicron
Good
0.1 µm
Diem et al.30
x, y free; z 
height 
depending on 
the epilayer, 
e.g., 100 µm
High/poor
LIGA (S/A)
Ni, PMMA, 
Au, ceramic, 
etc.
Max 10 × 10 cm 
or more, min 
0.2 µm
Fair
0.3 µm
Ehrfeld31
>100
x, y free, z up to 
100 µm
High 
(>$35M)/ 
poor
UV-transparent resists 
(S/A)
Polyimide, 
SU-8, 
AZ-4000
Max size equals 
the wafer size 
Good
0.5 µm
Ahn et al.,32 
SOTEC33 
25
x, y free, z up to 
1 mm
High/poor
Molded polysilicon 
HEXSIL (Keller) (S/A)
Poly-Si, Ni, 
etc.
Max several 
millimeters, 
min few 
microns
Good
0.5 µm
Keller and 
Ferrari34
10
x, y free; z up to 
100 µm
High/poor
Erect polysilicon 
(Pister) (S/A)
Poly-Si
Max several 
millimeters, 
min submicron
Good
0.5 µm
Pister35
10
x, y free, z up to 
1 mm
High/poor
Micromolding (A), (Ba)
Ceramics, 
plastics, 
metals
Max wafer size, 
min feature 
several 
microns
No
Bride et al.,36 
Zhao et al.,37 
Sander et al.38 
3–20
x, y free, z up to 
200 µm
Medium/
poor to 
fair
A, additive; Ba, batch; C, continuous; IC, integrated circuit; max, maximum; MEMS, microelectromechanical system; min, minimum; PMMA, poly(methylmethacrylate); S, subtractive; 
Se, serial. LIGA is a German acronym for “Lithographie, Galvanoformung, Abformung,” which in English is (x-ray) lithography, electroplating, and molding. For a more in-depth study 
on manufacturing options, we refer to the literature: Harris,6 Shaw,39 DeVries,40 Slocum,41 and Evans.42 Also visit the Louisiana Tech University’s Institute for Micromanufacturing 
(http://www.latech.edu/ifm).

[Page 19]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   19
handshake technologies should be of importance 
beyond micromachines—for example, in ICs, where 
one is faced with the same dilemma of packaging, 
mounting, and wiring large-scale integrated chips 
(LSIs) and very large-scale integrated chips (VLSIs). 
Several of these new technologies are maskless and 
enable very fast prototyping. The merging of bulk 
micromachining with other new fabrication tools, 
such as surface micromachining and electroplating, 
and the  adaptation of materials such as Ni and poly-
imides have fostered powerful new nontraditional 
precision engineering methods.
Table 1.2 comprises both additive (A) and sub-
tractive (S) techniques. For additive techniques, a 
further comparison of thick-film versus thin-film 
deposition methods is presented in Table 1.3. The 
decision to go with a thin versus thick film has very 
important ramifications and has to be considered 
very deliberately. Resolution and minimum feature 
size for thin films are obviously superior. Also, the 
porosity, roughness, and purity of deposited metals 
are less reproducible with thick films. Finally, the 
geometric accuracy is poorer with thick films. On 
the other hand, the thick-film method displays 
versatility, which is often key in chemical sensor 
manufacture. Silk screening forms an excellent alter-
native when size does not matter but cost, in rela tively 
small production volumes, does. For biomedical 
applications the size limitations, clear from Table 1.3, 
make thick-film sensors more appropriate for in 
vitro applications. For in vivo sensors, where size 
is more crucial, IC-based technologies might be 
more appropriate. Thin-film technology does not 
necessarily involve IC integration of the electronic 
functions. Table 1.4 provides a comparison of the 
economic and technical aspects in implementing 
thin-film technology, IC fabrication, thick film, and 
classic construction for sensors.43 It should be 
mentioned that in sensor fabrication, 60–80% of the 
cost consists of packaging, an aspect not addressed 
in Table 1.4. In comparison with complementary 
metal-oxide-silicon (CMOS)-compatible thin-film 
sensors, the packaging of thick-film sensors usually 
is more straightforward. Since packaging expenses 
overshadow all other costs, this is a decisive criterion. 
In the case of chemical sensors, where the sides of 
the conductive Si substrate might shunt the sensing 
function through contact with the electrolyte, 
encap sulation is especially difficult compared with 
the packaging of an insulating plastic or ceramic 
substrate (see also Chapter 4, this volume, on 
packaging).
TABLE 1.3 Comparison of Thin- versus Thick-Film Technology
Property
Silicon/Thin Film 
Hybrid/Thick Film
In-plane resolution
0.25 µm and better
12 µm
Minimum feature size
0.75 µm and better
90 µm
Temperature range
<125°C
>>125°C
Sensor size
Smaller
Small
Geometric accuracy
Very high
Poor
Deposition methods
Evaporation, sputtering, 
CVD*
Screen printing, stencil 
printing
Patterning methods
Etch through photomask; 
lift-off stencil
Screen photomask, etched 
stencil, machined stencil
Reliability nonencapsulated 
device
Low
High
Electronic compatibility
Good
Moderate
Versatility
Low
Very good
Roughness, purity, and 
porosity of deposited 
materials
Superior
Moderate
Energy consumption
Low 
Moderate
Handling
Difficult
Easy
Approximate capital costs per 
unit
Very large, but very low in 
large volumes 
Low; very low in moderate 
volumes
*CVD, chemical vapor deposition

[Page 20]
20   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Selection criteria for the additive processes 
reviewed in Volume II depend on a variety of con-
siderations, such as the following.
 
1. Limitations imposed by the substrate or the mask 
material: maximum temperature (Tmax),  surface 
morphology, and substrate structure and geometry
 
2. Apparatus requirement and availability
 
3. Limitations imposed by the material to be 
deposited: chemistry, purity, thickness, Tmax, 
morphology, crystal structure, etc.
 
4. Rate of deposition to obtain the desired film 
quality
 
5. Adhesion of deposit to the substrate; necessity 
of adhesion layer or buffer layer
 
6. Total running time, including setup time and 
postcoating processes
 
7. Cost
 
8. Ease of automation
 
9. Safety and ecological considerations
Table 1.5 compares some of the additive processes 
important in microsensors and micromachining. 
This table and the above criteria complement the 
questions in the check-off list presented in Table 
1.11. The latter is meant as a guide toward a more 
intelligent choice of an optimum machining sub-
strate for the micromachining task at hand.
A subset of subtractive machining techniques 
from Table 1.2 is compared in Table 1.6. Here, metal 
removal rates, tolerance, surface finish, damage 
depth, and required power are listed.
The metal removal rate by electrochemical ma -
chining (ECM) and plasma arc machining (PAM) 
is much higher than that of the other machining 
processes. Compared with conventional mechanical 
CNC machining, the metal removal rates by ECM 
and PAM are, respectively, 0.3 and 1.25 times that 
of CNC, whereas others are only a small fraction 
of it. Power requirements for ECM and PAM are 
also comparatively high. The tolerance obtained 
TABLE 1.4 Comparison between Different Sensor Technologies: Economic and Technical Aspects
Classic 
Construction
Thick-Film 
Technology
Thin-Film Technology
IC Technology*
Technology 
substrate
Wires and tubes
Screen printing 
Al2O3, plastic
Evaporation-sputtering 
Al2O3, glass, quartz
IC techniques 
silicon, GaAs
Initial 
investment
Very low
Moderate
High
High
Production line 
cost
>$10,000
>$100,000
>$400,000
>$800,000
Production
Manual 
production
Mass production
Mass production
Mass production
Units per year
1–1,000
1,000–1,000,000
10,000–10,000,000
100,000 and up
Prototype
Cheap
Cheap
Moderate
Expensive
Sensor price
Expensive sensor
Low cost per sensor
Low cost per sensor
Low cost per 
sensor
Use
Multiple use, in 
vitro, in vivo
Disposable, in vitro
Disposable, in vivo
Disposable, in 
vivo
Markets
Research, 
aerospace
Automotive, 
industrial
Industrial, medical
Medical, 
consumer
Dimensions
Large
Moderate
Small
Extreme 
miniaturization
Solidity
Fragile
Robust
Robust
Robust
Reproducibility
Low
Moderate
High
High
Maximum 
temperature
800°C
800°C
1,000°C
150°C (silicon)
Interfacing
External discrete 
devices
Smart sensors, 
surface mount
Smart sensors, surface 
mount
Smart sensors, 
CMOS,† bipolar
*IC, integrated circuit.
†CMOS, complementary metal-oxide-silicon.
Source: From Lambrechts, M., and W. Sansen. 1992. Biosensors: Microelectrical devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics 
Publishing. With permission.43

[Page 21]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   21
TABLE 1.5 Comparison of Additive Processes Important in Microsensors and Micromachining
Species 
Deposit Ion 
Mechanism
Deposit Ion 
Rate
Depositing 
Species
Coverage of 
Complex-
Shaped 
Objects
Coverage 
into Small 
Blind 
Holes
Metal 
Deposit 
Ion
Alloy 
Deposit 
Ion
Refractory 
Compound 
Deposit Ion
Energy of 
Deposi ting 
Species
Bombard-
ment of 
Substrate/
Deposit by 
Inert Ions
Substrate 
Heating by 
External 
Means
Cost
Evaporation
Thermal 
energy
Very high 
(up to 
750,000 
Å/min)
Atoms 
and ions
Poor 
line-of-
sight 
coverage
Poor
Yes
Yes
Yes
Low 
(0.1–0.5 
eV)
No, 
normally
Yes, 
normally
Low
Sputtering
Momentum 
transfer
Low 
except 
for pure 
metals 
(e.g., Cu, 
10,000 Å/
min)
Atoms 
and ions
Good, but 
non-
uniform 
thickness 
distribution
Poor
Yes
Yes
Yes
Can be 
high 
(1–100 
eV)
Depends on 
geometry
Not 
generally
High
CVD
Chemical 
reaction
Moderate 
(200–
2500 Å/
min)
Atoms
Good
Limited
Yes
Yes
Yes
High in 
plasma-
enhanced 
CVD 
(PECVD)
Possible
Yes
High
Electrodeposition
Precipita-
tion of 
redox 
species
Low to 
high
Ions
Good
Limited
Yes, 
limited
Limited
Limited
Can be 
high
No
No
Low
Thermal spraying
Solidifica-
tion of 
molten 
droplets
Very high
Droplets
No
Very 
limited
Yes
Yes
Yes
Can be 
high
Yes
No, 
normally
Very 
high
CVD, chemical vapor deposition.

[Page 22]
22   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
by various processes except PAM is within the 
range of CNC machining, which means satisfactory 
dimensional accuracy can be maintained. Satisfactory 
surface finishes are obtained by all processes except 
PAM. Depth of surface damage is very small for 
abrasive jet machining (AJM), electrochemical 
machining (ECM), and chemical machining (CHM) 
processes, whereas it is very high in the case of 
electrodischarge machining (EDM), electron beam 
machining (EBM), PAM, and the like. [As we saw 
in Volume II, these techniques give rise to a heat-
affected zone (HAZ).] For this reason, ECM can be 
employed for making dies and punches. AJM may 
be suitably employed for machining super alloys 
and refractory material; ECM has good applicability 
for machining steels and super alloys; CHM is very 
useful for aluminum and steel; EDM may well be 
adopted for machining steels, super alloys, titanium, 
and refractory material; and PAM can be suitably 
employed for machining aluminum, steels, and super 
alloys. Capital cost for ECM is very high compared 
with conventional CNC machining, whereas capital 
costs for AJM are PAM are comparatively low. EDM 
has a higher tooling cost than other machining 
processes. Power consumption cost is very low for 
PAM and laser beam machining (LBM) processes, 
whereas it is greater in case of ECM. Metal removal 
efficiency is higher for EBM and LBM than for other 
processes. Tool wear is very low for ECM, CHM, 
EBM, LBM, and PAM, whereas it is high for electrical 
discharge machining.
Given the tremendous variety of micromachin-
ing tools available, as evident from Tables 1.2–1.6, 
a truly multidisciplinary engineering education will 
be required to design miniature systems with the 
most appropriate building philosophy.
Design from the Package Inward
When approaching the development of a microde-
vice, we prefer using the terminology miniaturiza-
tion rather than MEMS, as the latter term is still too 
loaded with the notion that Si technology represents 
the only solution. The choice of processes for manu-
facturing a 3D microdevice can best be made after 
studying the detailed requirements of the appli-
cation. Since the package serves as the interface 
between the microstructure and the macroworld, 
and since it is the major contributor to cost and 
size, one should start the design with the package 
and work toward the best machining process for the 
micromachine inside. The package is often made 
with a traditional machining method such as turn-
ing and grinding or possibly with ultrasonic or wire 
electrodischarge machining.
For the micromachine inside the package, there 
may be many machining options, as both batch IC 
and traditional serial production techniques, per-
haps in combination with micromolding, must be 
considered. Several new, batch Si micromachin-
ing techniques derived from the IC industry are 
TABLE 1.6 Machining Characteristics of Different Processes 
MRR (mm3/min)
Tolerance 
Maintained 
(µm)
Surface 
Finish 
Required 
(µm)
Surface 
Damage 
Depth (µm)
Power 
Required for 
Machining 
(W)
USM
300
7.5
0.2–0.5
25
2,400
AJM
0.8
50
0.5–1.22
2.5
250
ECM
15,000
50
0.1–2.5
5
100,000
CHM
15
50
1.5–2.5
5
N/A
EDM
800
15
0.2–1.2
125
2,700
EBM
1.6
25
0.5–2.5
250
150–2,000
LBM
0.1
25
0.5–1.2
125
2–200
PAM
75,000
125
Rough
500
50,000
CNC
50,000
50
0.5–5
25
3,000
AJM, abrasive jet machining; CHM, chemical machining; CNC, computer numerical control machining; EBM, 
electron beam machining; ECM, electrochemical machining; EDM, electrodischarge machining; LBM, laser 
beam machining; MRR, metal removal rate; PAM, plasma arc machining; USM, ultrasonic machining.
Source: Based on http://www.cemr.wvu.edu.

[Page 23]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   23
gaining acceptance, but serial, precision machining 
techniques with specialized tools (e.g., ultrasonic 
machining or laser beam machining) are often the 
only commercially available methods to make intri-
cate, small, 3D microcomponents.
Decision Tree for the Optimized 
Micromanufacturing Option
Introduction
In this section we develop a checklist on how to 
arrive at an optimum miniaturization strategy for 
a new MEMS/NEMS product, choosing between 
MEMS manufacturing options: from nonlitho-
graphy-based to lithography-based, as captured 
in Table 1.2. To become a proficient MEMS/NEMS 
engineer one needs to first understand the appli-
cation and market for the product very well. These 
aspects should be apparent from a very detailed 
specification list and discussions with the user/
client. Once an appropriate sensor/actuator principle 
for the MEMS/NEMS has been chosen, on the 
basis of the specifications, through brainstorming 
sessions with the user and/or client and by making 
preliminary designs, one needs to develop a clear 
understanding on how this sensor/actuator principle 
scales into the microdomain. Then one must choose 
the optimum manufacturing approach and the 
optimized materials, including substrate material, 
for the most cost-effective practical implementation. 
These choices are tested through a new design phase 
and evaluation of critical process steps. A major 
challenge in this regard often concerns partitioning, 
i.e., how far to push the integration of electronics 
with the sensing function (hybrid vs. monolithic)? 
If  the MEMS-based product compromises both  a 
dispos able and a fixed instrument the question 
becomes, what should be included with the MEMS 
dispos able and what should be included in the fixed 
instrument? With partitioning decisions made,  a 
computer-aided design (CAD) is followed by research 
proto typing, engineering prototyping, and finally 
α and β products for the user/client to test. With a 
satisfied customer, manufacturing of a new MEMS 
product may begin.
Throughout the rest of this chapter, we illustrate 
the use of our proposed decision tree with the search 
for a sensor to measure glucose in a drop of blood. 
Glucose sensing represents the single largest biosen-
sor market, and a significant amount of all R&D in 
biosensors worldwide is geared toward improving 
this technology. Glucose self-testing by diabetics 
is one of the fastest-growing segments of the world 
diagnostics market. The World Health Organization 
estimates a worldwide diabetic population of more 
than 200 million (1–2% of the world population). 
Diabetes is the fifth leading cause of death in the 
United States, and 30% of our children will be diag-
nosed with diabetes in the future. The US healthcare 
costs related to diabetes are $132 billion per year. The 
specifications for a glucose self-test meter with dis-
posable sensor include very low cost disposable (<15 
cents), in vitro use, millions of devices manufactured 
per month, size of active area on the sensor of a few 
millimeters square (dictated by the size of the drop of 
blood), linear response with glucose concentration, 
and a simple handheld measuring device. Examples 
of glucose sensors/meters for diabetic care are shown 
in Figure 1.7. Our analysis will clarify why the current 
glucose sensors are constructed the way they are.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.7 Blood glucose monitor. (a) Glucometer from Roche (Accu-Chek). (b) Other examples of blood glucose meters, 
1993–2005.

[Page 24]
24   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Specifications
Applied miniaturization starts with a thorough 
understanding of the sensor or microsystem speci-
fication list, interviews with client/users, under-
standing of the application environment, and, 
equally important, a firm market appreciation. In 
choosing a sensor/actuator principle for a miniatur-
ization application, the various possible sensing/
actuating principles (see Table 8.2) need to be chal-
lenged with this detailed specification list. During 
discussions of the specifications required for mea-
suring a certain measurand, jargon confusion is 
common; making face-to-face meetings with cli-
ents/user is mandatory. A specification list should 
include static and dynamic performance character-
istics. Static specifications for a biomedical product 
with both a reader and a disposable might include 
the following.
 
◾Package/interface with the world. 
 
◾Esthetics/design of package. 
 
◾Sensitivity. Change in signal (response) per 
change in concentration (or mass). 
 
◾Lower limit of detection (LOD). The minimum 
concentration (mass) that can be detected at a 
given confidence level. The detection limit is 
affected by the level of noise in the data. One 
can determine the level of noise by repetitively 
measuring the signal of a blank. 
 
◾Resolution. The smallest increment of change 
in the measured value that can be determined 
from the instrument’s readout scale; e.g., for a 
pH electrode the accuracy is ±0.2 pH and the 
resolution is 0.1 pH.
 
◾Selectivity/specificity. The ability to accurately 
quantify one species or component in the pres-
ence of variable amounts of other components. It 
has a great effect on the accuracy of the method. 
 
◾Stability (long-term and short-term).
 
◾Response time. 
 
◾Ambient conditions (e.g., temperature, under 
or above water, pressure).
 
◾Sample size. 
 
◾Operating life. 
 
◾Drift. Gradual change in signal that is not due 
to change in analyte content.
 
◾Shelf life.
 
◾Cost, size, weight of reader. 
 
◾Cost, size, weight of disposable. 
 
◾Number of devices needed. 
 
◾Accuracy. 
 
◾Precision. 
 
◾Output format/display. 
 
◾Operating voltage, current, power.
 
◾Quality.
 
◾Reliability, i.e., mean time between failures. 
 
◾Hysteresis. 
 
◾Threshold.
 
◾Nonlinearity. 
Typical dynamic specifications for such a biomedi-
cal product are as follows:
 
◾Dynamic error response.
 
◾Dynamic range. Typical sensor response reaches 
saturation because of either saturation of bind-
ing sites or instrument factors. 
 
◾Hysteresis.
 
◾Instability and drift.
 
◾Noise.
Given the very fragmented nature of the microsystems 
business, it is impossible to present a generic specifi-
cation list, as a good list must also detail all applica-
tion-related intricacies. As an example, consider a pH 
sensor for sensing pH in the secondary cooling flow 
loop of a nuclear reactor. The presence of radiation 
and water at high temperature and pressure will sig-
nificantly reduce the potential sensor principles one 
may consider. The example also clarifies why a speci-
fication list can hardly ever be detailed enough.
The specifications for our example disposable glu-
cose sensor and glucose meter are as follows.
 
◾Package/interface. Handheld device with a slot 
that accepts disposable glucose sensor strips. 
 
◾Esthetics/design. Esthetics are more and more 
important: good design, easy to use. Letters 
must be large. Many diabetics are elderly people 
and have poor eyesight.
 
◾Sensitivity. Sensitivity is about 100 nA/M.
 
◾Lower LOD. Lowest measurable level should be 
0.06 mM glucose or less.
 
◾Dynamic range. Glucose assay range is from 1.1 
to 33.3 mmol/L.

[Page 25]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   25
 
◾Selectivity/specificity. Glucose test results are 
automatically adjusted for common interfering 
medications, vitamins, and endogenous sub-
stances, including up to 100 µg of acetamin-
ophen, 20 mg/dL uric acid, 3 mg/dL ascorbic 
acid, 500 mg/dL cholesterol, and 3000 mg/dL 
triglycerides.
 
◾Response time. The time it takes to read a 
glucose sensor may range from 5 to 60 sec-
onds (modern meters are typically below 
15 seconds).
 
◾Ambient conditions. Sensor operating temper-
ature range = 18–30°C.
 
◾Sample size. Sample sizes vary from 30 to 
0.3 µL.
 
◾Operating life. Nonreplaceable battery life = 
4000 tests.
 
◾Shelf life. Six months.
 
◾Cost, size, weight of reader. The glucose 
reader should be approximately the size of 
the palm of the hand, and it should be battery 
powered.
 
◾Cost, size, weight of disposable. Very low cost 
(less than 15 cents). Strip is a few centimeters 
square in size, and the active spot is a few mil-
limeters square. A consumable sensor element 
containing chemicals, which react with glucose 
in the drop of blood, is used for each measure-
ment. Since sensors may vary from batch to 
batch, a provision might be required for the 
user to enter in a code that may be found on 
the batch of sensors. By entering the code into 
the glucose meter, the meter will be calibrated 
to that batch of glucose sensors.
 
◾Number of devices needed. Each strip can be 
used only once and is then discarded. Millions 
of glucose sensor strips will be manufactured 
per month.
 
◾Accuracy. The minimum acceptable accuracy 
for results produced by a glucose monitoring 
system shall be as follows: 95% of the individ-
ual glucose results shall fall within ±15 mg/dL 
(±0.83 mmol/L) of the results of the manufactur-
er’s measurement procedure at glucose concen-
trations less than 75 mg/dL (4.2 mmol/L) and 
within ±20% at glucose concentrations greater 
than or equal to 75 mg/dL (4.2 mmol/L).
 
◾Precision. Determined as a coefficient of vari-
ation on replicate tests on fresh blood in the 
3.5–6% range. 
 
◾Output format/display. The glucose value in 
mg/dL or mmol/L displayed in a window. The 
preferred measurement unit varies by country. 
In the United States, mg/dL is preferred, and 
mmol/L is preferred in Canada and Europe. To 
convert mmol/L of glucose to mg/dL, multiply 
by 18.
 
◾Reliability. Does not apply for glucose sensor: 
one-time use only.
 
◾Hysteresis. Does not apply for glucose sensor: 
one-time use only.
 
◾Nonlinearity. Linear glucose sensor response. 
The specifications for a glucose meter listed above 
suggest a very low cost disposable (<15 cents) with 
an active area of a few millimeters square (dictated 
by the size of the drop of blood). These two data 
points alone preclude the use of Si technology, as 
this would represent a too-expensive solution. Since 
we desire a small, simple, and inexpensive measure-
ment device, and a linear response to the glucose 
in blood, an amperometric approach stands out as 
the most attractive sensing option (see Volume I, 
Chapter 7). An amperometric sensing approach is 
very simple and inexpensive—one pair of thin-film 
metal electrodes on an insulating substrate—and 
the method produces a signal linear in glucose con-
centration. See, for example, the MediSense/Abbott 
sensor, the Precision QID, in Volume I, Figure 7.80. 
The linear response makes it more sensitive than 
a potentiometric device that features a log depen-
dency of the voltage signal on concentration. As we 
learned in Volume I, Chapter 7, an optical approach 
tends to be more expensive than an electrochemical 
approach (see Volume I, Table 7.21).
Having established a sensing mechanism, we now 
need to know how the chosen effect (amperometry) 
scales into the microdomain.
Scaling Characteristics of Micromechanisms
To make the right choice from the different available 
sensing/actuating principles, it is also important to 
know how the phenomena scale in the microdomain. 

[Page 26]
26   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Scaling effects are explored in detail in Chapter 7, 
this volume, and some intuitive guidance (rules of 
thumb) is provided in Table 1.7.
Scaling understanding is crucial early on when 
deciding on a sensing/transduction principle. For 
example, both absorption and amperometric detec-
tion approaches scale poorly compared with a lumi-
nescent or a potentiometric sensing approach.
We apply these scaling rules now to the glucose 
sensor example. From the above, we appreciate that 
an amperometric device scales more poorly than a 
potentiometric device (the smaller an amperometric 
device, the smaller the current, while the signal for 
a potentiometric device is scaling invariant), but an 
in vitro glucose sensor may be relatively large, and 
sensitivity is more important in this case. A potentio-
metric device would be as inexpensive as our chosen 
amperometric approach, but its sensitivity is not as 
good. Moreover, we saw in Volume I, Chapter 7, that 
by making an array of electrodes, the signal to noise 
ratio of a microamperometric glucose sensor may be 
enhanced because of increased mass-transport at the 
electrode edges. So we stick with the amperometric 
sensor as our choice for the proposed glucose meter. 
Partitioning
Introduction
A major challenge in the manufacture of MEMS and 
NEMS revolves around correct partitioning, that 
is, how far to push integration of electronics with 
the MEMS or NEMS sensing function (hybrid vs. 
monolithic). What do we include with the MEMS 
disposable, and what can we put into the fixed 
reader instrument? Onboard or offboard fluidics? 
Battery or mains power? We first compare hybrid 
versus monolithic approaches and then illustrate 
the challenges of partitioning a MEMS instrument 
by looking at an example from the burgeoning field 
of microfluidics. Partitioning of electronics and 
instrument components obviously affects packag-
ing needs, and we will come back to this point in 
Chapter 4, this volume, on packaging. 
Monolithic versus Hybrid MEMS
Hybrid integration in the IC industry means com-
bining thin-film ICs with thick-film technology. 
Viewed from the Si MEMS sensor angle, a hybrid 
sensor keeps the electronics separate from the sen-
sor. The hybrid might then consist of two pieces of 
Si on the same substrate connected by a short wire 
bridge, or it might be a Si sensor mounted in a header 
TABLE 1.7 Some Important Effects of Scaling on 
Design of Miniaturized Devices
 1. Scaling of forces: weak forces are preferred in the 
microdomain. Electrostatic forces [with a quadratic 
dependency on dimension (12)] under certain 
conditions outperform magnetic torque [with a 
cubic dependency on dimension (13)] since they 
become relatively stronger in small devices.
 2. Increasing strength of materials in the microdomain. 
Single-crystal whiskers may be more than 1000 times 
stronger than the bulk material.
 3. The dominance of surface effects in the microworld: 
for example, because of an increase in S/V (surface-
to-volume ratio), better heat dissipation results 
(thermal isolation is difficult and cooling is excellent) 
and frictional forces increase.
 4. Decrease of manufacturing accuracy of 
micromachines (see Volume II, Figure 6.3).
 5. The need for error-insensitive design (fewer parts, 
flexible materials) and the use of nature as a guide 
in design philosophy for very small devices.
 6. Amperometric and absorption measurements scale 
poorly into the microdomain compared with 
potentiometric and chemiluminescence (see Volume 
I, Chapter 7, and Chapter 7, this volume, for details). 
Our proposed glucose sensor is amperometric, so we 
need to look in some more detail into whether this 
averse scaling should influence our choice.
 7. Mechanical, thermal, and electromagnetic response 
time constants and many other time constants shrink 
with advanced miniaturization, generally resulting in 
shorter response times. Microsystems, with their 
small inertial mass, are faster, leading to higher 
speed or frequency, but higher frequency of a cyclic 
process generally leads to larger losses and 
consequently to lower efficiency.
 8. Power consumption is often dramatically reduced, 
especially if good thermal isolation is possible for 
elements with small heat capacity.
 9. Energy sources scale very poorly (13), making 
onboard energy sources (e.g., batteries and fuel 
cells) less attractive for powering micromachines 
than radiating in energy (e.g., solar or laser light 
with micromachined photovoltaic converters or 
microwaves if extremely small receivers and 
converters were available).
10. Most actuators, which rely on power for inducing a 
movement, also scale poorly with reducing size, and 
it is often better to consider a “macroactuator,” 
which can produce a micromotion, than a 
micromachined actuator with too small of a stroke.

[Page 27]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   27
plugged into an electronics board. In a monolithic 
MEMS approach, on the other hand, electronics and 
MEMS elements are cofabricated within one single 
(lengthy!) sequential Si process. Each step in such 
a sequence has a nonzero failure probability and, 
since probabilities multiply fast, the yield may be 
dramatically reduced for long process sequences. In 
this light, there are some positive aspects to a hybrid 
MEMS approach. In the latter, MEMS and electronics 
are fabricated in separate high-yield processes and 
joined within a common package/substrate, improv-
ing the overall yield. Microassembly in hybrid man-
ufacture enables the mixture of components from 
separate optimal processes, including nonstandard 
processes and materials that are incompatible. For 
example, many optoelectronics require GaAs sub-
strates that are incompatible with standard Si elec-
tronics (see also under microassembly in Chapter 4, 
this volume). In addition, in hybrid MEMS, all com-
ponents needed for a complete MEMS function can 
be accommodated. Somewhat unexpectedly, parasit-
ics are sometimes lower in a hybrid than in an inte-
grated approach. The device components in a hybrid 
remain serviceable and, because the sensor pack-
age determines the final size, hybrids often are not 
much larger than their Si integrated counterparts. 
Hybrids usually are simpler to design and can be 
produced more economically in smaller- production 
volume runs. For chemical sensors and biosen-
sors, they often represent the most viable option 
to implement micromachining technology. Prices 
for Si mechanical sensors given in market reports 
mostly refer to hybrid devices with the Si sensor 
mounted in a header and the signal conditioning 
kept on separate chips. As an example, Figure 1.8 
represents an accelerometer built using a 3-inch Si 
wafer and involves a fusion bonding process to pro-
duce a proof mass, spring, and fixed capacitor plate. 
The interface circuits are designed to function with 
different sensors. The specific sensor configuration 
and calibration data are written into an EEPROM. 
It is a ±2-g device with 2-mg resolution at 60 Hz. 
These accelerometers are used for aerospace naviga-
tion, in navigation in small commercial airplanes, 
and in helicopters. 
From the precision engineering angle, a hybrid 
device is one in which parts produced by different 
technologies are joined and assembled. In the elec-
tronics industry thick film is often synonymous 
with hybrid manufacturing and thin film with front-
end IC manufacturing. For more details on choos-
ing between thin- and thick-film processes, consult 
Tables 1.3 and 1.4 above.
For the proposed glucose meter, we will have all 
the electronics in the reader rather than in the dis-
posable. It makes no sense to throw the electronics 
away with each used glucose sensor. Moreover, the 
glucose sensor will be constructed on an inexpensive 
nonsilicon substrate.
Many chemical sensors come with a pump and 
some fluidics, say for sample collection, calibration, 
rinsing, etc. In what follows, we decide what pump-
ing mechanism to employ and how to partition the 
fluidics between sensor disposable and permanent 
instrument.
Partitioning in a Microfluidic Instrument
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 6, microfluidic 
systems comprising nozzles, pumps, channels, 
reservoirs, columns, mixers, oscillators, diodes, 
amplifiers, and valves can be used for a variety of 
applications, including separation chemistry, drug 
dispensation, ink-jet printing, and general trans-
port of liquids, gases, and liquid/gas mixtures. The 
advantages of these devices include lower fabrica-
tion costs, enhancement of analytical performance, 
lower power budget, and lower consumption of 
chemicals than traditional pumping and spray-
ing systems. Ultimately, these developments will 
FIGURE 1.8 Commercially available Si accelerometer 
based on hybrid technology. CSEM 6100 accelerometer 
with interface circuitry in a T08 package. (From CSEM.)

[Page 28]
28   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
revolutionize applications where precise control of 
fluid flow is a necessity.
Generic technical challenges in making a micro-
fluidic instrument—for a biotechnology application 
for example—include the partitioning of the various 
instrument functions such as power supply, poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR) for DNA sample ampli-
fication, mechanism for getting the sample into and 
out of the instrument, providing fresh viable reagents, 
and detection. Depending on the specific biotechnol-
ogy application (say, clinical diagnostics or high-
throughput drug screening), the electronics, the 
power for the propulsion mech anism, heaters (e.g., 
for PCR), etc., may be integrated with a disposable 
cassette holding the disposables or within the fixed 
instrument. For diagnostics, both the disposable and 
the reader instrument should be inexpensive; the 
disposable should thus involve as little complexity 
as possible—perhaps only reagents, plastic substrate, 
and fluidic conduits. The reader instrumentation 
should be inexpensive, small (perhaps hand-held), 
and very user friendly. For high-throughput screen-
ing, much more sophisticated fluid handling is typi-
cally incorporated into a tabletop, expensive research 
instrument. The disposable in the latter does not 
need to contain sealed fluids or dry stored chemicals, 
often making it less sophisticated than disposables 
in diagnostic application. In one extreme, one might 
envision a totally integrated option such as the micro-
total analysis system44 illustrated schematically in 
Figure 1.9a.45 More realistically, one might look at a 
hybrid construct, as sketched in Figure 1.9b. For most 
Light source
Chip ﬁxation
Carrier
(b)
(a)
Sample
Inlet
Valve
Reactor
Separator
Waste
Pyrex
Silicon
Glass-bonded Si ground plate containing
ﬂuid channels
Detector
Pump
Outlet
Glass
ﬁber
Filter
Reader
Power
Propulsion
Heater
Detection
Electronics
Disposable
cassette
Inlet
Reagents
Fluidics
(reservoirs,
channels, and
waste)
FIGURE 1.9 Partitioning of functions between instrument and a disposable. (a) Configuration for a micro-total analysis 
system (µTAS). (Based on Bergveld, P. 1995. In Micro total analysis systems, eds. A. van den Berg and P. Bergveld, 1–4. 
Twente, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. With permission.45) (b) Generic hybrid microinstrument, with inlet, 
valves, fluid propulsion, detection, waste, and thermal control. Various options exist for partitioning between cassette 
and reader.

[Page 29]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   29
diagnostic microinstruments, it indeed makes more 
sense to envision a disposable cassette incorporating 
the specific reagents needed for a certain test and a 
separate reader instrument. In a diagnostic applica-
tion, a major challenge is how to store wet or dry 
chemicals in sealed reservoirs within the disposable 
package, making a microfluidic diagnostic instru-
ment actually more challenging to develop than a 
high-throughput drug screening station.
Our disposable glucose sensor will only have a 
substrate, electrodes, a chemical cocktail and per-
haps a very simple fluidic mechanism to make blood 
collection on the sensor surface easier. In the context 
of glucose sensing we will now briefly refer to sys-
tems that employ pumps to deliver insulin depend-
ing on the glucose sensor reading.
Fluid Propulsion Methods 
and MEMS Integration 
Introduction
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 6, there are various 
technologies for moving small quantities of fluids or 
suspended particles from reservoirs to mixing and 
reaction sites, to detectors, and eventually to waste 
or to a subsequent instrument. Methods to accom-
plish this include syringe and peristaltic pumps, 
electrochemical bubble generation, acoustics, mag-
netics, direct current (DC) and alternating current 
(AC) electrokinetics, and centrifuge. In Table 1.8 we 
compare some promising fluid propulsion means.46 
Only the simplest and least expensive pumping 
schemes should be integrated within the disposable 
itself.
Mechanical Pumps
From Volume I, Chapter 6, we remember that the 
pressure that mechanical pumps have to generate to 
propel fluids through capillaries will be higher the 
narrower the conduit (see Volume I, Equation 6.54). 
Piezoelectric (acoustic), electro-osmotic (DC elec-
trokinetic), electrowetting (DC electrokinetic), and 
electrohydrodynamic pumping (AC elect rokinetic) 
all scale more favorably in the microdomain and 
lend themselves better to pumping in MEMS devices. 
Despite this promise, almost all biotechnology 
equipment today is based on traditional external 
syringe or peristaltic pumps. Although integrated 
micromachined pumps based on two “one-way” 
valves may achieve a precise flow control on the 
order of 1 µl/min with fast response, high sensitiv-
ity, and negligible dead volume, these pumps require 
complicated fabrication processes, generate only 
modest flow rates and low pressures, and consume 
a large amount of chip area and considerable power. 
As a consequence of the low pumping pressure, they 
often become useless when device dimensions are 
reduced and resistance to fluid flow and required 
driving pressure increase. An example of a Si micro-
machined pump from Animas-Debiotech is shown 
in Figures 1.10 and 1.11. This belt-worn drug delivery 
pump features a piezoelectric design pioneered at the 
TABLE 1.8 Comparison of Microfluidics Propulsion Techniques
Fluid Propulsion Mechanism
Property
Centrifuge (see 
Figure 1.14 and 
Volume I, Figure 6.89)
Pressure (e.g., 
blister pouch)
Acoustic
Electro-osmosis
Electrowetting
Valving solved
Yes, for liquids
Yes, for liquids 
and vapor
No
Yes, for liquids 
Yes, for liquids
Maturity
Research and 
development
Products
Research
Products
Research
Propulsion 
force 
influenced by
Density and viscosity
Generic
Generic
pH, ionic strength
pH, ionic 
strength
Power source
Rotary motor
Mechanical 
roller (see 
Figure 1.12b)
5–40 V (peak to 
peak)
10 kV
1–10 kV
Materials
Plastics
Plastics
Piezoelectrics
Glass, plastics
Glass
Flow rate
From less than 1 nL to 
greater than 100 µl/s
20–500 µl/s
20 µl/s
0.001–1 µl/s
0.3 µl/s

[Page 30]
30   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
University of Twente, and a generic example of this 
MEMS pump is shown in Figure 1.11a.47 A close-up 
of the actual Animas-Debiotech MEMS pump is 
shown in Figure 1.11b. The size of most Si microma-
chined pumps is quite large, and one wonders why 
Si was chosen as a substrate (http://www.diabetes-
net.com/diabetes_technology/insulinpumps_debio-
tech.php). Reasonably, plastic molding technology 
is now being explored as a viable solution.48,49 
The advantages of using larger peristaltic pump-
ing today are that it relies on well-developed and 
commercially available components, that a wide 
range of flow rates is attainable, and that the pump-
ing mechanism is not easily fouled.
Another example of a mechanical pump is 
embodied in the Johnson & Johnson blister pouch 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test shown 
in Figure 1.12.50 Automated sample preparation 
and amplification coupled with detection systems 
would revolutionize the medical diagnostic appli-
cation of DNA amplification with PCR. An elegant 
example of progress in this direction comes from 
Johnson & Johnson (see also US patent 5422271).50 
This company’s simple fluidic structure for the detec-
tion of the HIV is shown in Figure 1.12. The device was 
invented at Kodak and bought by Johnson & Johnson 
in 1994. The disposable pouch-based PCR instrument 
features a total amplification time of 43 min and a 
sensitivity and specificity adequate for the detection 
of HIV. An unknown sample and the PCR cocktail are 
injected into the amplification compartment through 
a fill port in the plastic pouch. Eight pouches are 
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 1.10 Micropump technology. (a) Animas-Debiotech’s micropump is a Si micromachined piezopump meant to be a 
belt-worn drug delivery mechanism. The Oncojet is disposable and may deliver a drug at a rate of 10–50 mL/day. (b) The 
glass-Si sandwich pump is about 2 × 1 cm in size. (Courtesy of Ary Saaman, Animas-Debiotech.) 
(a) 
(b) 
Valve
Inlet
Outlet
Pump
chamber
Pump diaphragm
with PZT disk
FIGURE 1.11 (a) Generic design of a piezopump.47 (b) The Animas-Debiotech Si-based microelectromechanical system 
micropump (http://www.diabetesnet.com/diabetes_technology/insulinpumps_debiotech.php).

[Page 31]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   31
aligned on a fixed instrument with the amplification 
compartments on the upper amplification heaters, 
and the detector areas on the lower detection heat-
ers. Upon completion of the amplification, the next 
analysis step is accomplished by an automatic roller 
that forces detection chemistry fluids and amplified 
samples from compartments through channels lead-
ing to a temperature- controlled detection area. The 
plastic channels in the pouch contain small nips that 
close off the channel and break open upon pressur-
ization with a roller system, similar to the one used 
in credit card image transfer. These nips in the plastic 
form very inexpensive, single-use, normally closed 
valves. In the detection zone, biotinylated PCR prod-
ucts are captured via hybridization to probes immo-
bilized on latex particles. Multiple probe sites can be 
accommodated in the detection areas. Streptavidin-
horseradish peroxidase is mixed with those probes 
to allow for binding between the biotinylated probes 
and the streptavidin- horseradish peroxidase. Any 
material left unbound is then removed with the sub-
sequent wash solution. In the presence of peroxidase, 
leuco dye is oxidized to a visible blue color, indicat-
ing a positive hybridization event. Replacing the 
relatively thick walls of traditional, low surface-to-
volume ratio, polypropylene reaction tubes with the 
pouch “blisters,” with their relatively high surface-to-
volume ratio and very thin walls (100 µm), which are 
readily conformable to the shape of the instrument 
heaters, permits rapid heating and cooling.
The above PCR-based instrument is an example of 
optimum partitioning between disposable and fixed 
instrument for use in a medical diagnostic applica-
tion. For this purpose, sample receptacle, reagents, 
and all fluidics, such as mixing, valving, and waste 
area, are integrated in an inexpensive disposable. 
Power supply, heaters, coolers, readout electronics, 
etc., are kept separate in an inexpensive disposable 
plastic pouch. This inexpensive and ingenious way 
to couple PCR and detection is difficult for a Si-based 
micromachining approach to compete with. Despite 
its promise, this HIV test was taken off the market, 
presumably because of manufacturing problems.
A disadvantage of the pouch approach is that it is 
rather difficult to further miniaturize because it is a 
pressure-driven system. The disposable cartridge in 
the i-STAT (now Abbott) blood analyzer device illus-
trated in Figure 10.42b of this volume also contains 
a blister pouch containing calibrant solution. 
The proposed glucose meter of our example does 
not come with an insulin delivery pump, but, in 
addition to the Animas-Debiotech pump (Figures 
1.10 and 1.11), many such insulin delivery pumps 
are commercially available. Some glucose meters 
communicate wirelessly to the pump, and some 
pumps include the meter. 
Acoustic Streaming
Acoustic streaming is a constant (DC) fluid motion 
induced by an oscillating sound field at a solid-
fluid boundary (see Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluid-
ics). Transducers do not need to be integrated with 
the disposable; the cassette with capillary flow 
channels can simply be laid on top of the acoustic 
pump network in the reader instrument. Acoustic 
streaming is also well suited for mixing reagents.51 
The method is considerably more complex to imple-
ment than electro-osmosis (see below), but the 
insensitivity of acoustic streaming to the chemi-
cal nature of the fluids inside the fluidic channels 
Ampliﬁcation
heaters
Detection
heaters
Blisters
PCR
Rollers
Wash
Detection area
Waste
Dye precursor
and peroxide
Streptavidin-
horseradish
peroxidase
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.12 Johnson & Johnson blister pouch HIV test (a) and tabletop instrument with rollers, amplification, and 
detection heaters (b). See also reference 50 and US patent 5422271.

[Page 32]
32   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
and its ability to mix fluids very effectively make 
it a potentially viable approach. A typical flow rate 
measured for water in a small metal pipe lying on 
a piezoelectric plate is 0.02 mL/s at 40 V, peak to 
peak.52 Today acoustic stream ing as a propulsion 
mechanism remains in the research stage. 
Electro-osmosis and Iontophoresis
Electro-osmosis is capable of delivering an appre-
ciable DC electrokinetic flow rate in a capi llary, does 
not involve any moving parts, and is easily imple-
mented (see Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics). All 
that is needed is a metal electrode in some type of 
a reservoir at each end of the flow channel. Typical 
electro-osmotic flow velocities are on the order of 1 
mm/s, with a 1200 V/cm applied electric field. For 
example, Jorgenson reported electro-osmotic flows 
of 1.7 mm/s.53 This is fast enough for most analytical 
purposes. Some disadvantages of electro-osmosis are 
the required high voltage (1–30 kV power supply) and 
direct electrical-to-fluid contact with resulting sensi-
tivity of flow rate to the charge of the capillary wall 
and to the ionic strength and pH of the solution. It is 
consequently more difficult to make it into a generic 
propu lsion method. For example, liquids with high 
ionic strength cause excessive Joule heating; it is 
therefore difficult or impossible to pump biological 
fluids such as blood and urine. The sensitivity of the 
electrokinetic potential to the nature and strength 
of the electrolyte brings with it the insidious prob-
lem of pressure buildup at intersections where 
liquid columns of different ionic strengths meet. 
Micromachinists are starting to address the connec-
tion between the outside world and the capillaries 
in electrokinetic equipment. Gluing glass reservoirs 
for holding the platinum bias electrodes to the glass 
plate substrate with room temperature vulcaniz-
ing (RTV) silicone is a research solution but not an 
attractive manufacturing option.54 
In the context of our glucose meter example, we 
need a blood collection/sampling mechanism. One 
method for interstitial fluid collection uses iontopho-
resis. The GlucoWatch® Biographer (cost, $599–799), 
shown in Figure 1.13, collects glucose through the 
skin, and no finger pricks are needed (Cygnus Corp.: 
http://www.glucowatch.com).* In this method, one 
draws out interstitial fluid by iontophoresis, and the 
charge and size exclusion properties of the reverse 
iontophoretic extraction lead to a very clean sample. 
Iontophoresis utilizes the passage of a constant, low-
level electric current (~0.3 mA/cm2) passed through 
the skin between two electrodes applied onto the sur-
face of the skin. Electrolyte ions in the body act as the 
charge carriers for this current to iontophorese sub-
stances from within the body outward through the 
skin. Only small compounds pass through the skin, 
* On March 1, 2006, Cygnus, who made the GlucoWatch Biographer, was closed down, and its assets were bought by Animas (who makes insulin 
pumps, see Figure). Animas is no longer making GlucoWatch Biographers. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration reports that at least 50% of 
users experienced mild or moderate skin irritation.
g
= Glucose molecules
– = Negative ion Cl
– (ascorbate, urate)
+ = Postive ion Na+, neutral species (i.e., glucose)
(b)
(a)
Cathode
Anode
FIGURE 1.13 The GlucoWatch® G2™ Biographer (a) collects glucose through the skin via iontophoresis (b). (Cygnus Corp., 
http://www.glucowatch.com; http://www.animas.com.*)

[Page 33]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   33
so there are no proteins (e.g., hemoglobin) in the 
extract. Because the skin has a net negative charge at 
physiological pH, positively charged sodium ions are 
the major current carriers. This migration of sodium 
ions toward the cathode induces an electro-osmotic 
flow toward this  electrode. Uncharged molecules (e.g., 
glucose) are carried along by this electro-osmotic 
flow and thus preferentially extracted at the cathode. 
While glucose is collected at the cathode, interfering 
species (ascorbate and urate) collect at the anode. 
Micromolar concentrations of glucose are extracted 
by the process of iontophoresis compared with 5–10 
mM concentrations normally seen in blood samples. 
To accurately measure this small amount of glucose, 
the GlucoWatch® Biographer utilizes an amperomet-
ric biosensor. Glucose oxidase enzyme located in the 
hydrogel discs of the AutoSensor reacts selectively 
with glucose to produce hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). 
The hydrogen peroxide is detected at a platinum-con-
taining working electrode via an oxidation reaction 
producing an electric current that is measured by the 
circuitry of the Biographer. After a 2-hour warm-up 
period and a single-point calibration, the GlucoWatch® 
G2™ Biographer can provide glucose readings every 
10 min for up to 13 hours. Obtaining a blood glucose 
value from a traditional finger stick glucose meter and 
then entering the value directly into the Biographer 
during the calibration phase constitute a single-point 
calibration. This calibration phase occurs at the end 
of the 2-hour warm-up cycle. The GlucoWatch pro-
vides information on trends and not necessarily in 
real time for treatment adjustments.
Concerns with the merit of trending only, calibra-
tion time, risk of infection and irritation,* and the 
irreproducibility of the watch eventually spelled the 
demise of this approach. So we will combine our 
glucose meter with a more conventional lancet or 
laser pricking (see below) to obtain a blood sample.
Centrifugal Pumping
Using a rotating disc, centrifugal pumping pro-
vides flow rates ranging from less than 10 nL/s to 
* On March 1, 2006, Cygnus, who made the GlucoWatch Biographer, 
was closed down, and its assets were bought by Animas (who 
makes insulin pumps). Animas is no longer making GlucoWatch 
Biographers. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration reports that at 
least 50% of users experienced mild or moderate skin irritation.
greater than 100 µL/s depending on disc geometry, 
rotational rate (revolutions per minute), and fluid 
properties (see Figure 1.14).55 Pumping is relatively 
insensitive to physicochemical properties such as 
pH, ionic strength, or chemical composition (in 
contrast to AC and DC electrokinetic means of 
pumping). Aqueous solutions, solvents (e.g., dim-
ethyl sulfoxide), surfactants, and biological fluids 
(blood, milk, urine) have all been pumped success-
fully. As explained in Volume I, Chapter 6, fluid gat-
ing may be accomplished using “capillary” valves in 
which capillary forces pin fluids at an enlargement 
in a channel until rotationally induced pressure is 
sufficient to overcome the capillary pressure (at the 
so-called “burst frequency”). Since the types and 
the amounts of fluids one can pump on a centrifu-
gal platform span a greater dynamic range than for 
electrokinetic pumps, this approach seems more 
amenable to sample preparation tasks. The example 
fluidic platform based on a CD in Figure 1.14 is used 
by RotaPrep for cell lysis and DNA purification. This 
specific product uses magnetism, centrifugal force, 
and capillary action for system operation.
The disposable in this case is an inexpensive poly-
carbonate disc, containing only fluid manifolds, glass 
beads, and a metal disc. The permanent instrument 
has a motor, controls, and permanent magnets. 
Vacuum Pressure Reservoir
Fluid transport can also be accomplished by employ-
ing chambers within the cassette or reader that are 
at a higher or lower pressure than the sample and 
reagent reservoirs. Valves are required to separate 
FIGURE 1.14 RotaPrep system for cell lysis (http://
www.rotaprep.com). This specific product uses magne-
tism,  centrifugal force, and capillary action for system 
operation. (Courtesy of Dr. Kido, CEO, RotaPrep.)

[Page 34]
34   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the evacuated or pressurized chambers from the 
rest of the fluid path until fluid motion is required. 
Opening a valve initiates the flow of fluid toward 
an evacuated chamber or away from a pressurized 
chamber. An advantage of this mechanism over 
those previously described is that it is a straight-
forward way to generate a large fluid-motive force. 
Its drawbacks are that it can only be actuated once, 
valves may be difficult to implement, and the reli-
able manufacture of pressurized or evacuated cham-
bers may be challenging. Unless one uses osmotic 
pumping by implementing a salt reservoir, external 
actuation seems the safest implementation method 
for pressure-gradient actuation.
Heating and Cooling and MEMS Integration
Heating and cooling of fluid within a microinstru-
ment, like fluid propulsion, can be accomplished 
with elements that are either contained within a 
disposable cassette or the reader. There are, super-
ficially, some arguments to be made for integrating 
heating and cooling in the disposable. We learned in 
Volume II, Example 9.1, “Spray Pyrolysis Application: 
Taguchi Gas Sensor” that electrical current passing 
through resistors integrated on thin membranes 
can cause a very rapid temperature increase. This is 
because the resistor has very little thermal mass and 
is in intimate thermal contact with the membrane 
and the fluid to be heated. Integrated heaters are, in 
principle, simple to fabricate on a variety of materi-
als. On the other hand, temperature control can also 
be accomplished with a heating and cooling system 
that is external to the microsystem. For example, the 
Johnson & Johnson pouch, surveyed earlier, uses 
two external heaters (Figure 1.12). The heaters are 
cooled with forced air to speed cycling times. Fast 
heating and cooling are possible with external heat-
ers. Wittwer and Garling56 and Wittwer et al.57 have 
demonstrated 30-s PCR thermal cycling using a 
hot-air cycler and glass capillary PCR chambers (see 
the discussion on PCR in Chapter 10, this volume). 
External heaters offer the advantages of simpler (less 
expensive) microinstruments and no cassette-to-
reader electrical connections. In general, however, 
external heaters are slower and require more electri-
cal power than integrated heaters.
A third option is to heat fluid within the micro-
instrument using radiation generated in the reader. 
The radiation could be infrared, radio wave, or 
microwave; it could be adsorbed by the fluid or by 
absorptive structures (such as black ink) placed on 
the cassette. An advantage of radiative heating is 
that it avoids electrical contact from reader to dis-
posable. Our proposed glucose sensor strip has no 
heater on board.
Sample Introduction 
The exact mechanism for introducing samples into 
the microinstrument depends on the target sample. 
This is one of the most difficult areas—not only is 
pretreatment of the sample often required, but one 
also must transition from a relatively bulky exter-
nal receptacle structure, which can be handled and 
accessed manually, to the microfluidic components 
inside without incurring too much dead space. Very 
few machining techniques cover the whole dynamic 
size range required. Because the sample introduction 
method may place important constraints on the man-
ufacturing process, a few sample introduction options 
are considered here. Traditional sample injection 
systems, such as that for flow injection analysis, rely 
on some sort of commutating valve, either rotary or 
sliding, actuated manually or mechanically. Harrow 
and Janata58 compared different commercially avail-
able sample injection systems, and Shoji et al.59 were 
among the first to micromachine a sample injec-
tor consisting of two three-way microvalves and a 
channel. These valve systems today are too complex 
and expensive to consider their integration in a dis-
posable. Perhaps the simplest way to introduce the 
sample into the microinstrument is by creating wells 
into which the sample is dropped. For example, 
most of the substrates with electro-osmotic pumps 
have plastic tubes glued to them to make sample 
reservoirs. Similarly, the Biotrack blood coagulation 
device requires that a drop of sample be placed in a 
depression on the instrument surface.60 The sample 
is then wicked into an internal chamber by capillary 
action. Problems with sample wells include the large 
volume that they require and the need to accurately 
align the sample with the well if the sample well is 
small. Because the wells are open, one risks sample 

[Page 35]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   35
contamination or the inclusion of air bubbles in the 
sample. The latter are a major problem in miniature 
fluidic systems because of the associated surface 
tension, and debubblers, which are typically bulky, 
are often a necessity. Samples may also be injected 
directly into the microinstrument or disposable cas-
sette. An example of this is the Johnson & Johnson 
pouch HIV test, where an injection septum is pro-
vided in the disposable pouch (Figure 1.12). This 
reduces the chance of sample contamination but 
again requires exact alignment of the injection nee-
dle with the sample injection port. Furthermore, the 
manufacture of the cassette pouch is complicated by 
the need for an injection septum. In an integrated 
sample, the collection device could be the cassette. 
For example, the cassette could be manufactured in 
the form of a blood collection tube (Vacutainer), a 
syringe, a pipette, or a swab. However, this would 
complicate the cassette manufacture considerably 
and may limit the cassette design to a specific type.
For the sample collection of our example glu-
cose sensor, we came to understand earlier that 
iontophoresis still poses problems. Therefore, we 
will use a traditional lancet (Figure 1.15a). The 
Transdermal Biophotonic System from SpectRx 
(Figure 1.15b) collects interstitial fluid through 
micropores punctured in the outer layer of the skin 
by a laser (not FDA approved at this time), and glu-
cose is measured in a patch that contains the glu-
cose sensor. Measuring in interstitial fluids rather 
than blood, this collection method is similar to the 
GlucoWatch (see above) in that it provides informa-
tion only on trends and not necessarily real time for 
treatment adjustments.
Manufacturing Technique of 
the Disposable Cassette
The choice of how to partition fluid transport and 
heating techniques must go hand in hand with the 
choice of disposable/cassette manufacturing tech-
nique. The principal advantages of nontraditional 
methods for making microinstruments are that very 
intricate structures with very fine features can be 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.15 (a) Lancet for blood collection. (b) The Transdermal Biophotonic System from SpectRx collects interstitial 
fluid through micropores punctured in the outer layer of skin by a laser (http://www.spectrx.com).

[Page 36]
36   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
produced, and heaters, electro-osmosis electrodes, 
and acoustic streaming pumps can be readily realized. 
On the other hand, nontraditional microfabrication 
is optimized for making devices that are considerably 
smaller than most biochemical reaction sample 
volumes. A 100-µl reagent volume is the same size 
as a Si chip; that is, 14 mm on a side—huge by micro-
electronics standards. It is certainly possible to make 
Si micromachined parts that are as large as the 
starting wafer (typically 4 in. in diameter); however, 
the costs of the wafer and wafer processing are likely 
to be much higher than for other manufacturing 
techniques. In addition, variation from a previously 
developed microfabrication sequence can require an 
expensive and time-consuming process development 
effort. In the meantime, traditional methods have 
provided answers to most of the miniaturization 
needs in diagnostic applications. Where MEMS 
contributes is in realizing some crucial components of 
the instrument, for example, the detector, the fluidic 
conduits, and the actuators. Most solutions rely on 
plastic rather than Si. We will settle on a choice for our 
glucose sensor’s substrate and manufacturing method 
after we introduce some background on substrate 
choices and have launched our check-off list.
Substrate Choice
Here we compare substrate choices such as Si, 
ceramic, glass, plastics, and others in terms of tra-
ditional mechanical machinability, metallization 
ease, and cost. 
For many mechanical sensor applications, single-
crystal Si, based on its intrinsic mechanical stability 
and the feasibility of integrating sensing and elec-
tronics on the same substrate, presents an excel-
lent substrate choice. For chemical sensors, on the 
other hand, Si, with few exceptions,* is merely the 
* The ion-sensitive field effect transistor (ISFET) is one example where 
chemistry and electronics are intimately integrated.61 The difficulties 
encountered while integrating chemistry with electronics in an ISFET 
were highlighted in Volume I, Chapter 7. This device, thirty years 
after its invention, is finally commercially available. A second exam-
ple is Nanogen’s high-density DNA array (see Volume II, Chapter 8, 
on chemical-, photochemical-, and electrochemical-based forming). 
The problem of wiring a very high-density DNA array (e.g., 10,000 
sites) makes on-site electronics attractive in this case, outweighing 
both packaging and cost issues.  
substrate and as such it is not necessarily the most 
attractive option. 
In Table 1.9, we show a performance compari-
son of substrate materials in terms of cost, metal-
lization ease, and machinability. Both ceramic and 
glass substrates are difficult to machine, and plas-
tic substrates are not readily amenable to metal-
lization. Silicon has the highest material cost per 
unit area, but this cost can often be offset by the 
small feature sizes possible in a Si implementation. 
Silicon, with or without passivating layers, due to 
its extreme flatness, relative low cost, and well-es-
tablished coating procedures, is often the preferred 
substrate—especially for thin films. A lot of thin-
film deposition equipment is built to accommo-
date Si wafers, and as other substrates are harder to 
accommodate, this lends Si a convenience advan-
tage. There is also a greater flexibility in design 
and manufacturing with Si technology compared 
with other substrates. In addition, the initial capi-
tal equipment investment, although much more 
expensive, is not product-specific. Once a first prod-
uct is on-line, a next generation of new products 
will require changes in masks and process steps—
but not in the equipment itself.
The disadvantages of using Si are usually most 
pronounced with increasing device size and low pro-
duction volumes and when electronics do not need 
to be, or cannot be, incorporated on the same Si sub-
strate. The latter could be either for cost reasons (e.g., 
in the case of disposables, such as glucose sensors) 
or for technological reasons (e.g., the devices will be 
immersed in conductive liquids, or they must oper-
ate at temperatures above 150°C).
An overwhelming determining factor for substrate 
choice is the final package of the device. A chemical 
sensor on an insulating substrate is almost always 
easier to package than a piece of Si with conductive 
edges in need of insulation.
TABLE 1.9 Performance Comparison of Substrate 
Materials
Substrate
Cost
Metallization
Machinability
Ceramic
Medium
Fair
Poor
Plastic
Low
Poor
Fair
Silicon
High
Good
Very good
Glass
Low
Good
Poor

[Page 37]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   37
As we pointed out earlier, packaging is so impor-
tant in sensors that, as a rule, sensor design should 
start from the package rather than from the sensor. 
In this context, an easier-to-package substrate has 
a huge advantage. The latter is the most important 
reason why chemical sensor development in the 
industry retrenched from an all-out move toward 
integration on Si in the 1970s and early 1980s to 
a hybrid thick film on ceramic approach in the 
late 1980s and early 1990s. In US academic circles, 
chemical sensor integration with electronics con-
tinued until the late 1980s, stopped for a while, 
and then re-emerged with the successful introduc-
tion of a commercial ion-sensitive field effect tran-
sistor (ISFET)61 and DNA arrays with integrated 
electronics;62 in Europe and Japan, such efforts were 
never completely abandoned.
A good engineering guideline to determine 
whether Si is suitable for a given  mechanical appli-
cation is the following: there should be at least two 
benefits arising from the use of Si over other sub-
strates (aside from the possibility of integrating the 
electronics on the same substrate). For example, in 
the case of a torsional micromirror, as shown in 
Figure 1.16, fabricated based on a silicon-on-insula-
tor (SOI) approach, the two Si-derived benefits are 
1) excellent mirror-like surface and 2) superior tor-
sional behavior of the Si mirror hinges. On the basis 
of these two important properties, Si has become a 
formidable contender for making arrays of micro-
mirrors for optical switching. Note that the mirror in 
Figure 1.16 is not optimized for a high-density mir-
ror switch array. For such an application, the hinges 
should be very short or hidden behind the mirror, 
as the mirror surface exposed to the incoming light 
should be maximized. The design as shown could 
be used, for example, for a linear scanner.
In Table 1.10 we compare some of the material 
properties for single-crystal SiC, Si, GaAs, and dia-
mond with relevance to their role as substrates in 
electronics and MEMS. Not enough good data are 
available yet to assemble a similar table for the poly-
crystalline version of the listed semiconductors. From 
a comparison of Si and GaAs for micromachining 
applications in this table, we conclude that GaAs is a 
better material for thermal isolation and for higher-
temperature operation. Single-crystal GaAs lends 
itself as a material for micromechanics because of 
its attractive optoelectronic and thermal properties. 
The material is less attractive for mechanical devices, 
with a yield load smaller by a factor of 2 compared 
with Si. The many heterostructures possible with 
GaAs make a wide variety of optical components, 
such as lasers and optical waveguides, feasible. The 
piezoelectric effect enables piezoelectric transduc-
ers. On the basis of the high-electron mobility, the 
material is also ideal for the measurement of a mag-
netic field through the Hall effect. “Macro” pressure, 
temperature, and vibration sensors, making use of 
the influence of external pressure and temperature 
on the band gap, have been built. 
Micromachining is proving to be a good method 
to incorporate micromirrors in resonant optical cav-
ities for tunable lasers. Moreover, micromachining 
using gallium arsenide and group III–V compound 
semiconductors is a practical way to integrate radio 
frequency switches, antennas, and other custom 
high-frequency components with ultrahigh-speed 
electronic devices for wireless communications (see 
Chapter 10, this volume).
Checklist
Some twenty years ago, Stephen Senturia (Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology) posed a rhetor-
ical question about building micromachines: “Can 
we design microrobotic devices without knowing the 
mechanical properties of the materials involved?” 
In subsequent years, characterizing mechanical 
properties of MEMS materials became popular. 
However, an equally important question—”Would 
FIGURE 1.16 Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) micromirror.

[Page 38]
38   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
you build a microstructure without knowing all the 
available construction methods?”—often remains 
unaddressed. Choices of materials and machining 
processes are intertwined, and both must be 
confronted early on in the preliminary design 
phase.
In Table 1.11, we introduce a checklist to help 
make the decision of optimized manufacturing 
option and substrate material easier. For the check-
list, which serves as a control gate, we start from the 
assumption that the market and specifications list 
are well understood and that the detailed specifica-
tions list, scaling appreciation, and market under-
standing agree best with one particular sensing 
approach (in the example of the glucose sensor, we 
decided on an amperometric approach).
The checklist starts with a question about the 
design of the interface of the micromachine with 
the real world—in other words, with its package. 
Once the package design is established, one can 
look for the best manufacturing technique for the 
micromachined part inside. This strategy dictates 
TABLE 1.10 Material Properties of Four Important MEMS Materials at 300 K
Property
3C-SiC 
GaAs
Si
Diamond
Melting point (°C)
2,830 (pressure is 
35 bar; 
decomposes) 
1,238
1,415
4,000 (phase 
change occurs)
Maximum operating 
temperature (°C) 
873 
460
300
1,100
Thermal conductivity 
(W/cm °C) 
4.9
0.5
1.57; comparable to metals 
such as carbon steel (0.97) 
and Al (2.36) 
20
Linear thermal 
expansion coefficient 
(× 10–6 °C–1)
4.7
5.9
2.35; the low expansion 
coefficient of Si is closer to 
that of quartz (7.1) than 
that of a metal (e.g., 25 
for Al), making it 
insensitive to thermal 
shock
0.08
Young’s modulus (GPa) 
448
75
190 (111); the elastic 
modulus is similar to that 
of steel (206–235)
1,035
Physical stability
Excellent
Fair; sublimation 
of As is a 
problem
Good
Excellent
Energy gap (eV) 
2.39
1.42, direct
1.12, indirect
5.5
Chemical resistance
Very good
Poor
Good
Excellent
Electron mobility 
(cm2/V s) 
1,000 
8,500
1,500
2,200
Hole mobility (cm2/V s) 
50
400
600
1,600
Density
3.2
5.3
2.32; lower density than Al 
(2.7); thus, it has a high 
stiffness-to-weight ratio
3.5
Yield strength (GPa)
21 (for 6H-SiC)
2.0
7 (steel is 2.1); IC-grade Si is 
stronger than steel
53
Breakdown voltage 
(× 106 V/cm)
2
0.4
0.3
10
Dielectric constant
9.7
13.1
11.9
5.5
Lattice constant (Å)
4.36
5.65
5.43
3.57
Knoop hardness 
(kg/mm2)
3,980
600
1,000 (stainless steel is 660)
10,000
Saturated electron drift 
velocity (× 107 cm/s)
2.2
2
1.1
2.7

[Page 39]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   39
TABLE 1.11 Checklist to Determine Substrate and Machining Approach for a New Micromachining Application
 1. What will the package of the sensor or system be, and how does it interface with the real world? The package and 
the interface with the environment determine size and cost of the total product and the nature of the microdevice 
inside, as well as the answers to most of the following questions.
 2. Is there a need for integration of electronic functions in the micromachine? Such need (e.g., because the sensor has 
a very high impedance) necessitates a semiconductor substrate. Above, we proposed a rule of thumb to justify Si as 
a substrate; there must be at least two compelling reasons besides the possibility of integrated electronics [for the 
Si on insulator (SOI) micromirror in Figure 1.16, e.g., the reasons are the optical quality mirror surface of silicon and 
its excellent torsional behavior].
 3. How many of the microdevices will be made (production volume or number of units) and what is the unit 
complexity (number of devices in a unit)? The number might suggest a serial (small number), hybrid (large number), 
batch (very large number), or even a continuous (moving web-based) approach.
 4. Cost per device? The cost may suggest a serial (high cost, >$40) or Si batch (low cost, <$2) approach. For very low 
cost (glucose sensor strips, <$0.20), a very large batch or continuous fabrication process becomes mandatory.
 5. Does the substrate merely function as a support? If so, glass, ceramic, or even plastic and cardboard all become 
options. If the substrate has a mechanical function, Si is an excellent candidate. If the substrate must have good 
optical properties, materials such as GaAs and poly(methylmethacrylate) are candidates.
 6. Is there a need for modularity? Modularity is important with chemical sensor arrays, in which integration often is 
counterproductive because of the incompatibility issues faced when depositing different chemical sensor coatings 
on an integrated chip.
 7. What are the expected relative tolerances on the lateral dimensions, and what is the required depth-to-width aspect 
ratio of features built into the substrate? Very small relative tolerances on lateral dimensions cannot be achieved yet; 
1% lateral tolerance on a 100-µm line, in optical lithography, is considered good, but 10–3 on 1 cm in diamond milling 
is very poor (see Volume II, Figure 6.3). Large aspect ratios (say, >20) might necessitate wet anisotropic etching of a 
single-crystalline material, room temperature and cryogenic dry etching, or LIGA and pseudo-LIGA processes.
 8. To what environment (air, water, or other) will the device be exposed? Sensors exposed to aqueous environments 
such as blood present more packaging problems and make integration of electronics difficult.
 9. Which substrate makes packaging requirements less stringent? For a sensor in aqueous solutions, for example, a 
ceramic substrate requires no protection of the sides of the ceramic strip; a Si sensor, on the other hand, is difficult 
to insulate and package since a conductive medium might electrically short out the chemical sensor signal via the 
conductive Si sidewalls.
10. Is the desired microstructure a truly 3D part (e.g., a contact lens), or is it a projected form? A truly 3D part suggests 
traditional precision machining, for example, diamond turning or a molding process; projected forms allow for a 
lithography process.
11. What are the thermal requirements?
• Maximum temperature of exposure (temperatures >150°C may make integrated Si functions impossible). If 
integration and high temperature are needed, specially processed Si, SOI, or GaAs become candidates.
• Is thermal conductivity needed?
• Is a thermal match with other materials important?
12. What are the flatness requirements (often in connection with the optical properties of the substrate)?
• Average roughness, Ra?
• One or both sides polished?
13. What are the optical requirements?
• Transparency in certain wavelength regions?
• Index of refraction?
• Reflectivity?
14. What are the electrical and magnetic requirements?
• Conductor versus insulator?
• Dielectric constant?
• Magnetic properties?
15.  What is the process compatibility?
• Is the substrate part of the process?
• Chemical compatibility?
• Ease of metallization?
• Machinability?
16. What are the strain-dependent properties?
• Piezoresistivity?
• Piezoelectricity?
• Fracture behavior?
• Young’s modulus?

[Page 40]
40   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
itself, because the packaging cost contributes 
largely to the overall cost of any micromachined 
product and often overwhelms size specifications 
as well. The reason for expensive packaging can 
be ascribed to the many serial labor processes 
involved. Also, each device may require individual 
attention. The size of the package is dictated by 
the need to interface to a bigger structure, by 
limitations of traditional machining methods, or 
by the need for manual handling of the structure. 
Micromachining 
techniques 
such 
as 
fusion 
bonding, anodic bonding, and other integrated 
encapsulation techniques, commonly used in bulk 
and surface micromachining, might help transform 
more and more of the serial packaging steps into 
parallel batch steps even for ICs, which will prove 
advantageous in keeping costs of the total structure 
down. In the author’s opinion, micromachined 
batch packaging solutions represent one of the most 
unmined micromachining opportunities.
Next in the checklist, one needs to establish 
whether to integrate active electronics on the sub-
strate and confirm the expected temperature range 
of operation (if too high, the latter might void the 
integration option). A further consideration con-
cerns number and cost of the devices and which 
substrate will make packaging easier. When faced 
with a new micromachining problem, one should 
consider all available precision manufacturing 
options—that is, zero-base the approach, be will-
ing to forget all preconceived notions about how the 
part should be manufactured.
Different markets dictate different machining 
approaches. For example, chemical sensors, serv-
ing a fragmented market, are better constructed in 
a modular hybrid thick-film approach, but automo-
tive accelerometers, serving a huge and uniform 
market, are better built in an integrated polysilicon 
design. The choice of materials for miniaturization 
of sensors, actuators, and power sources will depend 
also on the particular sensing principle employed.
We now return once more to the glucose meter 
example summarized in Figure 1.17. In this exer-
cise, the first round of brainstorming (based on the 
specification list, and the scaling input) for a dispos-
able glucose sensor resulted in the suggestion of an 
amperometric approach. We are ready now to face 
the first design iteration by looking at material and 
machining options for the proposed electrochemical 
glucose sensor. For implementation of the preferred 
sensor materials and manufacturing technology, we 
challenge the electrochemical conversion option 
with the list of manufacturing options presented 
in Tables 1.2 to 1.6 and substrate materials options 
(Tables 1.9 and 1.10). In the decision process, we use 
the checklist in Table 1.11 as the control gate. For 
the glucose sensor this results in thick-film sensor 
electrodes on disposable plastic (polyvinyl chlo-
ride) as the best suggested approach. Screen print-
ing is a well-known technique for making patterns 
on various substrates (i.e., paper, plastic, wood, 
glass, ceramics, etc.). This coincides with the princi-
pal solution pursued by industry. See, for example, 
the MediSense/Abbott sensor, the Precision QID, 
which was shown in Volume I, Figure 7.80. This 
sensor consists basically of a two-electrode system 
with a carbon working electrode (carbon ink) and 
counter—and reference—electrode combined in a 
Ag/AgCl electrode (Ag/AgCl ink) (Figure 1.18). The 
working electrode is covered with another ink for 
the enzyme/mediator system.
Example 1.1:  Proposed Scenario for Continuous 
Manufacture of Polymer/
Metal-Based Biosensors
While the number of new tools available for 
microfabrication has grown dramatically, few 
methods have been gainfully applied to dis-
posable biosensor construction for clinical 
applications. In contrast to mechanical sensors, 
where the excellent mechanical properties of 
single-crystalline Si often tend to favor Si tech-
nology, the choice of the optimum manufactur-
ing technology for chemical sensors is far less 
evident. For chemical sensors, Si in the sensor 
often serves no other role than that of a pas-
sive substrate. This past decade the following 
trend emerged: mechanical sensors (pressure, 
acceleration, temperature, etc.) moved toward 
more integration (for example, in accelerom-
eters with CMOS-compatible surface microma-
chining), while chemical sensors and biosensors 
moved away from integration and from Si as a 
substrate. For the latter, hybrid technology on 
plastic or ceramic substrates with silk screening 

[Page 41]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   41
On to CAD
design
Transduction principles
Speciﬁcations list
Example:
In vitro glucose
sensor (drop of blood)
-   Cost <15 cents 
-   Disposable
-   20 million
-   Inexpensive
instrument
-   Sensitive, etc.
Electrochemical technique
(amperometric)
Substrates
Tables 1.9 and 1.10
Manufacturing options
Tables 1.2 to 1.6
Preliminary design
Brainstorming
Tick ﬁlm, disposable plastic strips,
      continuous printing process
Speciﬁcations  
        list
sensors/month
Scaling laws
Table 1.7 and
Chapter 7, this volume
Table 8.2, this volume
Final design
Final design
FIGURE 1.17 Confrontation of detailed specification list with sensing/transduction principles and scaling considerations 
in the brainstorming phase and subsequent searching of manufacturing options by going over a check-off list in the pre-
liminary design phase in the process of developing a disposable glucose sensor (see text).
Ag
AgCI
KCIsat
KCIsolid
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 1.18 Structure of a conventional reference electrode of Ag/AgCl/KCl type (a) and design of a planar reference 
electrode fabricated by means of screen printing (b and c).

[Page 42]
42   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
(a)
Integrated  approach to building sensor arrays
Si wafer
Series of lift-oﬀ steps
Die has three integrated sensors of diﬀerent ﬂavor
# of array elements
Yield
1
2
3
4
5
100
75
50
25
Sheets
All dies are of ﬂavor 1
All dies are of ﬂavor 2
All dies are of ﬂavor 3
Modular approach to building sensor arrays
Si wafers
Sheets
Si wafers
Sheets
Rolls
Rolls
Rolls
Individual dies are assembled on a 
biomodule/ﬂuidic platform with pick and 
place equipment
(b)
Si wafers
FIGURE 1.19 (a) Integrated sensor array fabrication method. (b) Modular approach to making a chemical sensor array. 
Wafers, sheets, or rolls of substrate with sensors of one type only are optimized separately to ensure optimum yield. They 
are then cut out and with pick-and-place equipment put into a biomodule/fluidic platform. Different sensor panels can 
be put together easily, as there are no compatibility issues to deal with.63

[Page 43]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   43
or drop delivery systems for the application 
of the organic layers became more popular. 
Microfabrication of Si-based electrochemical 
sensors, using IC technology, has been espe-
cially challenging, mainly due to process incom-
patibility issues, packaging problems, failure to 
incorporate a true reference electrode, and the 
difficulties involved in patterning relatively thick 
organic layers such as ion-selective membranes 
and hydrogels [see also i-STAT (Abbott Point of 
Care, http://abbottpointofcare.com) in Chapter 
10 of this volume]. The low cost requirements 
and the tremendous variety and fragmentation 
of biomedical sensor applications necessitates a 
nonsilicon, modular approach. Having addressed 
materials choice and modularity, various compet-
ing manufacturing processes must be compared. 
Today, in fabricating somewhat larger disposable 
biosensors, continuous manufacturing processes 
are used that yield much less expensive devices 
than silicon batch processes can afford. As an 
example, consider the mass production of amper-
ometric glucose sensors where the cost per sen-
sor target is 10 cents. Using a Si batch approach, 
it is very difficult to make a glucose sensor for 
less than $1 (or any disposable biosensor for that 
matter). The current process to mass produce 
glucose sensors involves such proven technology 
as doctor’s blade on a continuous moving web, 
making a 10-cent cost per sensor quite possible. 
It is our belief that for disposable microsensors 
to become an economic reality such continuous 
or semicontinuous manufacturing processes will 
have to be further developed and adapted to 
microsensor construction. In Figure 1.19, we con-
trast an integrated approach to chemical sensor 
array fabrication with a more modular manufac-
turing approach.63 The integrated sensor array 
with three types of sensing functions on a sili-
con substrate, depending on process compat-
ibility, often has a rapidly decreasing yield. The 
more modular approach shows how one type 
of sensor might be made on a silicon wafer, a 
plastic sheet, or a continuous roll. The biosen-
sors fabricated here are electrochemical sensors 
that can be combined in “biomodules” with 
pick-and-place equipment after they have been 
laser-cut from their individual processed sheets 
(see Figure 1.20). By making sensors of only one 
type on the same substrate, this approach allows 
for the fabrication of a sensor array composed 
of sensors that may otherwise have fabrication 
incompatibilities, thus increasing the yield of the 
final array. Since any panel could be put together 
in a factory upon demand without reconsidering 
process incompatibilities, more products could 
be introduced into the market all at once.
The ultimate goal is a manufacturing process 
for disposable sensors that merges traditional 
machining options with IC-based manufacturing 
options and is more akin to packaging processes 
(e.g., drop delivery, pick-and-place) than to the 
Membrane
Ag/AgCl
Hydrogel
Polyimide
Planar sensor arrays
Individual (laser out) sensors
Contact pins
Ag
Biomodule substrate
FIGURE 1.20 The individual biosensors [ion-selective 
electrodes (ISEs)] are combined in a so-called “biomodule” 
with pick-and-place equipment.63
Mylar sheet
Photoresist
Photomask
Upper opening
AgCl
Metal pin
Cover sheet
Ag (silk screen, round)
Laminate second layer
of riston
Bottom opening
Membrane
Hydrogel
FIGURE 1.21 Schematic illustration of the procedure for fabrication of an individual array element.63

[Page 44]
44   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
front end part of the IC industry (e.g., lift-off, 
integration). 
As a concrete example, the manufacturing 
procedure of an individual ion selective electrode 
array element, say, for sensing potassium, is illus-
trated in Figure 1.21. These electrochemical pla-
nar sensors may be made on a variety of polymer 
substrates; currently we use 5 × 5 in dry negative 
photoresist sheets (e.g., Pyralux). Pyralux comes 
in rolls, so it will eventually be possible to make 
these types of sensors in a continuous process 
(as depicted in Figure 1.19). An important simpli-
fication in the sensor manufacture depicted in 
Figure 1.21 is the self-aligned step. By exposing 
the dry resist from the top through the photo-
mask, both cavities in the photoresist bilayer are 
made at the same time. The top cavity results 
from the pattern on the mask while the bottom 
cavity originates from the silk-screened Ag pat-
tern, which acts as a mask for the lower part of 
the resist. No expensive double exposure system 
is required.
Fluid handling for calibration or washing 
steps may be implemented on the basis of the 
same dry photoresist technology. Fluidic struc-
tures have been made directly in all of the vari-
ous resist systems listed in Table 1.12. The use 
of two or more photoresists in combination has 
enabled the fabrication of photopatternable 
multilayer microfluidic structures. For example, 
Madou et al.63 have sealed photopatterned 
microchannels of SU-8 with sheets of the flexible 
photoresist, Pyralux, as shown in Figure 1.22a. 
Subsequent patterning of the Pyralux allows for 
the creation of more complex three-dimensional 
fluidic structures, as seen from Figure 1.22b. The 
TABLE 1.12 Basic Properties of the Different Photoresist Materials Used to Build Fluidic Elements63
Photoresist
XP SU-8
Pyralin PI2721 
(Photosensitive 
Polyimide)
Pyralux PC1025 
Dry Resist Film
Riston 4600 Dry 
Resist Film
Resist tone
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Developer
PGMEA*
DE6180
1% K2CO3
1% K2CO3
Etching profile
Vertical sidewall
Undercut
Vertical sidewall
Vertical sidewall
Smallest feature
2 µm
2 µm
20 µm
20 µm
Compatibility with 
plastic substrate in 
developing
No (surface coating 
and back cover are 
needed)
No (surface coating 
and back cover are 
needed)
Yes
Yes
Thickness of single 
layer
Any thickness 
up to 1 mm
~20 µm
64 µm
30 µm
Bonding to dry resist 
film
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Adhesion to substrate
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Good
Uniformity
Good
Fair
Excellent
Excellent
Flexibility
Not applicable
Not applicable
Excellent
Brittle
Developing
Vibration needed
Vibration needed
Washing needed
Easy and quick
Multicoating 
availability
Yes
Yes
Multilayers by 
lamination
Multilayers by 
lamination
*PGMEA, propylene glycol methyl ether acetate.
Dry resist ﬁlm
Dry resist ﬁlm
SU8
200 µm
Fluidic
channel
Hydrogel
SU-8
Polycarbonate
Acc. V   Spot Magn      Det  WD
10.0 kV 6.0    123X       SE     14.8   SU8 on CD
1 mm
Acc. V   Spot Magn      Det  WD Exp
10.0 kV 3.0    37X         SE     9.7   1
Buried Micro Chamber
Microopening
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.22 Buried SU-8 microchannel (a) and multilevel microchamber filled with hydrogel (b) (to be used as an 
onboard electrochemical reference electrode).63

[Page 45]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   45
latter structure can be used, for example, to seal 
liquids or hydrogels such as for an onboard elec-
trochemical reference electrode.
The above “beyond batch” fabrication se -
quence is generic and applies equally well if 
optical sensor probes have been selected and 
will make it possible to fabricate biosensors in 
an affordable manner. This will lead to a wide 
variety of additional biomedical products cur-
rently impossible to fabricate using silicon 
technology.
Questions
 1.1: List three different methods one can uti-
lize to deposit a thin-metal film on a MEMS 
structure.
 1.2:  What do the following acronyms stand for? 
MEMS, VLSI, DUV, DOF, SEM, NGL, NA, MTF, 
OAI, OPC, RIE, and CMOS.
 1.3:  Compare laser-machining (LM) with e-beam 
machining (EBM).  
 1.4: The following bulleted list includes examples 
of micromaching tools:
(a)  Classify them according to the applied 
energy appearance (W: wet chemical and 
electrochemical machining; M: mechani-
cal machining; E: electrothermal machin-
ing) at the workpiece.
(b)  Classify them according to machining 
methods (S: subtractive; A: additive; S/A: 
subtractive and additive).
• Photofabrication
• Laser beam machining
• Diamond milling
• Chemical and electrochemical milling
• Electron beam machining
• Photochemical milling
• Dry etching 
• Ultrasonic machining 
• Plasma beam machining 
• Abrasive jet machining 
• Electroplating and electroless plating 
• Stereolithography
• Electrodischarge machining
 1.5:  Provide a comparison of the economic and 
technical aspects in the construction of sen-
sors with thin-film technology, IC fabrication 
(semiconductor substrates), thick film, and 
classic construction.
 1.6: Why use miniaturization technology?
 1.7:  Get calibrated: What is a mil or a thou? How 
many microns in a mil? How many thou-
sandths of an inch (thou or mil) are there in 
a millimeter? Approximately how thick is a 
human hair? Approximately how big is a virus? 
A bacterium? A red blood cell? How thick is a 
standard sheet of paper?
 1.8:  How small is small? There are many manu-
facturing processes other than silicon micro-
machining for making small parts. Do some 
research to find specifications for various 
manufacturing processes, small devices, and 
tools. Search the Internet, call companies, use 
the Yellow Pages, use a Thomas’s Register, ask 
a machinist, ask your instructor, etc. We’re 
looking for the lower limits on traditional 
machining or tools that are currently com-
mercially available at a local job shop or a tool 
distributor. The objective is to get a feel for 
the boundary between MEMS and traditional 
machining.
 1.9:  Reconstruct the decision tree to reach an opti-
mized micromanufacturing option for a given 
miniaturization problem. 
1.10:  Explain the statement that MEMS engi-
neers should design from the MEMS package 
inwards.
1.11: Make a comparison of additive thin- versus 
thick-film technology. 
1.12:  Explain the progress from serial to batch to 
beyond batch manufacturing (R2R).
1.13:  Characterize objects made by laser machin-
ing, mechanical machining, E-beam machin-
ing, and plastic molding using the following 
criteria:
• Projected versus 3D 
• Serial, batch, or continuous manu facturing
• Top-down or bottom-up machining
References
 
1. Block, B. Personal communication.
 
2. Van Doren, C. 1991. A history of knowledge. New York: 
Ballantine Books.

[Page 46]
46   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 
3. Middlehoek, S., and U. Dauderstadt. 1994. Haben 
Mikrosensoren aus Silizium eine Zukunft? Technische 
Rundschau July:102–05.
 
4. Vasile, M. J., C. Biddick, and S. A. Schwalm. 1993. 
Microfabrication by ion milling: The lathe technique. 
Micromechanical systems. A. P. Pisano, J. Jara-Almonte, and 
W. Trimmer, Eds. New York: ASME Press, p. 81.
 
5. Vasile, M. J., C. Biddick, and S. A. Schwalm. 1994. 
Microfabrication by ion milling: The lathe technique. J Vac 
Sci Technol B12:2388–93.
 
6. Harris, T. W. 1976. Chemical milling. Oxford, United 
Kingdom: Clarendon Press.
 
7. Romankiw, L. T. 1997. Electroforming of electronic devices. 
J Plating & Surf Finish 84:10–16.
 
8. Romankiw, L. T. 1997. Evolution of the plating through litho-
graphic mask technology. Electrochim Acta 42:2985–3005.
 
9. Phillips, R. E. 1986. What is electrochemical grinding and 
how does it work? Carbide Tool 18:12–14.
 10. Kalpajian, S. 1984. Manufacturing processes for engineering 
materials. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
 11. Saito, N. 1964. Mechanism of electric discharge machin-
ing. Bull Jpn Soc Precis Eng 1:39.
 12. Taniguchi, N. 1984. Research on and development of 
energy beam processing of materials in Japan. Bull Jpn Soc 
Precis Eng 18:117–25.
 13. Harper, C. A., ed. 1982. Handbook of thick film hybrid micro-
electronics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 14. Fiori, C., and G. De Portu. 1986. Tape casting: a technique 
for preparing and studying new materials. Br Ceram Proc 
38:213–25.
 15. Helvajian, H., ed. 1995. Microengineering technology for space 
systems. El Segundo, CA: Aerospace Corporation.
 16. Pfender, E. 1988. Fundamental studies associated with the 
plasma spray process. Surf Coat Technol 34:1–14.
 17. UMN. http://www.nrri.umn.edu/NLTC/SLA.htm.
 18. Boothroyd, G., and W. A. Knight. 1989. Fundamentals of 
machining and machine tools. New York: Marcel Dekker.
 19. Bellows, G., and J. B. Kohls. 1982. Drilling without drills. 
Am Mach Special Report 743:187.
 20. Li, B., P. A. Clark, and K. H. Church. 2007. Robust direct-
write dispensing tool and solutions for micro/meso-scale 
manufacturing and packaging. Proceedings of the 2007 inter-
national manufacturing science and engineering conference. 
Atlanta, GA.
 21. Sakai, T. 1992. State of the art injection moulding of high 
performance ceramics. Adv Polym Technol 11:53–67.
 22. Rak, Z. S. 1998. From technical ceramics to high-perfor-
mance ceramics. Ceramic Forum Int 75: 19–24.
 23. Belloy, E., P. Q. Pham, A. Sayah, and M. A. M. Gijs. 2000. 
In Eurosensors XIV, eds. R. de Reus and S. Bouwstra, 
255–56. Copenhagen, Denmark: MIC-Mikroelektronik 
Centret.
 24. Waterjet. http://www.waterjets.org.
 25. Trotter, D. M. 1991. Photochromic and photosensitive 
glass. Sci Am 124:124–29.
 26. Allen, D. M. 1986. The principles and practice of photochemi-
cal machining and photoetching. Bristol, United Kingdom: 
Adam Hilger.
 27. Kern, W. 1978. Chemical etching of silicon, germanium, 
gallium arsenide, and gallium phosphide. RCA Rev 
39:278–308.
 28. Manos, D. M., and D. L. Flamm, eds. 1989. Plasma etching: 
An introduction. Boston: Academic Press.
 29. Johnstone, R. W., and M. Parameswaran. 2004. An introduc-
tion to surface-micromachining. New York: Springer.
 30. Diem, B., M. T. Delaye, F. Michel, S. Renard, and G. 
Delapierre. 1993. SOI (SIMOX) as a substrate for surface 
micromachining of single crystalline silicon sensors and 
actuators. Transducers ‘93.  Yokohama, Japan.
 31. Ehrfeld, W. 1990. The LIGA process for microsystems. 
Proceedings: Micro system technologies ’90. Berlin, pp. 
521–28.
 32. Ahn, C. H., Y. J. Kim, and M. G. Allen. 1993. A planar 
variable reluctance magnetic micromotor with fully inte-
grated stator and wrapped coils. Proceedings: IEEE micro 
electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL, 
February 7–10, pp. 1–6. 
 33. SOTEC. http://dmtsun.epfl.ch/~lguerin/sotec.html.
 34. Keller, C., and M. Ferrari. 1994. In Technical digest: 1994 
solid state sensor and actuator workshop, 132–37. Hilton Head 
Island, SC.
 35. Pister, K. S. J. 1992. In Technical digest: 1992 solid state sensor 
and actuator workshop, 136–39. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 36. Bride, J. A., S. Baskaran, N. Taylor, J. W. Halloran, W. H. Juan, 
S. W. Pang, and M. O’Donnell. 1993. Photolithographic 
micromolding of ceramics using plasma etched polyimide 
patterns. Appl Phys Lett 63:3379–81.
 37. Zhao, X.-M., Y. Xia, and G. M. Whitesides. 1996. Fabrication 
of three-dimensional microstructures: microtransfer mold-
ing. Adv Mater 8:837–40.
 38. Sander, D., R. Hoffmann, V. Reiling, and J. Muller. 1995. 
Fabrication of metallic microstructures by electroplating 
using deep-etched silicon molds. J Microelectromech Syst 
4:81–86.
 39. Shaw, M. C. 1984. Metal cutting principles. Oxford, United 
Kingdom: Clarendon Press.
 40. DeVries, W. R. 1992. Analysis of material removal processes. 
New York: Springer-Verlag.
 41. Slocum, A. H. 1992. Precision machine design. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
 42. Evans, C. 1989. Precision engineering: An evolutionary view. 
Bedford, United Kingdom: Cranfield Press.
 43. Lambrechts, M., and W. Sansen. 1992. Biosensors: 
Microelectrical devices. Philadelphia: Institute of Physics 
Publishing.
 44. Lebbink, G. K. 1994. Microsystem technology: Een niet te 
missen ontwikkeling. Mikroniek 3:70–73.
 45. Bergveld, P. 1995. In Micro total analysis systems, eds. A. van 
den Berg and P. Bergveld, 1–4. Twente, the Netherlands: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
 46. Madou, M. J., and G. J. Kellogg. 1998. Progress in biomedical 
optics. Eds. G. E. Cohn and A. Katzir, 80–93. San Jose, CA: 
SPIE.
 47. van Lintel, H. T. G., F. C. M. van der Pol, and S. Bouwstra. 
1988. A piezoelectric micropump based on micromachin-
ing of silicon. Sensors Actuators 15:153–67.
 48. Schomburg, W. K., J. Fahrenberg, D. Maas, and R. Rapp. 
1993. Active valves and pumps for microfluidics. J 
Micromech Microeng 3:216–18.
 49. Nguyen, N. T., X. Y. Huang, and K. C. Toh. 2002. MEMS—
micropumps: A review. J Fluid Eng 124:384–92.
 50. Findlay, J. B., S. M. Atwood, L. Bergmeyer, J. Chemelli, K. 
Christy, T. Cummins, W. Donish, T. Ekeze, J. Falvo, and D. 
Patterson. 1993. Automated closed-vessel system for in 
vitro diagnostics based on polymerase chain reaction. Clin 
Chem 39:1927–33. See also United States Patent 5422271.

[Page 47]
Nonlithography-Based (Traditional) and Lithography-Based (Nontraditional) Manufacturing Compared   47
 51. Tsao, T. R., R. M. Moroney, B. A. Martin, and R. M. White. 
1991. Electrochemical detection of localized mixing pro-
duced by ultrasonic flexural waves. IEEE 1991 ultrasonics 
symposium proceedings. Orlando, FL.
 52. Miyazaki, S., T. Kawai, and M. Araragi. 1991. A piezo-elec-
tric pump driven by a flexural progressive wave. Proceedings: 
IEEE micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS ’91), 283–88. 
Nara, Japan.
 53. Jorgenson, J. W., and E. J. Guthrie. 1983. Liquid chroma-
tography in open-tubular columns. J Chrom 255: 335–48.
 54. Jacobson, S. C., L. B. Kounty, R. Hergenroder, A. W. Moore, 
and J. M. Ramsey. 1994: Microchip capillary electropho-
resis with an integrated postcolumn reactor. Anal Chem 
66:3472–76.
 55. Kellogg, G. J., T. E. Arnold, B. L. Carvalho, D. C. Duffy, and 
N. F. Sheppard. 2000. Centrifugal microfluidics: applica-
tions. Micro total analysis systems. Eds. A. van den Berg, 
W. Olthuis, and P. Bergveld. Enschede, the Netherlands: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 239–42.
 56. Wittwer, C. T., and D. J. Garling. 1991. Rapid cycle DNA 
amplification: 
time 
and 
temperature 
optimization. 
BioTechniques 10:76–83.
 57. Wittwer, C. T., G. C. Fillmore, and D. J. Garling. 1990. 
Minimizing the time required for DNA amplifications 
by efficient heat transfer to small samples. Anal Biochem 
186:328–31.
 58. Harrow, J. J., and J. Janata. 1983. Comparison of sample 
injection systems for flow injection analysis. Anal Chem 
55:2461–63.
 59. Shoji, S., S. Nakagawa, and M. Esashi. 1990. Micropump 
and sample-injector for integrated chemical analyzing sys-
tems. Sensors Actuators A A21:189–92.
 60. Hillman, R. S., M. E. Cobb, J. D. Allen, I. Gibbons, V. E. 
Ostoich, and L. J. Winfrey. 1990. Capillary flow device. US 
Patent 4963498.
 61. Sandifer, J. R., and J. J. Voycheck. 1999. A review of bio-
sensor and industrial applications of pH-ISFETs and an 
evaluation of Honeywell’s “DuraFET.” Mikrochim Acta 
131:91–98.
 62. Thewes, R. 2002. Sensor arrays for fully-electronic DNA 
detection on CMOS. IEEE international solid-state circuits 
conference (ISSCC). San Francisco, CA.
 63. Madou, M., and J. Florkey. 2000. From batch to continu-
ous manufacturing of microbiomedical devices. Chem Rev 
100:2679–91.
 64. Christensen, C. M. 2006. Hewlett–Packard: The Flight of the 
Kittyhawk(A). http://cb.hbsp.harvard.edu/cb/web/product_
detail.seam?R=606088-pdf-ENG&ConversationId=51866.
 65. Ikuta, K., K. Hirowatari, and T. Ogata. 1994. Three dimen-
sional integrated fluid systems (MIFS) fabricated by Stereo 
Lithography. In IEEE International Workshop on Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’94), pp. 1–6. Oiso, Japan.

[Page 48]
[empty page]

[Page 49]
49
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Icarus Revisited?
Nature’s Engineering Feats
Emergence of Life: Biogenesis
DNA and RNA: The Software of 
Life
Proteins: Hardware of Life and 
Nature’s Robots
The Genetic Code
Cloning
Therapeutic Cloning, or Biomedical 
Cloning
Stem Cells
Reproductive Cloning and Stem 
Cell Research: Implications in 
Bioethics
Biological Cells and Their Machines
Organelles
Mitochondria and Power
Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic 
Forces Drive Self-Assembly in 
Nature 
From Micelles to Liposomes and 
Biological Cells
Biotechnology and Biomimetics 
DNA Chips
Biomimetics: Some Concluding 
Remarks
Appendix 2A: Uses of 
Extremophiles
Appendix 2B: The Twenty Amino 
Acids Found in Biological 
Systems
Appendix 2C: The Universal Code
Questions
References
2
Nature as an 
Engineering Guide: 
Biomimetics
What then is the vocation of the 
whole man? So far as I can make 
out, his vocation is to be a creator: 
and if you ask me, creator of what, I 
answer—creator of real values … And 
if you ask me what motive can be 
appealed to, what driving power can 
be relied on, to bring out the creative 
element in men and women, there 
is only one answer I can give; but I 
give it without hesitation—the love 
of beauty, innate in everybody, but 
suppressed, smothered, thwarted in 
most of us …
L. P. Jacks
The Education of the Whole Man
Fall of Icarus. Mimicking nature—
biomimetics. The Flemish artist 
Peter Paul Rubens (1636–1638) 
depicts Daedalus looking on as his 
son Icarus is falling from the sky. 
The picture is sometimes used 
to illustrate human arrogance. In 
the current context, the painting 
illustrates an early attempt at bio-
mimetics: the fixing of bird wings 
onto human arms with beeswax. 
When Icarus flew too close to the 
sun, the wax melted.
Watson and Crick with DNA model.

[Page 50]
50   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Introduction
In biomimetics, one studies how nature, building 
atom by atom, i.e., through bottom-up manufactur-
ing, through eons of evolution of life, developed 
materials, structures, processes, and intelligence to 
inspire and improve the engineering and design of 
artifi cial materials, human-made structures and 
processes (e.g., software). Human manufacturing 
technology works in the opposite direction, i.e., it 
builds top-down; in most current manufacturing 
we tend to start with larger build ing blocks and use 
stiff materials (e.g., Si or stain less steel), whereas 
nature prefers small build ing blocks and mostly 
soft, low-Young’s modulus materials (e.g., muscle 
or skin). Throughout history, biomimetics has been 
attempted but often with less than satisfactory 
results. Bird flight, for example, did not lead 
to aircraft, but mathematical expressions from 
aerodynamics did. As a consequence, from the 
middle of the eighteenth century to about thirty 
years ago, engineers were tempted to engineer 
around nature’s obstacles rather than be inspired by 
nature itself. Today though, in fields ranging from 
artificial intelligence to microelectromechanical 
systems (MEMS), nanoelectromechanical systems 
(NEMS), and smart materials, the perceived advant-
ages of bottom-up designs and manufacturing are 
convincing many scientists to research natural, bio-
mimetic approaches and manufacturing methods. 
In this chapter, we first introduce the most impor-
tant engineering feats of nature and then explain 
how these are applied in today’s biotechnology. 
It  can be argued that molecular scientists and ge -
netic engineers were practicing nanotechnology 
long before the name became popular with electri-
cal and mechanical engineers. Actually molecular 
biology or “wet nanotechnology” has been called 
by some “nanotechnology that works.” To be fair, 
molecular biology discoveries were rarely seen in 
the light of improved manufacturing techniques, as 
the discoverers were usually aiming for improved 
diagnostics and therapeutics. Within this context 
we introduce the use of natural polymers and their 
mutants not only for optimized sensing and realizing 
new drugs but also for the fabrication of actuators 
and new manufacturing techniques in general.
We start this chapter on a philosophical note, 
inquiring into the wisdom of biomimetics. We then 
detail a long list of nature’s engineering feats. We 
try to define life on Earth and other planets, list the 
many ideas about the emergence of life, introduce 
DNA and RNA as the software of life and proteins 
as its hardware, and explain the build of a biological 
cell and the genetic code. We dwell on how nature 
generates power, while biomimetic approaches  to 
packaging of nanocomponents are covered in 
Chapter 4, this volume, on packaging, assembly, 
and self-assembly, and on implementation of artifi-
cial intelligence in Chapter 9, on power and brains 
in miniature devices.
After introducing a definition of biotechnology we 
present examples of the use of MEMS and NEMS in 
biotechnology. We finish this chapter with a compar-
ison of human- and nature-engineered structures.
This chapter is also meant as a bridge from dry 
engineering, in air and with rigid materials (mechan-
ical and electrical engineering), to wet engineering, 
with flexible materials in aqueous solutions (biol-
ogy and molecular engineering). Miniaturization 
science in 2011 is still practiced predominantly by 
electrical and mechanical engineers, but as appli-
cations are becoming more and more biological in 
nature, biologists, materials scientists, chemists, 
and physicists must work together with electrical 
and mechanical engineers to develop new minia-
turization solutions. We hope that this chapter will 
further stimulate such collaborations.
Icarus Revisited?
Biomimetic-oriented manufacturing is a hot topic 
today, but some caution might be in order. As the 
legend of Icarus reminds us, at least some previous 
attempts at biomimetics have resulted in failure. 
The chapter-opening Fall of Icarus illustrates an early 
attempt at biomimetics. Icarus and his father Daedalus 
fixed bird wings onto their arms with beeswax. When 
Icarus flew too close to the sun, the wax melted and 
he fell to his death in the Mediterranean. 
Smallness is the ancestral condition of life. Large 
organisms are built bottom-up from cells rather than 
divided into cells. Cells are, in turn, fabricated from 
yet smaller entities. A single Escherichia coli bacterium, 

[Page 51]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   51
for example, is shaped like a cylinder about 1 µm 
across and 3 µm long. It contains at least 3000 dif-
ferent molecular parts and will divide every 20 min 
when nutrients are available. No wonder scientists 
are intrigued by the miniaturization skills displayed 
by nature! But zoologist Steven Vogel, in his book 
Cats’ Paws and Catapults,1 asks a question very relevant 
to this chapter: “Who then is the better technologist? 
Mother Nature or the human engineer?” Natural 
design and biomimetics are very popular today and, 
according to Vogel, in danger of being overused or 
misinterpreted. Vogel presents a balanced view on 
the relative merits of natural and human mechani-
cal design. He points out that although nature often 
exemplifies desired features, mimicking it has proved 
useful on surprisingly few occasions (as the Icarus 
legend attests). Vogel’s explanation is that human 
and natural mechanical designs are two individually 
well-integrated technologies, but they are within very 
separate contexts. Each might be uniquely integrated 
by its own elements of internal harmony and consis-
tency, but an impressive aspect of one may have little 
relevance to the other. A prominent example is met-
allurgy. In human technology, metals enable stamp-
ing, forging, casting, grounding, slicing, and sawing. 
No known organism uses pieces of pure metal for 
any mechanical purpose; they make stiff materials 
into artifacts by internal growth and surface deposi-
tion. So humanity’s diverse array of metal manufac-
turing techniques is of no value in nature. Nature, 
on the other hand, does not use steel or favor the 
production of flat surfaces and sharp corners—all 
very useful in human manufacturing. Nature builds 
with proteins and produces mostly curved surfaces 
and rounded corners, resulting in such masterfully 
engineered objects as biological cells. Both natural 
and human manufacturing approaches have their 
merits within their own proper frame of reference. 
As a consequence, Vogel maintains, most attempts 
at mimicking nature have failed; we do not fly in air-
craft with flapping wings or use wood to build sky-
scrapers. Vogel’s comparison of human and nature’s 
engineering feats principally deals with large designs, 
where he finds them competitive. 
However, it is at the nanoscale level that nature 
truly excels, and perhaps Vogel’s contention might 
not hold true in nanoengineering. In the nanoworld, 
nature is way ahead of human engineering, as it 
works with much smaller, more versatile building 
blocks and has mastered the self-assembly and mul-
tiparallel construction of those building blocks to 
create large, hierarchically arranged organisms that 
are much more complex than even the most com-
plex human machines. Today, using human engi-
neering techniques such as MEMS and NEMS, we 
are not able to build a single micromachine display-
ing anywhere near the complexity of even the sim-
plest biological cell. 
With biomimetic bottom-up manufacturing tech-
niques, we are able to synthesize natural and mutant 
nucleic acids and proteins. Using well-established 
approaches such as recombinant DNA, gene shuf-
fling,  and knockout mutations, we can alter the 
genome of a cell, but there has been little progress 
made assembling an artificial cell or even the simplest 
organelle. But all this might be changing soon: at the 
end of 2007, a team of 20 scientists constructed a 
synthetic chromosome that is 381 genes long and 
contains 582,970 base pairs of genetic code, using 
lab-made chemicals at the J. Craig Venter Institute.2 
Prior  to this work, the largest synthesized DNA 
contained only 32,000 base pairs. The J. Craig 
Venter team achieved its technical breakthrough by 
chemically making DNA fragments in the lab and 
developing new methods for their assembly and 
reproduction. After several years of work perfecting 
chemical assembly, the team members found that 
they could use homologous recombination (a process 
that cells use to repair damage to their chromosomes) 
in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to rapidly 
construct the entire artificial bacterial chromosome 
from large synthesized subassemblies. This team 
then started working toward the ultimate goal of 
inserting a synthetic chromosome into a cell and 
booting it up to create the first synthetic organism. 
The artificial chromosome was to be transplanted 
into a living bacterial cell, and in the final stage of 
the process, it was anticipated to take control of the 
cell and in effect become a new life form. The new 
life form would still depend for its ability to replicate 
itself and metabolize on the molecular machinery 
of the cell into which it has been introduced, and 
in that sense, it would not be a wholly synthetic 
life form, rather one more in tune with a parasitic 

[Page 52]
52   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
life form. In May 2010, Venter’s team did indeed 
create such a “synthetic cell,” i.e., a normal bacterial 
cell controlled by DNA made in the lab. The Venter 
team first decoded the genome of the bacterium 
Mycoplasma mycoides. Then they purchased about 1000 
bits of DNA about 1000 letters long that make up that 
bacterial genome. These bits were stitched together 
in the right order by putting them into yeast cells. 
The completed synthetic genome, containing almost 
1000 genes, was then put into a different kind of 
bacterial cell, Mycoplasma capricolum, where it replaced 
the native DNA. The man-made DNA booted up the 
host cell, which began to replicate, making millions 
of M. mycoides cells.70 Possible applications of this 
technology are unlimited. For example, in medicine, 
imagine that synthetic genes could be introduced 
into individuals suffering from a genetic disease, 
where they are missing genes or have damaged ones. 
The ability to correct the original faulty gene could 
potentially constitute a cure for a number of genetic 
diseases. Since building large genomes is now 
feasible and scalable, other important applications, 
such as biofuels, can be envisioned. Along this 
line, Venter’s team is working already with Exxon 
Mobil to develop algae that soak up carbon dioxide 
and convert it into hydrocarbon fuel, and on new 
vaccines with Novartis. The hope is that many other 
complex, engineered microbes will be developed to 
clean up water, produce new forms of food, textiles, 
pharmaceuticals and industrial chemicals in ways 
that naturally occurring microbes cannot achieve.
The reason that nature is leading in nanotechnol-
ogy may be sought in the fact that evolution has 
worked much longer on developing a single biologi-
cal cell (3.5 billion years for the first life-forms to 
evolve) than on the larger life-forms (Homo sapiens 
sapiens first appeared only about 120,000 years ago). 
In other words, many designs were experimented 
with over a much longer period of time to come to 
the optimally designed single-cell life forms than 
for the larger living creatures such as trees and 
humans. It will perhaps be through nanochemis-
try that humans can aspire to reach the same level 
of sophistication in the manufacture of nanostruc-
tures as nature does. Moreover, the flight of birds 
did inspire the Wright brothers’ first successful 
fixed-wing aircraft. But, as we are cautioned to do, 
the Wright brothers did not blindly mimic nature: 
they used fixed-wing aircraft, not the flapping bird 
wings of Icarus. That is, one should learn from 
nature’s manufacturing techniques and adapt them 
to human/societal needs rather than blindly mimic 
king nature’s approaches. After all, nature’s manu-
facturing techniques are geared toward maximiz-
ing procreation, not toward maximizing speed and 
efficiency of product manufacturing techniques in a 
modern human societal context.
As humans learn to build with the same construc-
tion set as nature does, we are bound to challenge 
nature in nanoengineering. Because it uses rela-
tively large building blocks, human manufacturing 
is rapid, and the expectation is that nature, because 
it uses much smaller building blocks (for example, 
atoms with a diameter of 0.3 nm), must be very slow. 
To offset the time it takes to work with small, basic 
building blocks, nature, in growing an organism, 
relies on an additive process featuring massive paral-
lelism and self-assembly, the latter of which is intro-
duced as one of the key characteristics of bottom-up 
manufacturing, detailed in Chapter 3, this volume.
Nature’s Engineering Feats
Life?
The question of how exactly to define life has been 
a constant dilemma throughout humankind’s his-
tory. Scientists of the stature of Schrödinger, Fermi, 
Arrhenius, Hoyle, von Helmholtz, Eigen, Haldane, 
von Neumann, Urey, Oparin, Monod, Dyson, de 
Duve, and Crick, to name a few, have been preoc-
cupied with this question. From the plethora of 
ideas and the many attempts to characterize life 
that emerged from these thinkers, we select a few 
that promise the longest staying power. We refer to 
“ideas” and “characterizations” of life rather than 
“definitions,” as no definition has yet been presented 
that is accurate enough.3
One of the better ideas comes from the book 
Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature by Francis Crick, 
who describes life as a process that is able to dire-
ctly replicate its own instructions and indirectly 
replicate any machinery needed to execute those 
instructions.4 Others consider something to be alive 
if it exhibits a minimal set of features that include, 

[Page 53]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   53
for example, metabolism, self-repair, and replication. 
A more complete set of characteristics associated 
with living “things” is summarized in Table 2.1. Not 
all organisms exhibit all these features all at once, 
but a combination of some of these characteristics 
can describe almost anything that can be defined as 
alive on Earth.
From Table 2.1, we learn that thermodynamics 
offers one of the many descriptions of life. In a 
living system, materials and free energy (ΔG) flow 
into the organism, and waste and heat (ΔH) flow 
out of it. Living things, from the lowly bacteria to 
the more sophisticated, intelligent humans, all are 
highly ordered compared with their constituent 
molecules and seem to violate the law of increasing 
entropy (second law of thermodynamics). The 
second law of thermodynamics states that in any 
spontaneous process, there always is an increase 
in entropy. Living creatures have spontaneously 
developed into more ordered and sophisticated 
systems through evolution with an accompanying 
decrease in entropy (ΔS). This apparent violation 
of the second law of thermodynamics is easily 
explained if one recognizes that the evolutionary 
process takes place within the broader context of 
a universe in which chaos keeps on increasing. In 
more rigorous thermodynamic terms, the argument 
goes as follows: the entropy of the universe may be 
expressed as the sum of the system under study (life) 
and its surroundings, as follows.
 
Δ
Δ
Δ
S
=
S
S
universe
system
surroundings
+
 
(2.1)
TABLE 2.1 Characteristics Associated with Living Things
Characteristic
Remarks
Typical chemistry
Proteins, nucleic acids, fatty acids, sugars and water. Several of these chemicals can 
also be found in nonliving matter.
Very high degree of complexity
The incredible complexity guarantees the unpredictability of organisms. The 
weather is also very complex though and few would consider it alive.
Self-organization
Perhaps more important than complexity is organized complexity. Then again, 
there are also self-assembled monolayers and micelles that we would not call 
alive.
Chirality
Life on Earth almost exclusively uses left-handed amino acids and right-handed 
DNA. Experiments show that proteins cannot form if both right- and left-handed 
DNA are present. 
Self-repair
The object is capable of rectifying errors in either its metabolic or genetic 
machinery.
Autonomy or self-determination
Spontaneity, inner freedom—perhaps the most enigmatic characteristic of life to 
explain, and one that sets life apart from nonlife.
Decrease in entropy
The increasing complexity of a living organism goes hand in hand with a 
decreasing entropy. Unfortunately, such a definition also characterizes a 
refrigerator.
Metabolism and homeostasis
Taking up substances (nutrition) to garner energy and excrete others reaching an 
equilibrium body shape. But what does this characterization make of a dormant 
microorganism?
Self-recognition
Distinguish foreign from self and reject foreign. 
Sensitivity
Response to environmental stimuli.
Information content
The information needed to replicate an organism is encoded in the genes.
Replication
Identical offspring are generated. Then again, many molecules and crystals form 
templates for replication.
Evolution (natural selection)
Populations change over time. 
Reproduction
Offspring is more than a facsimile; it also must incorporate a copy of the 
replication mechanism. Slight differences in the offspring are implied. Clays can 
replicate as well as reproduce (see text).
Growth and development
Growth and gradual evolutionary development, often from a single cell, to more 
complex structures. Crystals also grow, but there is no actual evolutionary 
adaptation.
Heredity
Transmit information from generation to generation with some slight changes 
embedded.

[Page 54]
54   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
In life, large molecules assemble from simple, 
small ones into those that are increasingly complex; 
that is, ΔSsystem is negative. To reconcile this with 
Equation 2.1, we must remember that ΔSuniverse must 
be positive, which can be achieved only if ΔSsurroundings 
is large and positive.5*
To illustrate how weak some of these “definitions” 
of life are, just consider a thermodynamic defini-
tion, often presented in the literature: a living sys-
tem is one that can maintain itself in a state of low 
entropy. However, a definition in which a system 
reducing its  entropy through interaction with its 
environment is considered alive would also qualify 
your refrigerator—or the weather, for that matter.
Computer science (through modeling of artificial 
life), mathematics (through complexity theory), 
and information theory all contribute their own 
definitions. The following are some of the basic 
tenets. In artificial life, or a-life, computer-virus-like 
entities are created in an artificial computer world 
(e.g., Tom Ray’s Tierra and Network Tierra);6 these 
creatures reproduce, mutate, evolve, and die. Some 
scientists actually have considered these digital 
entities alive. Critics of a-life are skeptical because 
of the many simplifications and the arbitrariness 
of its rules. Independent of the issue of a-life 
being alive or not, important information about 
what life is and how it evolved might be gathered 
in days rather than over  millions or billions of 
years. Indeed, because of the simulation power of 
today’s computers, Darwinian evolution scenarios, 
involving creatures of varying complexity and 
different degrees of environmental pressures, can be 
played out over short periods of time.
The continuing study of complex systems may 
result in a better definition of life. Complexity 
scientists suggest that life is an “emergent” or “self-
organizational” property that arises spontaneously 
* But where did the order of the universe as a whole come from? The 
second law of thermodynamics must have been violated during cre-
ation! Pointing out that the expanding universe allows increasing 
room for order to form could deflate this point, but then one may 
further ask where did the energy and mass of the universe originate? 
The first law of thermodynamics (conservation of energy) must have 
been violated at creation. This point may perhaps be refuted as well 
since the positive energy of the universe is exactly balanced by the 
negative gravitational potential energy: E = k(inetic) + mc2 (matter/
energy) – Vg (gravitational) = 0. So perhaps no energy was required 
to produce the universe?
when a broth of different chemicals reaches a certain 
level of complexity.3 Others are adamant that it is the 
principle of information economy in self-developing 
systems that provided the guiding principle of 
biological evolution. Artificial life and complexity 
theory is touched upon in Chapter 9, on power and 
brains in miniature devices, and in “Emergence of Life: 
Biogenesis” below. Some artificial life Web sites can be 
found at http://alife .org and http://www.alcyone.com/
max/links/alife .html. It is perhaps best at this point 
to admit that, today at least, because of its complexity, 
we cannot define what life really is and that describing 
life obviously is easier than defining it.
Life on Other Planets?
To garner a better understanding of what life is, 
we might look for it on other planets. The search 
for 
extraterrestrial 
intelligence 
(SETI) 
(http:// 
setiathome.ssl.berkeley.edu) is privately funded and 
kept somewhat at arms’ length by NASA out of fear 
of criticism by overzealous politicians, who would 
rather spend tax dollars finding weapons of mass 
destruction. Use of miniaturized systems figures 
prominently in this quest, and NASA is an impor-
tant funding source for miniaturization science. It is 
beyond the scope of this book to dwell on SETI, but a 
brief introduction of the Drake equation, which pre-
dicts the probability of finding intelligent life on other 
planets, might motivate interested readers to explore 
the topic further. The Drake equation has been a 
starting point for almost all theoretical speculation 
on the existence of extraterrestrial intelligence since 
1960.7 The equation is a product of a large number of 
elements, most of which are only vaguely known: 
 
N
R
f
n
f
f
f
L
Physical
 
Biological
Cultural
p
e
i
c
=
×
×
×
×
×
×
*
1
 
(2.2)
The elements forming the Drake equation are as 
follows.
Physical Elements
R* = the rate at which stars are formed in our gal-
axy per year; fp = the fraction of stars, once formed, 
that will have a planetary system; ne = the number 
of planets in each planetary system with the right 
environment suitable for life.

[Page 55]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   55
Biological Elements
fl = the probability that life will develop on a suit-
able planet; fi = the probability that life will develop 
to an intelligent state.
Cultural Elements
fc = the probability that intelligent life will develop 
a culture capable of communicating over interstellar 
distances; L = the time (in years) that such a culture 
will spend trying to communicate.
We know that N is no less than 1, as manifested 
by life on Earth. Beyond that, the widest range of N 
values has been proposed—from 1 all the way up to 
>100 million! Paradigms Lost by John Casti (1989)7 
presents an excellent treatise on the subject. Casti 
revisited the topic in 20008 and points out that, since 
his Paradigms Lost of 1989, the evidence for planetary 
systems outside our own solar system has become 
overwhelming, increasing ne in Equation 2.2.
Most of the “life” sensors that NASA has developed 
so far are based on the assumption that life on other 
planets is similar to that on Earth and are based on 
sensors for flow of typical Earth-type feed materials 
(e.g., oxygen) and Earth-type waste materials (e.g., 
carbon dioxide), or they may be heat flow detectors. A 
few such “life” detectors were tested on Mars. Oyama, 
for example, in a Mars Viking experiment, wetted a 
soil sample with amino acids and other nutrients 
and then monitored common metabolic gases, such 
as carbon dioxide, oxygen, and hydrogen.9 Perhaps 
too many experiments designed to find life on other 
planets are based on the expectation of Earth-like 
life and a specific molecular structure rather than 
on an abstract system featuring properties such 
as adaptability, flexibility, reproduction, and self-
organization. Life elsewhere might well involve 
molecules other than DNA.
Crick, in his 1981 Life Itself: Its Origins and Nature,4 
details the Panspermia theory, quite controversial at 
the time, in which life on Earth came from some-
where else in the universe. This, of course, puts the 
question about what life is, or how it emerged, on 
another planet and does not answer the underly-
ing question. Interestingly, the Panspermia theory 
has found new supporters. In August 1996, it was 
announced that features that were explained as life 
forms more primitive than those on Earth were 
found  in a 4-pound meteorite retrieved on Earth 
but originating from Mars* named ALH840018 
(Figure 2.1). A mineralogical study concluded that 
the temperature of the rock never rose much above 
that of boiling water, and a living microbe or spore 
deeper inside would have survived the voyage. There 
have also been new suggestions that extremely 
sturdy life forms might reach Earth unscathed via 
dust or small objects such as comets.10,11 We do, 
indeed, know now that some types of meteorites 
contain carbon and organic chemicals, including 
amino acids.11 In this context, the amino acid gly-
cine was found inside the galactic cloud Sagittarius 
B2 in 1994.8 An issue that the cosmic seed theory 
does address is how life on Earth could get off to 
such a quick start; it might have arrived nearly fully 
developed!
Emergence of Life: Biogenesis
Introduction
Religious debates aside (Genesis with creationism, 
vitalism, reincarnation, etc.), and ignoring earlier 
suggested life forces such as psyche, air, lifeblood, 
phlogiston, electricity, and radioactivity, the ques-
tion about the “emergence” of life has been even 
more controversial than the question about what 
life itself is. The two questions, as suggested in the 
preceding section, are intertwined: if we knew how 
* The 1996 NASA announcement of potential proof for life on Mars is 
still mired in controversy relating to life originating from inorganic 
or organic sources.
ALH84001,0
FIGURE 2.1 ALH84001. A rock from Mars retrieved on 
Earth.

[Page 56]
56   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
life evolved, we might be able to define it better. 
There are several schools of thought on the issue. 
We briefly review the most prominent ones.
DNA, RNA, and Proteins: Who Was on First?
Four billion years ago, there was so much crater-
ing on the moon and on Earth’s surface that no life 
could have taken hold. The oldest fossilized bacte-
ria date the start of life on Earth to 3.8 billion years 
ago. The starting point of “life,” in a “narrow” win-
dow between 3.8 and 4 billion years ago, might have 
been a simple molecule with the ability to catalyze 
its own formation from raw materials found in its 
immediate surroundings—replication through autoca-
talysis. The period of “competing chemistries” before 
terrestrial life developed is known as the prebiotic 
phase. One or several self-replicating “mother mol-
ecules” must have led to the molecules of life we 
have come to know: deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 
ribonucleic acid (RNA), and proteins. In Table 2.2 
we summarize some of the most common terms/
definitions used in the context of the emergence of 
life (biogenesis) and genetics.
Many of the debates have focused around the pri-
macy of DNA versus RNA versus proteins. We dis-
cuss life’s functional polymers—DNA, RNA, and 
proteins—and the genetic code in more detail below. 
For now, it will suffice to expose the purported roles 
of DNA, RNA, and proteins in the emergence of 
life.
 
1. DNA first. DNA is the repository of genetic 
information and would seem like a logical can-
didate to be the first molecule of terrestrial life 
to follow one or more of the mother molecules 
of prebiotic times. However, this is not so. It is 
widely accepted that the carrier of the genetic 
code could not have been at the cradle of life, as 
it cannot replicate without the presence of cer-
tain proteins. To be specific, it needs enzymes 
unzipping its double helix structure before it 
can replicate. Some theories have RNA emerg-
ing first, others proteins, and yet others have 
both of them arising separately and developing 
a symbiotic relationship. In all instances DNA 
would have emerged later as a more reliable 
repository for genetic information.
 
2. RNA first. RNA is involved in the copying of the 
DNA genetic code and the assembly of amino 
acids into proteins on the basis of the copied 
DNA blueprint. As told by Casti, Eigen et al., 
in 1974, showed that from a broth containing 
the four RNA bases and an enzyme, RNA could 
self- assemble.8 Thomas Cech (1989 Nobel 
Prize winner for Chemistry for the codiscovery 
of ribozymes, and now director of the Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute), when at the Uni-
versity of Colorado, demonstrated that RNA 
exhibits enzymatic properties and can catalyze 
the replication of other RNA molecules (i.e., 
ribozymes).8 According to Matt Ridley, RNA was 
Greece to DNA’s Rome, Homer to its Virgil.12
 
3. Proteins first. Proteins are the basis of a wide vari-
ety of functions (e.g., catalysis of reactions and 
immunoreactions to combat disease) and struc-
tural elements (e.g., in skin and hair). There is 
also evidence for the protein-first model. Reza 
Ghadiri, for example, showed that in homo-
geneous solutions, certain small peptides can 
catalyze the formation of other peptides, form 
symbiotic relationships, and spontaneously 
develop error-correcting mechanisms that pre-
vent mutant forms from replicating.8 In 1997, 
Lee et al.13 published results in Nature on a 
helical peptide that is able to replicate itself, so 
the debate of what came first, RNA or protein, 
remains unsettled.
 
4. There also are serious problems with the pre-
DNA models. The RNA-first model, for example, 
is thought to be too prone to errors. Coding 
errors are induced by mutations, and they are 
quite frequent in RNA, as there is only one 
strand of the molecule, and there would have 
been no “proofreading” enzymes available. As 
we will see below, DNA features two strands 
and special enzymes that repair coding errors 
before the code is translated into proteins. The 
RNA error rate explains why nature eventually 
switched to the more secure DNA molecule 
in order to protect its software. In the case 
of the proteins-first model, it is not easily 
understood how proteins could have passed 
on their heritage. An example of a symbiotic 
relationship theory is the one postulated by 

[Page 57]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   57
Freeman  Dyson.  In this attractive model, a 
vesicle or cell (the hardware) metabolizes 
proteins but has no genome (the software) until 
a primitive nucleic acid replicating molecule 
invades the vesicle and finds it advantageous to 
replicate not only itself but also all the helpful 
proteins it finds in the cell.8
Made from Clay?
A rival theory to the DNA-, RNA-, or proteins-first 
models has life originating from inorganic materials 
such as clays. (Life originating from clay! Where 
have we heard this before?) This concept was first 
advanced in 1982 by Cairns-Smith,8,10 a chemist at 
the University of Glasgow, Scotland. In a test tube, 
TABLE 2.2 Common Terms Used in Biogenesis and Genetics
Term
Definition
Allele
Slight variant of the same gene in a given species.
Archaea 
Archaeans are single-celled creatures that join bacteria to make 
up a category of life called the prokaryotes (pronounced 
“pro-carry-oats”).
Chromosomes
A complex structured set of DNA with proteins inside the cell 
nucleus. It stores genetic information.
DNA
Biological chain molecule built from four kinds of building blocks, 
the nucleotides. DNA, normally found as a double helix spiral of 
two complementary strands, is the carrier of genetic information in 
all cellular life forms and many viruses.
Eukaryotes
Creatures whose cells have a nucleus, which contains the genetic 
information (pronounced “ew-carry-oats”).
Gene
A segment of DNA containing the necessary information to produce 
a particular protein.
Genome
All of the DNA possessed by an individual member of a species.
Genotype
The particular collection of various possible gene alleles present in 
the genome of a given individual.
Germ cells
The cells of the body involved in reproduction; i.e., the sperm of the 
male and the eggs of the female are formed from germ cells.
Heterozygous
If there is more than one allele of a given gene within the 
population, an individual might have two different alleles for a 
given gene, in which case that individual is said to be heterozygous 
for that gene.
Homologous chromosomes
Chromosomes containing the same gene sequence.
Homozygous
Having the same alleles at a particular gene locus on homologous 
chromosomes.
Mutation
Modification of a DNA sequence extending from a single base 
change to the addition or elimination of an entire DNA fragment.
Phenotype
The physically discernible features resulting from a particular 
genotype.
Polymorphic genes
Genes that have allelic forms.
Prokaryotes 
Prokaryotes’ genetic material, or DNA, is not enclosed in a central 
cellular compartment called the nucleus. Bacteria and archaea are 
the only organisms of this class.
Protein
Molecules made up of long chains of amino acids. They build tissues, 
organs, etc., and carry out many critical functions in the body.
RNA
A nucleotide chain that differs from DNA in having the sugar ribose 
instead of deoxyribose and having the base uracil instead of 
thymine. RNA helps translate the instructions encoded by DNA in 
order to synthesize proteins.
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms
Differences (polymorphism) of individual bases within a genome 
from different individuals.
Somatic cells
All of the cells in the body except the germinating cells, such as 
those in the eggs and sperm.

[Page 58]
58   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
small clay plates (platelets), less fragile than nucleic 
acids, given the right feed stock, will replicate—that 
is, identical offspring are generated (see Figure 2.2a). 
In a natural, more challenging setting in which a 
small change might induce the platelets to change 
shape (evolution), they may even reproduce—that 
is, their offspring become somewhat different, and 
these offspring may in turn replicate (identical 
offspring) or reproduce (offspring changed in shape). 
Microcrystals of clay, typically flat platelets with 
two large plane surfaces exposed to the surrounding 
medium, consist of a silicate lattice with a regular 
array of ionic sites but an irregular distribution of 
metal ions (e.g., Mg2+ and Al3+) occupying these 
sites. The precise arrangement of metal ions in the 
clay may be capable of catalyzing specific reactions 
of organic molecules on the clay surface. These 
organic molecules in turn can bestow certain 
benefits onto the clay crystals: perhaps a more 
advantageous platelet shape or cementing the crystal 
planes together better—anything that protects them 
against the environment and speeds up (catalyzes) 
their replication. During crystal growth, silicate and 
metal ions from the surrounding medium will tend 
to carry the same pattern of ionic charges as the clay 
layer below it. In this way, the metal ion patterns, the 
carriers of information, are replicated and selected 
by environmental pressures. Replication and repro-
duction of clay are illustrated in Figure 2.2a. In a 
clay such as kaolinite, many cross-sectional shapes 
of crystallites are possible. The electron micrograph 
of the structure of kaolinite in Figure 2.2b illustrates 
the basic idea. The distribution of metal ions 
on these platelets, in association with organic 
molecules from the surrounding medium, helps 
favor one platelet out-replicating another. Physical 
aspects of the crystal act as the phenotype (what 
an organism—in this case a crystal—looks like as 
a consequence of its genotype) and cause selection 
to choose among the genotypes (the genes that an 
organism possesses).
Cairns-Smith suggests that clays came first, 
enzymes second, cells third, and genes fourth. After 
natural clay learned to direct synthesis of organic 
molecules, clay and organics learned to make a cell 
membrane. These cells containing clay as the hered-
itary unit eventually discovered RNA, which “piggy-
backed” at first on clays as they fitted snuggly into 
clay lattices. Clays might then have found a way 
of fabricating these self-replicating organics and, 
consequently, they would have quickly out-repli-
cated other clays. By piggybacking on clays, RNA 
could have existed for a long time before becom-
ing self-replicating. Once the organic molecules 
on the clay started replicating faster and faster by 
absorbing organic material from their surround-
ings, “organic life” might have taken over from 
“inorganic life.” The latter is called a genetic take-
over. For Cairns-Smith’s bibliography and work, 
see http:// originoflife.net/cairns_smith/index.html. 
There was not much experimental evidence for the 
Cairns-Smith’s model until 1996, when Ertem and 
Ferris discovered that long strands of RNA, given 
the right feedstock, form spontaneously on the sur-
face of montmorillonite (a type of clay).14
Life’s Origin beneath the Earth’s Surface?
The Archaea (also Archaeabacteria) constitute the 
earliest and most basic life form: relatively simple 
single-celled organisms that are chemotrophic; 
i.e., they do not need light, as they make biomass 
via chemical energy rather than light. Today, these 
organisms are still often are found in “extremophiles” 
living in harsh, toxic environments. Archaea use 
Replicate
Mutate
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.2 Replication and reproduction. (a) Replication and reproduction in a stack of clay platelets. (b) Electron 
micrographs of the structure of kaolinite clay.

[Page 59]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   59
a remarkable diversity of metabolic tricks and 
adaptations to survive under apparently impossible 
conditions. A lot of information has been gathered on 
these “superbugs” in the last twenty years; they have 
been found in oil wells, the Dead Sea, the Antarctic, 
near volcanic deep-sea vents, and deep down below 
the Earth’s surface. From the Archaea two quite 
different groups developed, namely, the Eubacteria 
(bacteria) and the Eukarya (eukaryotes). Archaeans 
and Eubacteria (bacteria) make up a category of life 
called the prokaryotes. In prokaryotes, the genetic 
material, or DNA, is not enclosed in a nucleus, a 
central cellular compartment. The Eukarya include 
all organisms made up of cells with nuclei; that is, 
their DNA is walled off in a separate compartment of 
the cell (see also below under “Cells,” Figure 2.20). It 
should be noted that extremophiles also include 
bacteria, and these hardy organisms can be grouped 
as acidophiles (acid loving), halophiles (salt loving), 
thermophiles (heat loving), hyperthermophiles 
(the present record is 121°C), psychrophiles (cold 
loving), alkaliphiles (thriving at high pH), barophiles 
(surviving under high-pressure levels, especially 
in deep sea vents), osmophiles (surviving in high-
sugar environments), xerophiles (surviving in hot 
deserts where water is scarce), anaerobes (surviv-
ing in habitats lacking oxygen), microaerophiles 
(surviving under low-oxygen conditions), endoliths 
(dwelling in rocks and caves), and toxitolerants (able 
to withstand high levels of damaging agents, for 
example, living in water saturated with benzene or 
in the water core of a nuclear reactor).
Carl Woese, from the University of Illinois, in 
1977, had a hard time convincing the world about 
the existence of Archaeans.15 Woese found that 
Archaeans clustered together as a group well away 
from the usual bacteria and the eukaryotes. Because 
of their vast differences in genetic makeup, he 
proposed that life be divided into three domains: 
Eukaryota, Eubacteria, and Archaebacteria (Figure 
2.3). Craig Venter, in 1996, completed the genome 
sequence of the first Archaean, Methanococcus jan-
naschii. The genome data of this hardy bacterium, 
thriving at a balmy 85°C and 200 atm of pressure, 
Animals
Plants
Fungi
Ciliates
Slime molds
Termotoga
Presumed common progenitor
of all extant organisms
Presumed common progenitor
of Archaebacteria and eukaryotes
Flavobacteria
Green sulfur
bacteria
Borrelia
burgdorferi
Methanococcus
jannaschii
Halobacterium
Halococcus
Sulfolobus
Eubacteria
Archaea
Termococcus
Methanobacterium
E. coli
B. subtilus
Microsporidia
Euglena
Diplomonads
(Giardia lamblia)
Eukaryota
FIGURE 2.3 The tree of life.

[Page 60]
60   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
includes the sequence of more than 1700 extremely 
heat-stable proteins never before sequenced.
The idea that chemicals beneath the Earth’s sur-
face produced these prebiotic replicators is attractive 
to many researchers. Early Earth, with high concen-
trations of CO2/H2S/H2 etc., low oxygen levels, and 
high temperatures, was largely inhospitable to life as 
we know it today. Life forms that could evolve in such 
an environment needed to adapt to these extreme 
conditions. Many hyperthermophiles and Archaea 
are H2 oxidizers. Thus, it is widely held now that 
extremophiles represent the earliest forms of life, 
with nonextreme forms evolving after cyanobacte-
ria had accumulated enough O2 in the atmosphere.
The recognition of life in those harsh environ-
ments on Earth makes the prospect of life on a harsh 
planet like Mars a bit more likely, and Archaea are 
favorites of the adherents of the Panspermia theory. 
A Web site with good information on extremophiles 
is http://www.astrobiology.com/extreme.html.
Extremophiles present a tremendous opportunity 
for more robust biotechnology processes and nano-
chemistry. Ordinary natural macromolecules can-
not withstand extreme environments, making the 
prospect of widely used bottom-up, biomimetic 
devices less bright unless proteins from these super-
bugs are used to implement more robust nano -
chemistry. A well-known example of this approach 
is that of the hyperthermophile Thermus aquaticus 
used as the DNA polymerase in the very useful 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique, which 
amplifies DNA samples by heat cycling the DNA 
sample together with the required chemistry cocktail 
(see “Polymerase Chain Reaction”). In Appendix 2A, 
we list other applications of extremophiles.
Complexity Theory
A groundswell of opinion has it that the difference 
between life and nonlife is only one of degree 
of organization, not of the type of components 
involved, and that life is how things behave, 
rather than of what they are made. Along this line, 
complexity scientists suggest that life is an “emergent” 
or 
“self-organizational” 
property 
that 
arises 
spontaneously when a large set of chemicals reaches 
a certain level of complexity (see also Chapter  3, 
“Self-Organization”). The background here is quite 
profound: humans are reasonably capable of 
calculating behavior of inorganic materials and the 
structures built from them, but we have had much 
less success with the more complex organic systems. 
This is where the science of complexity comes 
in—just like scaling and artificial life, complexity is 
a subdiscipline of biomathematics and represents a 
general attempt to elucidate fundamental biological 
principles on the basis of mathematics.
The Belgian Nobelist Ilya Prigogine (1917–2003) 
models complex systems that are far removed from 
thermodynamic equilibrium and describes their 
self-organizing* properties. These self-organizing 
properties have a tendency to reach critical “bifur-
cation” or “indecision points,” where their behavior 
may leap into chaos or greater complexity and sta-
bility.16 The latter scenario, Prigogine envisions, is 
how life might have started, that is, on the precipice 
between order and chaos.
An outstanding example of work in complexity is 
the theoretical work by Kauffman, from the Santa 
Fe Institute, who showed that an autocatalytic 
set of reactions leads to “emergent” and “self-
organizational” behavior when a certain level  of 
interconnectedness is reached between the reac-
tions.17 Kaufmann’s Web site can be found at 
http://wn.com/Stuart_Kauffman. There is plenty 
of experimental evidence gathering for  his theory 
in the laboratory. We described Ghadiri’s protein 
work already (see “DNA, RNA, and Proteins: 
Who Was on First?”). In similar work, Rebek has 
demonstrated that synthetic chemicals can also 
reproduce, mutate, evolve, and combine with other 
reproducing chemicals.18 Skeptics not only point to 
the simplifications and the arbitrariness of the rules 
of complexity theory but also point out that life is 
actually not an example of self-organization but one 
of genetically directed or specified organization. In 
other words, in life there is a software code directing 
the organization that emerges from complexity; 
in the complexity theory, on the other hand, there 
is no underlying software. In complexity theory, 
the physical boundaries of the system lead to the 
* In Chapter 3, we clarify the distinction between self- assembly (near 
equilibrium) and self-organization (far removed from equilibrium) 
(see “Self-Assembly and Self-Organization”).

[Page 61]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   61
emergence of organization. Despite the skeptics, 
this discipline is proving itself. We need to know 
how the system’s software came  about before we 
can understand how life emerged.
A Model from Information and 
Communication Theory
Yet another way of looking at the emergence of life 
comes from the theory of information and commu-
nication. Considering that DNA stores the informa-
tion needed to construct and operate an organism, 
noise, a form of disorder, may then be regarded as 
the encroaching entropy. One then has to explain 
the creation of information (negative entropy) from 
noise, which again seems to violate the second law of 
thermodynamics until we realize that we are dealing 
with an open system (see above). Mutations in this 
model generate the noise, and it is the environment, 
via natural selection, that selects which information 
out of that noise ends up in the genetic message. 
The ultimate question in this model is, from where 
did the information content of the universe come?10 
The above considerations can be expressed in some 
simple mathematical formulations. There is a direct 
connection between information content (I) in a 
system and its entropy (S); an increase in entropy 
implies a decrease of information, and vice versa. 
Boltzmann linked entropy, S, to the computed prob-
ability of sorting objects into bins—a set of N into 
subsets of sizes ni as follows:
 
S =
k
p ln p
i
i
i
−∑
 
(2.3)
where pi is ni/N, and k is the Boltzmann constant 
(3.2983 10–24 calories/°C). On Boltzmann’s tomb-
stone, Equation 2.3 is written out as follows:
 
S = k log W 
(2.4)
where W is the probability of a given state. One of 
the classic equations of information, derived by 
Claude Shannon in the 1940s, is formally similar to 
Equation 2.3.
 
I =
p log p
i
i
2
i
•
 
(2.5)
Information, I, is a dimensionless entity, but its 
partner entity, entropy, has a dimension; compar-
ing Equations 2.3 and 2.5, one notices that S and 
I have opposite signs and otherwise differ only in 
their scaling factors, and to convert from one to the 
other expression, one may write S = –(k ln2)I, or an 
entropy unit equals –kln2 bits. Information is thus 
a concept equivalent to entropy, and “life” can be 
described in terms of one or the other.* Lowenstein 
promotes the idea that the first molecular mutants 
that came about were those that made the most effi-
cient information loops, an information loop where 
the product promoted its own production.19 As with 
digital computers, it is in the resetting of the mem-
ory register where the unavoidable thermodynamic 
price is paid. Each time a molecule has been pro-
duced on its template, the molecule needs to be reset 
for spinning out the next “clone.”
For further reading on the origins of life in gen-
eral, good starting points are http://www.seti.org/
seti and http://www.panspermia.org/.
DNA and RNA: The Software of Life
In all known life forms on Earth, heredity, or geno-
type, is encoded by deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). 
This molecule first appeared on Earth more than 3.5 
billion years ago. Sections of DNA, called genes, con-
stitute the chemical recipe expressed in the actual 
form of an organism or its phenotype. DNA—a 
master “read-only” memory—guides, records, and 
passes on every evolutionary development of all 
carbon-based life on Earth. Its building blocks are 
sugar (deoxyribose), phosphate, and four different 
nitrogen-containing bases, namely guanine (G), 
cytosine (C), thymine (T), and adenine (A). A unit 
of a base, sugar, and phosphate is a nucleotide, and 
since there are four different bases in DNA, there are 
also four different nucleotides in DNA. A model of a 
DNA molecule is shown in Figure 2.4b.
In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick  (see 
photo on chapter-opening page), building on exper-
imental results by Rosalind Franklin (Figure  2.5), 
Maurice Wilkins, and many others, elucidated the 
*  William Dembski, a proponent of intelligent design, has claimed that 
natural causes are incapable of generating information. He calls this 
the law of conservation of information. From Equations 2.3, 2.4, and 
2.5, information gain is equivalent to loss of entropy, and Dembski 
is confusing entropy and energy: entropy is not a conserved quantity 
like energy. 

[Page 62]
62   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
double helix motif of DNA. Within a few years, it 
became clear how DNA, with the help of some other 
more or less complex molecules, is able to store 
and pass on hereditary information. This insight, 
among others, earned a Nobel Prize for Watson, 
Crick, and Wilkins in 1962. A fascinating historical, 
scientific, and ethical perspective on the discovery 
of the human blueprint is that of Robert Shapiro, 
The Human Blueprint: The Race to Unlock the Secrets of 
Our Genetic Script.20 While scientific, Shapiro’s book 
manages an entertaining account of the personalities 
involved in this greatest of scientific discoveries. 
Watson’s autobiography Double Helix reads like a 
detective story and has become a classic bestseller.21 
Contrasting it with Crick’s autobiography, What 
Mad Pursuit,22 reveals how differently these two 
Nobel laureates measured their own contributions 
and that of others leading to that same monumental 
discovery (Crick passed away in July 2004).
The double helix DNA molecule consists of a right-
handed spiral coil of two linked strands and is about 
20 Å in diameter. Watson, during a dinner talk, per-
haps after a bit too much wine, could muster only, “It 
is beautiful.”* A model of the molecule as shown in 
Figure 2.4 is a bit misleading, since DNA is in reality 
a very narrow but extremely long molecule. From an 
* It has been noted that the height of one unit of the DNA helix is 
related to its width in a proportion equal to the Golden Ratio. 
Throughout history, the ratio for length to width of rectangles of 
1.61803398874989484820 has been considered the most pleasing to 
the eye. The Greeks named this ratio the Golden Ratio. In the world of 
mathematics, the numeric value is called “phi,” named for the Greek 
sculptor Phidias. Many artists who lived after Phidias have used this 
proportion. Leonardo Da Vinci called it the “divine proportion” and 
featured it in many of his paintings. Long before Phidias, the Great 
Pyramids were proportioned based on the Golden Ratio.
C
C
C
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H H
H
C
NH2
NH2
Cytosine
Guanine
Adenine
Uracil
Tymine
T
A Adenine
H
H
H3
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
Guanine
Cytosine
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
NH2
NH2
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Replaces thymine in RNA
Nitrogenous
bases
RNA
DNA
A
G
U
O
Nitrogenous
bases
Nitrogenous
bases
Base pair
Sugar
phosphate
backbone
G
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.4 (a) Single-stranded RNA. (b) Double-stranded DNA.

[Page 63]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   63
engineering point of view, DNA is a highly asymmet-
ric molecule, with a width on the atomic scale and a 
length on the macroscopic scale, that is, from milli-
meters to centimeters and up to meters for a human.
This asymmetry makes DNA quite susceptible to 
breakage by shearing forces. The winding staircase 
of the DNA molecule in Figure 2.4 has railings made 
up by alternating molecules of sugar and phosphate; 
the steps are made up by pairs of bases. The four 
bases guanine (G), cytosine (C), thymine (T), and 
adenine (A) form only two types of pairs. An A base 
always joins to a T base via two hydrogen bonds (in 
shorthand, A = T), and a G always joins a C via three 
hydrogen bonds (G ≡ C). Walking up the staircase 
of the double helix, staying close to one side of the 
steps, the climber might read at his or her feet a base 
sequence such as AGCTAT; coming back down, on 
the other side of the steps, the descending person 
will read TCGATA. DNA often operates in conjunc-
tion with another nucleic acid, namely, ribonucleic 
acid (RNA). RNA is involved in the copying of the 
DNA genetic code and the assembly of amino acids 
into proteins based on the copied DNA blueprint. 
RNA uses a base called uracil (U) in place of thy-
mine (T) and also employs a slightly different sugar 
ring (ribose instead of deoxyribose) (Figure 2.4a). 
Apart from these two differences, the components 
of RNA are identical to those of DNA.
The joining of two single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) 
strands into one double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) is 
called hybridization. The Watson-Crick pairing or 
hybridizing of DNA bases is shown in Figure 2.6.
FIGURE 2.5 Rosalind Franklin.
N
N
C
H
H
H
Adenine
C
C
O
C
H
H
N
C
CH3
C
N
N
H
O
C
C
C
N
N
Sugar
phosphate
backbone
O
H
N
H
H
5
3
3
5
H
N
H
O
C
C
H
N
C
C
N
N
N
C
H
H
Hydrogen
bond
Guanine
C
C
C
C
N
N
Cytosine
Tymine
FIGURE 2.6 Base pairing in DNA.

[Page 64]
64   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
To pass on information, a DNA molecule simply 
splits apart down the middle and then rebuilds 
matching parts to each half. The two strands in the 
ladder are complementary to one another, and, if the 
strands separate, each is fully capable of recreating 
the base sequences of the other with the help of a 
specialized enzyme. The enzyme, DNA polymerase, 
links up the appropriate nucleotides to make 
two daughter strands. The replication process is 
demonstrated in Figure 2.7. From this figure, we see 
that once the original double helix “unzips,” the two 
separated strands act as templates (molecular molds), 
directing the production of new matching strands. If 
a double-stranded DNA is heated above its so-called 
“melting temperature,” Tm, the two strands separate 
into two single strands. The melting temperature is 
a function of the ion concentration of the solution 
and the G-C content in the specific DNA sequence. 
When the temperature is reduced again, the two 
strands will eventually pair again by diffusion, 
and consequently “rehybridize” or “renature.” The 
process just described is the one taken advantage of 
in PCR to replicate DNA (see above).
As mentioned earlier, one must distinguish 
between DNA replication as shown in Figure 2.7 and 
reproduction. Reproduction involves making modi-
fied copies of itself that can reproduce in return. If 
reproduction were flawless, evolution would never 
have occurred. DNA not only replicates and allows 
for reproduction, it also is the blueprint* for the 
synthesis of proteins. Further below, we introduce 
* Not everyone sanctions the blueprint analogy. Ian Steward in Life’s 
Other Secret correctly points out that genes are actually more like reci-
pes in a cookbook rather than engineering blueprints; they tell us 
what ingredients to use, in what order, and in what quantities, but 
they do not provide a complete, accurate plan of the final result. Matt 
Ridley in Genome prefers the analogy of an immense book, a recipe of 
extravagant length; he also considers the term blueprint a poor anal-
ogy for a one-dimensional digital code. Then again, Robert Shapiro 
titled his book The Human Blueprint: The Race to Unlock the Secrets of 
Our Genetic Script.
Sugar phosphate
backbone
Base pair (joined by 
hydrogen bonding)
Old strands
Nucleotide
about to be
added to a
new strand
New
strands
FIGURE 2.7 The DNA replication process.

[Page 65]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   65
some important characteristics of proteins, but we 
must first learn how a reading of the DNA blueprint 
results in their synthesis or production; i.e., we need 
to understand the mechanism of the genetic code.
Proteins: Hardware of Life 
and Nature’s Robots*
Introduction
Virtually every process and product in an organism 
depends on proteins. In addition to their roles as 
enzymes (catalysts), messengers between cells, and 
defenders against infection, they are the principal 
constituents of cell membranes, tendons, muscles, 
skin, blood, bone, silk, hair, and other structural 
materials. The human body alone contains more 
than 100,000 distinct types of proteins, and all are 
synthesized in the same basic way. Just like nucleic 
acids, they are macromolecules, long polymeric 
chains. In the case of proteins, the chains are com-
posed of just twenty different types of amino acids 
that are always joined in the simplest possible man-
ner: linearly, in long chains (see Appendix 2B for a 
listing of their names and chemical formulas). There 
are many more amino acids, but nature only uses 
the twenty listed.
Biomolecules can process electrical and/or optical 
signals, but what proteins excel in is at recognizing 
and reacting to three-dimensional shapes. Proteins 
have twenty letters in their alphabet rather than the 
four of DNA, and they have the ability to adapt an 
endless number of three-dimensional (3D) shapes, 
making them much more versatile molecules than 
DNA. Information in biology, we shall see, is stored 
in the 3D shape of molecules.
Making Proteins
Amino acids are the basic components that make 
up all proteins. They are left-handed chiral mol-
ecules (except for the simplest, glycine) containing 
both a carboxylic acid group and an amine group. 
Chiral molecules are molecules that come in two 
forms, enantiomers, which are structurally identical 
except that one is the mirror image of the other. Like 
* From the title of the book Nature’s Robots: A History of Proteins by 
Charles Tanford and Jacqueline Reynolds.
left- and right-hand gloves, these molecules can-
not be superimposed (Figure 2.8). All chiral amino 
acids, forming proteins, in nature are “left-handed,” 
and nucleotides, forming the genetic material, are 
“right-handed.” It is one of the great unifying prin-
ciples of biochemistry that the key molecules of life 
have the same hand in all organisms. The twenty 
common amino acids can be combined in an almost 
infinite number of ways to produce proteins. The 
reaction involved is the formation of a peptide bond 
(amide bond) in a so-called “condensation reaction” 
between the amine group of one amino acid and 
the carboxylic acid of another amino acid. In this 
reaction, a water molecule is released, as shown in 
Figure 2.9.
Each type of protein differs in its sequence and 
number of amino acids; therefore, it is the sequence 
of the chemically different side chains that makes 
each protein  distinct. The two ends of a polypeptide 
chain are chemically different: the end carrying the 
free amino group (NH3+ or NH2, depending on pH) is 
the amino, or N, terminus, and the one carrying the 
free carboxyl group (COO– or COOH, depending on 
pH) is the carboxyl, or C, terminus. The amino acid 
sequence of a protein is always presented in the N to 
C direction, reading from left to right.
When only a few amino acids are linked, the prod-
uct is called a peptide, the difference between a pep-
tide and a protein being one of size. A protein with 
a molecular weight of 50,000 is also referred to as 
a protein of 50,000 daltons or 50 kilodaltons (kD). 
One dalton is equal to one atomic mass unit. 
Mirror
Right-handed
form
Left-handed
form
FIGURE 2.8 Right- and left-handed bromochlorofluo-
romethane. The left-handed form of a chiral molecule 
rotates a beam of polarized light to the left, while the 
right-handed form rotates it to the right. The example 
shown in this figure is the CHFClBr molecule.

[Page 66]
66   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
In Table 2.3, example proteins and their function 
are reviewed. 
The Odds against the 
Emergence of Proteins
All models of the emergence of life eventually 
rely on the theory that a chance combination of 
chemicals leads to increasingly complex molecules 
and eventually to “life.” Some simple organic 
molecules were already present in Earth’s primeval 
atmosphere, as first demonstrated in 1953 in the now 
famous Miller-Urey experiments.7 Miller, inspired 
by a suggestion of his advisor, Urey, reproduced 
a potential primeval atmosphere in laboratory 
glassware. When heating methane (carbon source), 
ammonia, and hydrogen with water, and passing an 
electrical discharge, to simulate lightning, through 
the mixture, he produced significant quantities of 
organic compounds, including some amino acids 
(e.g., glycine and alanine). He obtained this result 
after running the experiment for one week. Earth’s 
early atmosphere was at first believed to have been 
reducing. Although Miller used hydrogen, ammonia, 
and methane, today it is believed that the atmosphere 
was more of a neutral mixture, consisting mainly 
of carbon dioxide and nitrogen and only small 
amounts of methane and ammonia. Since 1953, 
the Miller-Urey experiments have been reproduced 
with different simulated environments, such as 
the electric spark being replaced by a furnace, 
an ultraviolet lamp, shock waves, and energized 
chemicals. It turns out that amino acid synthesis 
is rather easy; as we saw before, they actually have 
been found even in meteorites.3,7,10 The issue is not 
so much how to make individual amino acids but 
how to string them into the three-dimensional 
complicated proteins that life needs. The odds are 
stacked against making even the smallest protein 
this way. Take a small protein of 100 amino acids; 
with 20 different amino acids, the number of 
differently arranged proteins corresponds to 20 
multiplied by itself 100 times (which corresponds 
to 1.26 × 10130). Even the total number of stars in 
the observable universe, on the order of 1021, is 
trivially small compared with the gigantic odds 
of stitching together a simple protein properly.10 
The latter is the major reason why scientists such 
as Crick and Davies came to believe that life 
on Earth was seeded from interstellar space, as 
there was not enough time to reach that degree 
of complexity on Earth in such a short amount 
of time.23 
First amino acid
Peptide
Peptide bond
Second amino acid
FIGURE 2.9 Water release in protein formation: proteins consist of a polypeptide backbone with attached side chains.
TABLE 2.3 Examples of Proteins
Structural
Functional
Collagen (found in bone and skin)
Hormones (control body functions)
Keratin (principal component of hair and nails)
Antibodies (fight infections)
Fibrin (helps blood clot)
Enzymes (catalyze chemical reactions)
Elastin (major part of ligaments) 
Hemoglobin (carries oxygen and carbon 
dioxide in the blood)
Myoglobin (transports oxygen in muscles)

[Page 67]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   67
Protein Structure
Proteins begin their life as linear chains of linked 
amino acids; however, most of them do not stay 
that way long, as is clear from Figure 2.10. The 
floppy protein chains quickly fold to minimize 
free energy. This minimization involves hydro-
philic groups (groups that like water) orienting 
themselves toward the aqueous environment and 
hydrophobic groups (groups that dislike water) ori-
enting themselves inward, that is, away from the 
aqueous or hydrophilic environment. Similarly, 
there are groups attracted to one another and 
groups that repel one another. The sequence of 
amino acids constitutes the primary structure of 
the protein. The secondary protein structure can 
follow several motifs—an α-helix (a right-handed 
spiral), a β-pleated sheet, or a ribbon. The tertiary 
protein structure describes how secondary struc-
tural motifs are packed together to give the mol-
ecule its three-dimensional shape. The tertiary 
structure of an enzyme molecule creates cavities 
and grooves on the molecule surface into or onto 
which only selected partner or ligand molecules 
fit. Those select ligand molecules, while bound to 
the enzyme, may in turn react as they present the 
right functional chemical groups to the immediate 
environment. The quaternary structure refers to the 
grouping of individual proteins into protein clusters 
that carry out a task collectively. The final assembly 
of any protein or protein group is all programmed 
by the original amino acid sequence in the linear 
primary structure. The seamless differentiation of 
proteins into different components results in one 
smooth and uniform manufacturing process. Every 
living body is thus a unique molecular machine in 
which function at the nanoscale dictates the cellu-
lar and whole organ behavior at the macroscale.24 
The various protein structural organizational levels 
are illustrated in Figure 2.11.
Today’s computers can barely simulate a fraction 
of the fascinatingly complex protein-folding process. 
With that task in mind, IBM developed a computer 
called Blue Gene. Blue Gene is 500 times faster 
than other supercomputers. It was the first petaflop 
computer (1015), and it is able to simulate interac-
tions of certain proteins with their natural ligands 
and potential drug candidates and thereby poten-
tially aid in the design of more efficient and potent 
drugs.
Protein Self-Repair and Recycling
Proteins and derived structures (e.g., tissues such as 
skin) are of use only in a small operational range of 
temperature and pH. Despite this narrow dynamic 
Proteins are
made by
ribosomes.
Te structure of a protein
Protein
folding in
nature:
Proteins come 
in many shapes.
Te shape of the
protein gives its
function. Some
transport
molecules around
the body. Others ﬁt
in “receptors” to
turn processes on
and oﬀ. Tere are
thousands of
diﬀerent proteins,
and each type has
its own speciﬁc
function.
Tousands
of tiny
ribosomes read
a set of
instructions,
called a
messenger RNA
template, from
the nucleus and
link amino
acids in the
prescribed
order. Tis order
dictates the
protein’s
eventual shape
and function.
less than a 
minute after
they are formed,
proteins
automatically
fold into their
preordained
shape
Protein
Ribosome
mRNA
template
Amino
acids
Amino
acid
chain
Ribosomes
Cell
Nucleus
FIGURE 2.10 A protein emerges from a ribosome.

[Page 68]
68   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
range, the synthesis of natural organisms—starting 
with atoms and molecules, through intermediate 
structures such as fibers and grains, to components 
such as skin, bone, and teeth, has led to marvels 
of enduring engineering such as trees, birds, and 
humans. Humans usually use stronger (higher 
Young’s modulus) building materials than proteins 
(say steel or aluminum), but nature has another 
major advantage, namely, self-repair. The external 
physical observable form, function, and behavior of 
living organisms (i.e., the phenotype) are not perma-
nent constructs; they derive from the entire genetic 
information (i.e., the genotype). Some structures, 
such as skin and brain, are in a state of constant 
regeneration; proteins are continually synthesized 
de novo. Other structures, such as the eyes, are made 
up by proteins with some of the slowest turnover 
rates. This type of self-repair compensates for many 
of the deficiencies of life’s construction materials. In 
human engineering, we have nothing of this kind 
yet, and together with self-assembly, self-repair is a 
must for the bottom-up approach in human engi-
neering to succeed. 
Cells of nearly all life forms possess systems for 
recycling proteins that have been damaged or are no 
longer needed. Ubiquitin tags proteins for degrada-
tion in a complex protein system, the proteasome, 
a molecular abattoir, in which only those proteins 
that are unfolded and marked with ubiquitin are 
destroyed. The proteasome also plays an important 
role in the immune system as it cuts foreign proteins 
down into chunks that the immune cells then pres-
ent on their surfaces to signal the start of the attack 
by antibodies.25
(a) Primary structure
(b) Secondary structure
Hydrogen bonds between
amino acids at diﬀerent
locations in polypeptide
chains
Amino
end
Carboxyl end
Pleated sheeet
(c) Tertiary structure
(d) Quaternary structure
Heme
β
β
β polypeptide
Heme group
-helix
FIGURE 2.11 The various protein structural organizational levels.

[Page 69]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   69
The Genetic Code
In this section, we address the question of how 
nature, using DNA as a template, builds a plethora of 
different proteins from just twenty different amino 
acids. From our description of DNA, we learned 
that there are four different bases and four different 
nucleotides in DNA. All cells contain the same DNA, 
but different genes are expressed depending on the 
local need for an enzyme, a muscle cell, a neuron, 
or a bone. In this process, DNA is the repository for 
the construction blueprint, but it is not responsible 
for building the proteins. This hard work is done 
by another nucleic acid, namely, RNA. RNA uses a 
base called uracil (U) in place of thymine (T), and 
it also employs a slightly different sugar ring (ribose 
instead of deoxyribose). Apart from these two differ-
ences, the components of RNA are identical to those 
of DNA. 
The details of the protein-building process are 
sketched in Figure 2.12. The process of protein man-
ufacture (e.g., of insulin) may be compared to that 
of the manufacture of a car (such comparison was 
first made by Casti).7 It all starts with copying the 
car’s blueprint at headquarters, corresponding to 
transcription or copying of DNA in the cell nucleus. 
Next is a quality control step in which the copy of 
the blueprint of the car is inspected, a process that 
has its analog in the editing, or snipping out, of 
introns in protein manufacture. This step is followed 
by mailing of the copies to the various manufactur-
ing plants—the ribosomes in the case of a cell. After 
a new car, or protein, is finished, it is packaged and 
shipped, and, finally, if the car or protein is no lon-
ger needed, it is disassembled and recycled. 
A bit more slowly, and in more detail, the story 
unfolds as follows. In protein manufacture, an 
enzyme first unzips a section of DNA, and the gene 
(DNA segment) that codes for the protein (in this 
case insulin) is freed for expression. All genes use 
the ATG codon to serve as the marker to start pro-
tein synthesis and TAA to stop it. Expression of a 
specific gene is switched on and off by proteins 
physically attaching themselves to promoter and 
enhancer sequences near the start of the gene text. 
In other words, the blueprint is unfolded for read-
ing and copying one specific part of the original 
only (one car or protein is copied). Messenger RNA 
(mRNA) interprets the freed construction blueprint 
from the DNA inside the nucleus of the cell in a pro-
cess called transcription. In transcription, an mRNA 
strand is synthesized by complementary base pair-
ing between the nucleotide bases of the DNA and 
the mRNA. In Detroit lingo, this translates to the 
photocopying of the blueprint for a certain type of 
car. In eukaryotic cells, the mRNA now leaves the 
nucleus and acts as a template for protein synthesis 
in ribosomes. In our car analogy, copies of the car’s 
blueprint are being distributed to different factories 
in Ohio and Indiana. The code to make proteins on 
the mRNA template is a triplet code—a sequence of 
three bases, or a codon, describes one amino acid. 
If each individual base is coded for only one 
amino acid, then the four bases would only code 
for four amino acids. A pair of bases could code 
for sixteen different amino acids (42), and a triplet 
could handle sixty-four (43). It is the latter code, 
the one with the largest bandwidth available to call 
on the twenty amino acids, that nature has chosen 
to build proteins (see Appendix 2C for a list of the 
twenty amino acids). Actually, an amino acid may 
be encoded by between one and six codons, several 
different triplets may code for the same amino acid, 
and three triplets are assigned to the instruction for 
1. Transcription
DNA
mRNA
mRNA
RNA
polymerase
RNA
nucleotides
Nuclear
membrane
Codon
Protein synthesis
2. Translation
Ribosome
Polypeptide
chain
Proteins
Anticodon
Amino acids
tRNA
rRNA
FIGURE 2.12 Protein manufacture: transcription and 
translation.

[Page 70]
70   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
a stop. In 1967, Har Gobind Khorana and Marshall 
Nirenberg were able to correlate each one of the 
twenty amino acids with the sixty-four possible 
codons. The resulting universal decoder chart is 
presented in Appendix 2C.
In many cases, stretches of DNA coding for poly-
peptide chains are not continuous but are inter-
rupted by large stretches of “nonsense” sequences. 
Even within genes, there are stretches of nucleotides, 
called introns, that don’t code for anything; Casti 
calls them commercial breaks.8 Exons within the gene 
are the only segments where protein coding occurs 
(see Figure 2.13). In humans, there is only about 
one gene per 100,000 base pairs, and the mean gene 
extends over 27 kilobases, whereas the mean tran-
script is 1.3 kilobases.
The validity of the mRNA copy is checked 
by verifying the integrity of all base pairs (also 
called editing). A team of enzymes snips out 
the  introns and  reconnects the parts that contain 
useful information called exons, which are the 
expressed genetic sequence. This editing process 
reduces the error rate to about one in 1 billion 
base pair replications. Although most editing is 
done by enzymes, some RNA molecules can do it 
unassisted. These are called ribozymes, reflecting the 
Exon
Exon
Exon
Exon
DNA
Ribosome
A
C
U
A
C
G
C
G
A
U
A
G
U
G 
U
G
A
A
G
E
E
N
mRNA
tRNA
Transcription
Transcription
Amnio
acid
Polypeptide
chain
Gene
Intron
Intron
U
G
C
G
C
U
A
U
C
A
C
A
U
G
A
C
U
U
A
C
G
C
G
A
T
A
G
G
T
G
A
A
G
T
G
T
A
C
T
G
A
A
Exon - Constitutes the mRNA
and translation into protein
Intron - Intervening sequence
FIGURE 2.13 In the expanded gene, only the exons actually code for the protein corresponding to the gene.

[Page 71]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   71
fact that they  show  -enzyme-like tendencies. The 
nonsense DNA—perhaps up to 95% of the human 
genome—has been called junk DNA in the past but 
more recently has been upgraded to selfish DNA, as 
scientists recognized that it might play some role in 
heredity after all. Crick speculated that this selfish 
DNA might be involved in the rapid evolution of 
some of the complex genetic control mechanisms 
essential for higher organisms (lower organisms 
have none or much less of this selfish DNA). Crick 
believed selfish DNA might be there for its own sake 
rather than that of the organism itself. The same 
claim is made by Richard Dawkins26 in his book 
The Selfish Gene.*
We continue now our story about the genetic code 
and car manufacture and study the process that fol-
lows transcription and editing—that is, translation 
of the blueprint into proteins, or how to go from a 
blueprint copy to a car.
Living organisms feature armies of three-
dimensional protein construction sites called ribo -
somes (see also Figure 2.12) in which any conceivable 
protein can be manufactured. Small RNA molecules 
called transport RNA (tRNA) transport the proper 
amino acids to the ribosomes, which are cell 
organelles located in the cytosol outside the nucleus, 
to build new peptide chains on the mRNA template 
in the so-called translation process. Each of the 
twenty amino acids has its own tRNAs equipped 
with a codon, complementary to the triplet of 
bases that encodes the tRNA’s amino acid on the 
mRNA template. In the car analogy, individual car 
components are being shipped to the car assembly 
plant. The ribosomes bind together the amino acids, 
docked in place by the tRNAs, in a growing protein 
chain at a rate of five amino acids per second. Many 
ribosomes can be lined up on one mRNA strand 
so that a full copy of a new protein—for example, 
insulin—can be delivered every few seconds. The 
insulin protein just fabricated in the ribosome 
contains a short sequence specifying the part of the 
cell to which it should be sent. This is the equivalent 
of a bar code on a new car. When this signal sequence 
(the bar code) has emerged from the ribosome, the 
* The Selfish Gene is an elegant account of neo-Darwinism in which 
Dawkins argues the view that DNA rules.
cell’s transport mechanism is activated, the bar code 
is read by a signal recognition particle, and in the 
case of an emerging insulin it is, together with its 
ribosome, directed toward the membrane of the 
cell’s shipping dock, the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER). The ribosome attaches to the ER membrane, 
and the protein is threaded through a pore in the 
ER. Once inside the ER, the signal sequence or bar 
code is removed, the protein—assisted by molecular 
chaperones—folds into its native shape and is 
packaged into a small sphere (vesicle) that buds out 
of the ER membrane. The vesicle then transports the 
insulin to the Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus, 
similar in appearance to and perhaps continu-
ous with the ER, is a region of smooth, stacked 
membranous sacs. Cell biologists have shown that 
the Golgi apparatus modifies proteins, which it 
receives from the ER in vesicles, and prepares them, 
in a series of steps, for excretion to the exterior. Just 
as a letter is taken to the post office to be mailed 
to another location, proteins are transported to the 
Golgi apparatus for shipment to other locations in 
the body. Within the Golgi apparatus, the proteins 
and lipids are labeled with sequences of molecules 
(an address), which tells the body where the product 
should be delivered.
The French biochemists Francois Jacob and 
Jacques Monod showed in the 1960s that genes 
regulate one another, switching each other on and 
off via the proteins they encode. For example, some 
genes that encode proteins used in the cell (called 
structural genes) are partnered with regulatory genes 
that encode repressor genes. With the regulatory 
gene switched on, the repressor protein is synthe-
sized and binds to the structural gene, preventing it 
from being expressed (transcribed and translated into 
its protein). Jacob and Monod called these regulated 
stretches of DNA operons.
The fact that information flows from DNA to RNA 
to protein is called the central dogma of molecular 
biology. This “dogma” also implied that there was 
only one protein per gene. A first serious attack on 
the first part of this central dogma came in 1970 
when David Baltimore and Howard Temin discov-
ered an enzyme that does just the opposite: it trans-
forms the RNA genome of a group of RNA viruses, 
now called retroviruses, into a DNA copy that can be 

[Page 72]
72   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
inserted into a genome. The family of retroviruses 
includes HIV. The enzyme in question is a reverse 
transcriptase. In comparison with DNA polymerase 
that replicates DNA chains, reverse transcriptase is 
very error-prone. The latter is what makes it so dif-
ficult to make an HIV vaccine. Baltimore and Temin 
received a Nobel Prize in 1975 for this discovery. 
Gene Copying Errors: The Error Catastrophe
A higher organism has about thirty thousand genes 
capable of storing about one hundred million bits of 
information, each of which may be subject to copy-
ing errors. Too many copying errors can cause the 
reproduction machine itself to come to a halt. The 
German biochemist Eigen called this the error catas-
trophe.27 Eigen, who believed in an RNA-first world, 
introduced a simple mathematical formulation for 
characterizing this error catastrophe. He assumed 
that a self-replicating system is specified by N bits 
of information and that each time a single bit is rep-
licated from parent to offspring the probability of 
making and error is given by ε. He also accepted that 
natural selection penalizes copying errors by a selec-
tion factor S. In other words, an error-free replication 
has a selective advantage of S over a system with one 
error, and so on. Then according to Eigen the crite-
rion for survival of a replicating organism is:
 
Nε < log S 
(2.6)
If the above condition does not hold, the species 
will die out, but with the inequality satisfied, 
the selective advantage of the error-free system is 
great enough to maintain a population alive with 
few errors. To understand the deeper meaning of 
Equation 2.6, we may look back to the information 
theory of life (see above) for some further insights. 
The left side of the inequality represents the 
information loss through copying errors in each 
generation. The right is the number of bits supplied 
by the selective action of the environment. If the 
information supplied is less than the information 
lost in each generation, a progressive degeneration 
is inevitable. The selective advantage of an error-free 
system cannot be too large, so that log S is probably 
not much greater than 1 (life always survives on 
the edge of chaos). The greater the number of genes 
an organism possesses, the lower the error rate 
must be to avoid error catastrophe. Human beings 
accumulate about 100 mutations per generation, 
with N of the order of 108, to satisfy Equation 2.6, 
ε must be of the order of 10–8. In other words to avoid 
error catastrophe, the copying error in human DNA 
should be less than one in a hundred million per 
replication. In human cells, an editing process weeds 
out errors, and the remaining error rate is actually 
one in a billion. Bacteria with considerably fewer 
genes than humans can get away with many more 
errors (they can tolerate up to one in a million), and 
a virus can survive an even greater number of errors. 
The latter is the reason why drug-resistant mutations 
emerge with such rapidity, always keeping research-
ers one drug behind. This will continue to challenge 
chemists and the pharmaceutical industry, keeping 
the latter happy and rich for a long time to come.
Genes and Chromosomes
A gene, as we learned above, is a segment of DNA 
with a unique sequence of nucleotides that encodes 
 information—the genetic code—for assembling 
amino acids into a particular protein. Genes are 
located on chromosomes and humans have twenty-
three chromosome pairs (Figure 2.14). Genes are 
isolated from chromosomes through purification of 
RNA molecules. Since RNA is not very stable, this 
purified material is first converted back into DNA 
known as complementary DNA (cDNA). To store and 
make copies of genes, the cDNA is stitched into a 
small circular bacterial chromosome. Whenever 
more of the gene is needed, the bacterial colony 
containing the gene of interest is grown, and the 
required amount of cDNA is isolated. 
The biggest surprise of the rough analysis of the 
first sequencing of the human genome (see below) 
was the low number of genes it contains. For years 
scientists had been predicting that human DNA 
would contain somewhere between 100,000 and 
140,000 genes. It turns out we may have as few as 
26,000—a genome about the size of a rat or a corn 
plant, with roughly a third more genes than the fruit 
fly. We are coming to the somewhat uncomfortable 
conclusion that there is no relation between the 
complexity of an organism and the number of chro-
mosomes or genes or the length of the DNA strand. 
Lysandra atlantica (a butterfly) has 250 chromosomes 

[Page 73]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   73
versus our meager 46. Nor is there a correlation 
with the number of genes; the fruit fly has 13,700, 
whereas Caenorhabditis elegans (a 1-mm nematode 
worm) has 20,500. Despite the fact that the eye of 
the fruit fly is composed of more cells than are found 
in the entire Caenorhabditis worm (profoundly more 
complex in structure and behavior than the micro-
scopic roundworm), the fruit fly has 5000 fewer 
genes! Finally, there is also no correlation with the 
length of the DNA, with, for example, the Amoeba 
dubia at 670,000,000,000 bases and Homo sapiens at 
3,000,000,000. Obviously, the  complexity of organ-
isms is not reflected in the complexity of its genes. 
Some people are referring to this dilemma, the lack 
of correlation between the genome and the complex-
ity of the organism, as the cosmic joke. The cosmic 
joke violates a second tenet of the central dogma, 
i.e., one gene to one protein. Ron Evans, Michael 
Rosenfeld and others clearly demonstrated that the 
same RNA gene transcript can be spliced in many 
ways to encode multiple proteins.28 This discovery 
shed much-needed light into the low number of 
genes–large number of proteins paradox.
Only 40% of a chromosome consists of DNA. 
The rest is made up of packaging protein mate-
rials. Figure 2.15 illustrates an exploded view 
of a chromosome as well as some other impor-
tant cell  components. The total human genome, 
that is, the full set of chromosomes, comprises 
about 3 billion DNA base pairs. One strand of 
human DNA stretched out would measure up to 
5 cm. Since there are forty-six chromosomes in a 
human cell, this means we have about 230 cm, 
or 6 feet, of DNA for each cell. Within the chro-
mosome, the DNA is obviously very well coiled 
and packed. This remarkable feat of packaging is 
described in more detail in Chapter 4 on packag-
ing (see Figure 4.1). In this packed state, the DNA 
is so tightly bundled that it is entirely inaccessible 
to gene-activating enzymes. Only as stretches of 
chromosome move out of this condensed state are 
genes exposed and available for expression. Inside 
the nucleus of each cell there are two complete 
sets of the human genome. Egg and sperm cells 
contain only one copy, and red blood cells do not 
have any DNA.
Centromere
Chromatid
_
_
19
13
6
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10 11
12
14
15
16
17
18
20
21
22
X 23 Y
Organism
Human (Homo sapiens)
Laboratory mouse (M. musculus)
Mustard weed (A. thaliana)
Roundworm (C. elegans)
Fruit ﬂy (D. melanogaster)
Yeast (S. cerevisiae)
Bacterium (E. coli)
Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
3 billion
2.6 billion
100 million
97 million
137 million
12.1 million
4.6 million
9,700
30,000
30,000
25,000
19,000
13,000
6,000
3,200
9
Genome Size (Bases)
Estimated Genes
FIGURE 2.14 Human chromosomes and genome size (bases) and estimated number of genes for some different 
organisms.

[Page 74]
74   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Evolution 
The driving force for the sequence of events that led 
to the plethora of life forms we know today comes 
from the ever-changing challenges presented by the 
environment to living organisms in a process called 
evolution or natural selection. Evolution theory tells 
us that over long periods of time, life forms change. 
Perfect replication of DNA would only have led 
to a planet with very little diversity among its life 
forms. Errors during DNA replication do occur, and 
when errors occur, they can manifest themselves 
as mutations in the organisms that inherit them. 
Mutations not only arise from copying errors but 
may also be caused by physical damage to the DNA 
in the genes, such as that caused by radiation and 
certain chemicals. If an alteration of a gene results 
in an observable change in some aspect of an indi-
vidual’s phenotype, and if this change is passed on 
to his or her offspring, then we say that a mutation 
has occurred or a new allele of a gene was created. 
Only mutations in germ cells are passed on to the 
offspring: mutations in somatic cells (all the cells 
of an organism except for the germ cells) do of 
course occur, but they are not passed on. An allele is 
defined as one of the two alternative states of a gene 
that occupy the same locus on homologous chro-
mosomes (chromosomes containing the same gene 
sequence) and that are responsible for alternative 
traits. Not all genes have alleles; many genes within 
a given species are invariant among individuals. If 
there is more than one allele of a given gene within a 
population, an individual might inherit two differ-
ent alleles for a given gene (one from the father and 
one from the mother), in which case that individual 
is said to be heterozygous for that gene. Some alleles 
are dominant over others, and with a heterozygote 
the dominant allele will be the one that is expressed 
in the phenotype. With two identical alleles, the 
individual is called monozygotic. Random errors in 
the DNA coding are mostly disadvantageous, some-
times neutral, and very rarely beneficial, conferring 
Base pairs
DNA(double
helix)
Histones
Cell
Telomere
Centromere
Telomere
Chromosome
Nucleus
FIGURE 2.15 From chromosome in the nucleus to DNA.

[Page 75]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   75
an advantage on the mutant. Over long periods 
of time, favorable traits will be transmitted more 
efficiently to the offspring, and unfavorable ones 
will occur with decreasing frequency, until they 
are eliminated. For any two unrelated individuals, 
there is roughly one alteration every 1000 bases, or 
3 million sequence variations altogether. These sites 
of sequence variations are called single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs, pronounced snips). Those 
“snips” are critically important in the development 
of new molecular diagnostics (see applications in 
Chapter 10). 
The concepts of evolution and inheritance were 
introduced in the second half of the nineteenth 
century with Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species 
(1859). Gregor Mendel published in Transactions 
of the Brunn Natural History Society on heredity of 
peas in 1865, but his work was not widely known 
until 1900, when it was rediscovered. Darwin had 
predicted a continuous variation within a species 
with gradual change over long periods of time. The 
perpetuation of any life form requires a fine balance 
between fidelity of replication and variation from 
generation to generation. A slight imbalance, and 
extermination certainly follows. Among Mendel’s 
pea plants, a more discrete variation manifested 
itself, with the plants exhibiting either white or 
purple flowers with no continuous variation in 
between. In the early twentieth century, evidence 
pointed toward gene mutations having a big step 
effect rather than a continuous effect. Only later 
did it become apparent that although the units of 
heredity—genes—are discrete, many mutations do 
have small-scale effects, and that combinations of 
genes can produce continuous variations, such as 
height in humans. The mathematical foundation 
of  Darwin’s theory was on solid footing by the 
1930s. Mendel’s very discrete heredity results were 
found to be coincidental, because the traits he 
studied were controlled by single genes only. If this 
had not been the case, he would not have obtained 
such clear-cut results. 
There is some controversy as to whether natural 
selection explains all features of evolution. One 
extreme position is that of Dawkins, who, in his 
books The Selfish Gene26 and The Blind Watchmaker,29 
contends that everything is shaped by natural 
selection alone. The opposite extreme, much 
more controversial, is represented by, for example, 
Micheal  J.  Behe with his intel ligent design who 
claims that Darwin’s mechanism—natural selection 
working on varia tions—can explain small changes 
but does  not explain how complex molecular 
systems, such as vision, might have been gradually 
pro duced (for an introduction visit http://www.
talkorigins.org/faqs/behe/review.html). Intelligent 
design is a criticism of Darwinism, not a theory, 
as it does not logically follow from experimental 
evidence. In between, there are scientists such as the 
late Stephen Jay Gould, who believed that there must 
be other factors involved and that selection alone is 
not capable of explaining all patterning forces in 
the history of life (http://www.stephenjaygould.org/
library/gould_structure.html). This view supports 
complexity theory, which sees evolution as a 
complex system, not to be studied by its individual 
parts alone. This implies that self-organizational 
properties typical of complex systems would go hand 
in hand with selection. Artificial life simulations 
also have the potential to solve some of the major 
problems that evolutionary biologists have struggled 
with for decades. The first one has to do with the 
concept of predetermin ism in evolution. Evolution 
is not supposed to have purpose or a predetermined 
goal in mind—mutations are random, which 
makes it difficult to explain how life organized itself 
into increas ingly complicated organisms. However, 
computer simulations of artificial life do suggest a 
tendency for systems to organize themselves into 
increasingly complex forms for purely mathematical 
reasons. A second problem is that of mass extinc-
tions, which computer simulations suggest are the 
norm, not the exception.6 
Transposomes
It is estimated that less than 5% of the DNA in a 
human contains gene sequences that code for 
proteins. Noncoding DNA is assumed to consist of 
structural elements and repetitive sequences such as 
transposons. Transposons, also called jumping genes, 
are stretches of DNA that jump from site to site 
within one genome or “catch a ride” with a virus and 
move from species to species in so-called horizontal 
transmission.

[Page 76]
76   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Barbara McClintock won the 1983 Nobel Prize 
for her work on transposons in Indian corn; she 
postulated transposons as far back as the 1940s. It 
is now widely accepted that genes operate as parts 
of networks almost like those formed by neurons in 
the brain, and individual genes may either inhibit 
the  action of another gene or cause it to be more 
likely  to express itself (translate into proteins). 
Because of this additional complexity, it seems 
increasingly likely that a traditional reductionist 
approach will not be able to solve all of the issues 
involved in the expression of the 30,000 or so 
human genes. Answers may come from the science 
of complex systems instead, and, as a result, 
nonlinearity and complexity mathematics may 
become the most important contributors to the 
understanding of life and evolution. Along this line 
of thinking, Roy Britten at Caltech and many others 
believe that evolution cannot be explained by single-
point mutations only.30 Britten’s position is  that 
transposons are a much larger source of natural 
variation. To make his argument, he has focused 
on the Alu transposons that are unique to primates. 
Alus make up more than 5% of our DNA and could 
conceivably be responsible for the diversity  of 
primates. Alus, for some unknown reason, seem 
to have started spreading widely around 30 to 50 
million years ago. Wanda Reynolds discovered that 
Alus have the power to alter which sets of genes 
are expressed, by which hormone, and when they 
are triggered, thereby elevating or reducing gene 
expression in certain tissue so that the evolution of 
a species can gradually be changed (see also http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC38434/). 
This process might have been an important factor 
in creating diversity in primates. Despite the fact 
that the genet ic distance separating us from pygmy 
chimps is only 1.6%, it is possible that not all our 
differences are the result of this (the chimp-human 
split occurred not much more than 10  million 
years ago, possibly even less than 5 million). The 
proximity of Alus might have regulated which sets 
of genes were triggered, enabling Homo sapiens to 
appear around 40,000 years ago. Transposons can be 
regarded as an internal environmental challenge to 
the evolution of life forms rather than the more famil-
iar external environmental factors. Transposons, 
by posing a continuing challenge to increasingly 
complex genomes, have helped evolution along and 
might even be the reason why more complicated 
organisms such as humans could emerge at all. 
The reason for the dense packing of chromosomes 
in more complex  living systems is probably to 
keep transposons better hidden within them. As a 
consequence, only 0.2% of all spontaneous human 
mutations are caused by transposons, although they 
make up a large portion of our genome. By contrast, 
fruit fly transposons constitute only 10–20% of 
the genome, yet they are responsible for as much 
as 85% of spontaneous fruit fly mutations. The 
chromosomes of the fruit fly hide the transposons 
much less than our chromosomes do.
In 1998, Schatz and coworkers at Yale University 
identified yet another major role that transposons 
might have played in evolution, namely, the devel-
opment of a powerful immune system in verte-
brates.31 A powerful immune system is created by 
mixing gene fragments to create a vast array of anti-
body genes in millions of B cells.* Schatz’s group 
has demonstrated that the mechanism for the cre-
ation of these antibody cocktails involves the RAG1 
and RAG2 genes, which produce the proteins used 
to “cut and paste” the gene fragments into new 
combinations. RAGs have lost their ability to rein-
sert themselves at random in our genome, and as a 
result, they are not only harmless but actually bene-
ficial. Transposons also might be dangerous, as their 
presence near or on a functional gene may damage 
or destroy it; they have been associated with diseases 
such as leukemia, hemophilia, and breast cancer. 
Human Genome Project
The aim of the $3 billion Human Genome Project, 
started in the mid-1980s, was to decode the details 
of the software running the genetic code machin-
ery depicted in Figure 2.12 by 2005.32 Scientists 
working on the project located, mapped, and iden-
tified the ~30,000 individual genes carried on our 
twenty-three pairs of chromosomes by 2001. If the 
* B cells develop from stem cells in the bone marrow. Each B cell is 
programmed to make one specific antibody. For example, one B cell 
will make an antibody to block a virus that causes the common cold, 
while another produces an antibody to attack a bacterium that causes 
pneumonia.

[Page 77]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   77
human genome is compared to a book, the twenty-
three chromosomes may be considered the chap-
ters, with each chapter containing many stories, or 
genes. Each story contains many paragraphs, called 
exons, interrupted by advertisements called introns. 
The words are codons, and each word is written in 
letters, or bases.12 One of the project’s approaches 
involved cloning fragments of DNA, inserting them 
into E. coli bacteria, and looking for shared sequences 
of DNA that could be identified chemically. The 
Human Genome Project stressed free access, includ-
ing via the Internet, to all the information resulting 
from this multinational project (http://genomics 
.energy.gov). On the other hand, Celera, a com-
peting private company, had already applied for 
patents on 6500 different gene sequences. In elu-
cidating the genome, Celera used an approach in 
which the genetic material was shredded into tiny 
pieces and, after analysis, a supercomputer tried to 
put the pieces back together.  In September 1999, 
Celera succeeded in mapping the genome of the 
fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster), which contains 
“only” 180 million base pairs. The Human Genome 
Project announced the elucidation of the map of 
human chromosome 22, the second smallest, on 
December 2, 1999.33 Although this chromosome 
holds only 1.6–1.8% of the human genetic code, it 
is believed to contain genes that play a role in at 
least thirty-five diseases, including congenital heart 
disease, mental retardation, leukemia, and schizo-
phrenia. By June 26, 2000, Bill Clinton, president 
of the United States and Tony Blair, prime minister 
of the United Kingdom, simultaneously announced 
that the rough draft of the Human Genome was 
complete. We can now only hope that humankind 
has it in its genes to exploit the results for the ben-
efit of humanity rather than for making a very few 
very rich individuals yet richer at the cost of their 
own country and especially to the detriment of 
third world nations. 
Identification of the DNA sequence is only the 
beginning; the real payoff is still to come; molec-
ular biologists worldwide that wrote down the 
3.5-billion-bit genetic code are now trying to link 
specific genes and the proteins for which they code. 
It is becoming apparent that the expression of genes 
and the folding of proteins might better be solved by 
complexity theory than with a reductionist approach 
because of the extreme interconnectedness of the 
subcomponents. 
Death and Aging
With the aging of the population in the industri-
alized countries, research funding for the study 
of death and aging is rapidly increasing. Some 
things about aging are known, but more needs to 
be learned,  and plenty of controversy surrounds 
the topic. Here are some generally accepted facts. 
The simpler the life form, the easier it is to prolong 
its life or to regenerate parts of itself. Bacteria, for 
instance, continue to grow and produce progeny as 
long as they have food and a nontoxic environment. 
They do not die because of aging. Aging becomes 
increasingly important as a species acquires more 
sophisticated, specialized cells and organs. In these 
more complex life forms, there are two types of 
cells,  namely germ cells and somatic cells. Germ 
cells are potentially immortal (like bacteria, they 
can  reproduce the whole living entity forever); 
somatic cells are there for the greater efficiency 
of particular functions but cannot reproduce the 
whole organism. If a worm is cut in half, the tail, 
which contains germ cells, can reproduce a whole 
worm; the head, which only contains somatic 
cells, dies. The higher the ratio of somatic cells to 
germ cells, the more prone an organism is to aging. 
Mutating the genes that control how worms respond 
to hormones resembling insulin enable worms to 
live two to five times longer.34,35 
Chromosomes are capped and protected by spe-
cial DNA pieces called telomeres, in the same way 
that shoelaces are prevented from becoming frayed 
by aglets. These telomeres in mammals consist of 
thousands of TTAGGG repeats and act somewhat as 
an internal clock for the aging of cells: each time a 
cell divides, the telomeres on the chromosomes get 
shorter, and when they are short enough, they signal 
the cell to stop dividing. By adding telomerase, an 
enzyme that rebuilds telomeres, cells cultured in a 
dish become immortal (the patent rights for telom-
erase are owned by Geron in California). Cancer 
cells keep on dividing in part because they reactivate 
their telomerase! It is not yet clear how telomeres 
relate to death and aging in humans, since so many 

[Page 78]
78   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
other factors play a role. It is reasonable to expect, 
though, that some cells and tissue—especially those 
that divide quickly—become crippled by shortened 
telomeres. Short telomeres in old people might 
weaken the immune system and the capability of 
regenerating bone and skin, all of which contain 
rapidly dividing cells. The more times DNA is repli-
cated, the more likely it is that errors are introduced. 
This link between age and mutation frequency is 
clear from parental-age-dependent genetic disorders 
such as Down’s syndrome. Dolly, the cloned sheep, 
died in 2003, at age seven, very young for a sheep 
(see Figure 2.18). It has been speculated that Dolly 
started off life with a telomeric “clock” set already at 
her mother’s age. This has put somewhat of a damper 
on cloning enthusiasm. 
Many factors are claimed to influence average 
lifetime. Free oxygen radicals decrease the average 
life span (Linus Pauling’s vitamin C is an antioxi-
dant, and he claimed that it increased lifetime!).36 
Mutant forms of the enzyme catalase decrease the 
average life span; food restriction and less sexual 
activity (or more sex later in life—figure that one 
out!) will make you live longer. Cooler tempera-
tures and an efficient glucose metabolism also pro-
long life (goodbye Florida). Although we can expect 
to live longer and healthier in the new millennium, 
Hayflick discovered in 1961 that normal human 
cells, when grown in a culture dish, divide a limited 
number of times (mean value is 61) and then die. 
This ultimate ceiling for life has been dubbed the 
Hayflick limit. Hayflick believes that our maximum 
life span is fixed by our genes at about 125 years.37–40 
Evolutionarily, there is no reason for human life to 
go on after the reproductive years are over (just look 
at the Rolling Stones). 
Cloning
Introduction
The last decade of the twentieth century brought 
one of the most important milestones in molecu-
lar biology: the creation of the cloned sheep Dolly 
in 1996,41 an event that made unprecedented 
headlines, both in scientific journals and in the 
popular press. The result was that suddenly the 
entire world was introduced to cloning. Cloning 
has become a household term, but most people 
are still unacquainted with the scientific processes 
involved in cloning and how cloning is actually 
executed. In this section, the cloning process and 
its implications from a molecular biology point 
of view is introduced. As shown below, there are 
three different types of cloning: 1) DNA cloning 
or recombinant DNA technology, 2) reproductive 
cloning, and 3) therapeutic cloning.
DNA Cloning, or Recombinant 
DNA Technology
First, we should mention that the terms cloning, 
gene cloning, recombinant DNA technology, and 
molecular cloning are used interchangeably to 
denote the same genetic engineering method. The 
term cloning denotes the process by which genetic 
material from one species is transferred to a self-
replicating genetic element, such as a bacterial plas-
mid or a virus. A plasmid is an extrachromosomal 
circular piece of DNA distinct from the normal 
bacterial genome that contains genes and that is 
capable of producing multiples copies of itself when 
introduced into a host organism (i.e., bacteria, 
yeast, mammalian, or plant cells). Thus, plasmids 
replicate desired genes; in nature, these genes are 
from the plasmid’s same organism (bacteria, yeast, 
etc.), but in recombinant DNA technology, scien-
tists introduce foreign genes and use the plasmid to 
copy said genes. For example, in genetically modi-
fied foods, a gene encoding for a natural pesticide 
can be incorporated into a corn cell, giving rise to 
corn that now can produce its own pesticide.
Of all the terms used to denote cloning, recom-
binant DNA technology is perhaps the one that best 
defines what the procedure entails. As explained, 
the method involves taking a gene that encodes for 
a desired protein and introducing it within a bac-
terial plasmid, thereby recombining this foreign 
DNA with that of the plasmid. More specifically, 
the gene to be cloned first is isolated or cut out 
from chromosomal DNA by employing restriction 
enzymes, a type of enzymes that cleave DNA when 
they encounter a specific sequence of DNA bases 
that they recognize, leaving a distinct sequence of 
bases at both ends. The resulting DNA fragment 

[Page 79]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   79
containing the gene is then isolated and purified 
from the mixture of chromosomal DNA, so it is 
ready to be inserted into the plasmid. Likewise, the 
plasmid is also cut open, or cleaved, with the same 
restriction enzyme, leaving the same sequence of 
bases at each end of the open plasmid as those 
present in the isolated gene. In that manner, when 
the gene fragment and the open plasmid are mixed 
together in the presence of another enzyme—ligase, 
whose function is to bind or “glue” together DNA 
sequences—they recombine like two pieces in a 
puzzle. After the plasmid is constructed, it is ready 
to be inserted into a host—most commonly a bac-
terium—where it will take advantage of the host’s 
cell machinery to replicate in large amounts. The 
plasmid then expresses the gene that was inserted, 
thus producing the protein encoded by the desired 
gene. Figure 2.16 depicts a generic cloning proce-
dure performed in bacteria.
Reproductive Cloning
The process of reproductive cloning is different from 
DNA cloning as described above. Its goal is to cre-
ate an animal from the nuclear DNA of an exist-
ing one. The principle of this method involves the 
removal of the nucleus of an egg containing all 
the DNA of the cell and replacing it with that from 
another cell. In the laboratory, the newly created egg 
is then treated with chemicals or electrical stimu-
lation so it can divide. Once the embryo reaches a 
certain cellular stage, it is inserted into the uterus 
of a female host, or “surrogate mother,” where it 
grows and develops until birth (see Figure 2.17). 
It is important to note that cloned animals are not 
Source DNA
Bacterium
Restriction
sites
Restriction
enzymes
Base pairing
and DNA ligase
Transformation
and cell division
Bacterial clone carrying copies
of gene of interest
Gene of interest
FIGURE 2.16 A generic cloning procedure performed in bacteria.

[Page 80]
80   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
exact replicas of their progenitors because the clones, 
in addition to the nuclear DNA from the progeni-
tor, have mitochondrial DNA that is derived from 
the original egg. Mitochondrial DNA plays a role in 
the aging process, an important consideration when 
choosing the egg donor. 
Reproductive cloning is not as effective as DNA 
cloning, where virtually any gene can be cloned into 
a suitable host, with the exception of a few incom-
patibilities. Reproductive cloning methods, although 
continuously improving, still are inefficient, with 
more than 90% of the embryos failing to produce 
viable offspring. To date, not enough data are avail-
able to allow one to predict the long-term effects of 
cloning, partly because a large number of the cloned 
animals produced are dying at a premature age. The 
first example of reproductive cloning, performed in 
1952, resulted in a tadpole.42 
Although other examples of cloned amphibians 
and other animals exist,43 the most notable exam-
ple of this type of cloning involves the creation of 
Dolly the sheep (named after the country singer 
Dolly Parton). Dolly (Figure 2.18) was cloned by a 
team of Scottish scientists led by Dr. Ian Wilmut,41 
currently at the Queen’s Medical Research Institute 
at the University of Edinburgh. Dolly’s cloning was 
exemplary in that she was the first large mammal 
to be cloned, thus bringing to reality the possibility 
of cloning other large animals, including humans. 
Unfortunately, Dolly’s life was not easy; she suffered 
from crippling arthritis and lung cancer in addition 
to having to deal with paparazzi following her at all 
times—she was a Dolly Parton kind of celebrity! As 
a result, Dolly had to be euthanized when she was 
only six years old, a rather short life span compared 
to the eleven to twelve years of life of regular sheep. 
Therapeutic Cloning, or Biomedical Cloning
The goal of this type of cloning is to produce an arti-
ficial organ or tissue that can be transplanted back 
into the individual who supplied the original DNA. 
The procedure, in its first stages, is almost identical 
to that of reproductive cloning, and it involves first 
removing the nucleus of an egg and then replacing 
the genetic material by inserting the nuclear DNA 
of the individual for whom a new organ or tissue is 
needed. The egg is allowed to develop until it has 
produced a large number of stem cells. After that, 
the stem cells are harvested from the embryo. This 
procedure results in the destruction of the embryo. 
The stem cells are allowed to reproduce in vitro and 
are chemically treated so as to develop in different 
types of stem cells that will give rise to the desired 
organ or tissue type. Once the artificial tissue 
or organ has been produced, it can be implanted 
into the patient (see Figure 2.19). The fact that the 
embryo is being destroyed during the cloning pro-
cess brings up a number of ethical issues (see dis-
cussion in the section below). Nevertheless, the 
potential benefits of therapeutic cloning are tre-
mendous, and researchers believe that these cells 
will be invaluable in the treatment of all sorts of 
diseases, among others, those of neurological origin 
Cloning procedures
Blastocyst
Early embryo
Fetus
Adult possible donors
Culture cell
Implantation into
surrogate uterus
Progeny
Injection
Fusion
Remove
nucleus
Recipient
egg
FIGURE 2.17 Reproductive cloning.
FIGURE 2.18 Dolly with her firstborn lamb, Bonnie. All of 
Dolly’s offspring were bred the old-fashioned way. (Roslin 
Institute Image Library, http://www.roslin.ac.uk.)

[Page 81]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   81
(e.g.,  Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s), cardiac diseases, 
and autoimmune diseases.
Stem Cells
The human body has more than 200 different types 
of cells, all derived from the same original stem 
cells. These stem cells are capable of reproducing 
themselves and transforming into different kinds, 
depending on what type of signal they receive 
while growing. This results in the production of a 
large number of diverse specialized cells respon-
sible for organ and tissue formation in animals. 
Much research has been devoted to understanding 
the signaling events and pathways that lead to the 
transformation of a pool of identical unspecialized 
stem cells into this distinct very specialized cells 
originators of organs and tissues. Embryonic stem 
cells can develop into all different types of cells, 
whereas adult stem cells (present in fully developed 
adult individuals) are limited to the production of 
only certain types of specialized cells. In addition 
to embryonic and adult stem cells, rather recently, 
stem cells have been identified in placenta and 
in umbilical cord blood. The latter two types can 
develop into various types of blood cells. The char-
acteristics and differences between embryonic and 
adult stem cells are shown in Table 2.4, below.
There is much to be learned about stem cells, but 
undoubtedly, the knowledge gained thus far already 
shows the vast number of applications and benefits 
that their manipulation and production will have 
in medicine, agriculture, and in the environment. 
A clear example of the potential of embryonic stem 
cells in medicine involves the preparation of active 
functioning nerve cells in mouse brains. In order to 
realize all the benefits of stem cells, protocols and 
methods will need to constantly be improved and 
simplified. In that regard, in 2006 researchers dem-
onstrated the feasibility of producing embryonic 
stem cells from the morula (i.e., solid mass of cells 
that develops about six days after fertilization of an 
egg cell) of a mouse, thus showing that stem cells 
can be made without animal products in a culture. 
In November 2007, two separate teams of research-
ers were able to reprogram skin cells and turn 
them into stem cells.44,45 The teams, led by James 
Thomson of the University of Wisconsin-Madison 
and by Shinya Yamanaka of Kyoto University in 
Japan, first identified four genes that confer the abil-
ity to reprogram certain types of cells. They then 
introduced these genes into skin cells from differ-
ent sources and individuals by employing a retro-
virus to essentially infect the skin cells and carry 
these genes into the nucleus of the cells. Once the 
new genes were part of the skin cells, they repro-
grammed them, converting the skin cells into pluri-
potent stem cells. Because the original cells came 
from different types of tissue (i.e., facial skin, con-
nective tissue, fetal skin, and baby foreskin) and 
from a variety of individuals (i.e., a 36-year-old 
woman, a 69-year-old man, a fetus, and a baby), 
the researchers are confident that the method will 
be able to be generalized and employable in most 
individuals. While the efficiency of the method was 
not the best—the Japanese team reported that 1 in 
5,000 cells treated turned into a stem cell, and the 
US team, 1 in 10,000—both methods still result 
Add diﬀerent
growth
factors
Muscle
Blood
Nerve
Pluripotent stem cells diﬀerentiate
into many cell types
(b)
How cloning might be used
therapeutically
Nucleus
transfer
Anucleate
unfertilized
egg from donor
Adult cell
from patient
(a)
FIGURE 2.19 Therapeutic cloning.

[Page 82]
82   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
in a good number of cell lines that are viable. The 
implications of this discovery are vast, as this is the 
first real demonstration of conversion of cells from 
mature adult individuals into stem cells. The major 
downfall of these cell-reprogramming experiments 
is that they use a retrovirus to carry the reprogram-
ming genes into the skin cells to be transformed. 
Retroviruses are known to cause tumors in human 
cells, and thus, the risk of inducing tumors cannot 
be trivialized. However, at this moment the pos-
sible positive outcomes of this new breakthrough 
technology outweigh the negative. Perhaps the 
most interesting application stemming from the 
work of these groups is the possibility of regenera-
tion of organs and tissues of a patient from his/her 
own cells. Moreover, since the methods developed 
bypass the use of embryos or oocytes, the ethical 
dilemmas and controversy associated with their use 
will be avoided. 
Finally, it is important to note that stem cells are 
also useful in studying human development, for 
testing new drugs and screening of toxins, and for 
testing gene therapy methods.
Reproductive Cloning and Stem Cell 
Research: Implications in Bioethics
Dolly’s creation and life led to controversy, and as a 
consequence, reports regarding the ethics of cloning 
were drafted in the European Union (EU), the United 
States, and a number of other countries, including 
Canada and Australia. Specifically, in 1997, after 
Dolly’s creation, President Clinton responded quickly 
to the prospect of human cloning, banning the use 
of federal funds for human cloning in the United 
States. Having considered the scientific and moral 
implications of said research, he also asked privately 
funded researchers to implement a temporary 
moratorium on human cloning research until the 
Bioethics Advisory Committee set up guidelines 
regarding this matter. Moreover, in 2001, then 
President George W. Bush created The President’s 
Council on Bioethics (http://www.bioethics.gov/
topics/cloning_index.html), whose mission is to 
advise the President on bioethical issues that may 
emerge because of advances in biomedical science 
and technology. Currently, there are no federal 
TABLE 2.4 Stem Cell Overview
Characteristics of Stem Cells
Embryonic Stem Cells
Adult Stem Cells: Adult Tissues
In Vitro Fertilization
Nuclear Transfer
Properties
Produce all cell types
Produce all cell types
Successful in certain treatments
Easy to manipulate and grow 
in the laboratory
Easy to manipulate and 
grow in the laboratory
Stem cells are genetically matched 
to patient
Can obtain embryos from in 
vitro fertilization clinics
Stem cells are genetically 
matched to patient
Limitations
Limited number of cells 
available for federally funded 
research
Not achieved with human 
cells yet
Results in limited numbers of cell 
types
Risk of creating tumors from 
transplanting 
undifferentiated cells
Risk of creating tumors 
from transplanting 
undifferentiated cells
Not found in all tissues or organs
Difficult to manipulate and grow in 
the laboratory
Ethical issues
Destruction of human embryos
Destruction of human 
embryos
No ethical issues have been raised
Require informed consent 
from embryo donor
Require informed consent 
from embryo donor
Possible misapplication in 
reproductive cloning
Source:  Adapted from the National Academies of Sciences, http://dels.nas.edu/dels/rpt_briefs/Understanding_Stem_Cells.pdf.

[Page 83]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   83
laws in the United States that prohibit human 
reproductive cloning. To date, federal regulations on 
most human biotechnologies are not adequate, and 
more comprehensive regulatory policies are needed. 
Regarding stem cell research, in 2001, President Bush 
imposed a limitation on federal funding earmarked 
to embryonic stem cell research. This policy decision 
has been a source of controversy and debate, with 
many members of Bush’s own Republican Party 
regretting this limitation and siding with the more 
progressive Democratic members of Congress. 
Also noteworthy are some of the most outspoken 
supporters of stem cell research, Republican public 
figures Nancy Reagan, former First Lady, and 
Arnold Schwarzenegger, the California governor. 
In that regard, then Governor Schwarzenegger led 
the country by proposing a bill, Proposition 71, in 
his state to fund stem cell research. Californians 
voted to pass the bill in 2004, which authorized 
up to $3 billion over 10 years for embryonic stem 
cell research in California. With this funding, the 
California Institute for Regenerative Medicine was 
created to foster stem cell research and appropriate 
the funds provided by the state of California. Other 
states have followed suit with the creation of stem 
cell research programs, albeit not as ambitious or 
comprehensive as the California one.
In 2005, the National Academies of Sciences 
of the United States published the Guidelines for 
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research, which pro-
vide a common set of scientific and ethical guide-
lines aimed at aiding scientists from both the public 
and private sectors to establish new protocols in 
stem cell research. These guidelines state the need 
for the monitoring of all human embryonic stem 
cell research and outline specific methods for the 
derivation of new stem cell lines; for example, 
experimenting on human embryos by inserting 
stem cells into them is not allowed. Furthermore, 
the rapid advances in stem cell research prompted 
the National Academies to create a panel com-
posed of experts in the field to monitor and review 
scientific developments; to change ethical, legal, 
and policy issues; and to prepare periodic reports 
to update the guidelines. More information on this 
can be found at http://www.nationalacademies.
org/stemcells.
Within the EU, the European Convention on 
Human Rights and Biomedicine has prohibited 
human cloning in one of its protocols; however, 
only a few countries—namely Greece, Spain, and 
Portugal—have ratified this protocol. Furthermore, 
the ambiguity continues in the EU with regard 
to any kind of legal standing on reproductive 
human cloning despite the fact that the Charter of 
Fundamental Rights of the European Union has 
prohibited its practice. The United Nations decided 
to introduce debate on this issue among the country 
members of its General Assembly; as a result, in 
March 2005, the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Cloning was adopted. 
For information on National Polices Governing 
New Technologies of Human Genetic Modification 
in a large number of different nations, see http://
geneticsand society.org/article.php?id=304. For read-
ers interested in the topic of bioethics, information 
can be found at http://ethics.sandiego.edu/Applied/
Bioethics/index.asp. In addition, a good source of 
information and interesting reading can be found 
on the Web site of Professor Lee Silver of Princeton 
University, an expert in bioethics, http://www. 
leemsilver.net/challenging/index.htm. Dr. Silver’s 
views are provocative as well as entertaining, and 
interested readers will enjoy his written work and 
audiovisual pieces.
Biological Cells and Their Machines
Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
Earlier, we learned how cells might have emerged 
from a soup of chemicals, and their more detailed 
construction and operation will be instructive for 
the future of  miniaturization science. Living cells 
and their organelles have dimensions in the micro-
meter and submicrometer range and constitute the 
first truly autonomous micromachines. There is 
much more membrane area (99%) surrounding the 
internal organelles than there is outer membrane 
surface (1%). 
Microscopic sizes are the normal working size 
for the biological world, a biological cell of about 
5–10 µm being one of the larger components. The 
human body contains approximately 100 trillion of 
these cells. Some of the simplest organisms, such as 

[Page 84]
84   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
bacteria and algae, have no cell nucleus, and their 
genetic material is mixed in with the aqueous cyto-
plasm. These life forms are known as prokaryotes, a 
designation used to convey their relatively simple 
status as protocells, and they are the forerunners 
to multicellular organisms. Most multicellular 
organisms have their genetic material in a separate 
chamber within the cell, the nucleus, and are called 
eukaryotes, literally, “true nucleus.” These two types 
of cells are compared in Figure 2.20. 
Prokaryotes (from bacteria to blue-green algae) 
took about 500 million years to evolve, but the 
evolution of the first eukaryotic cells took 2500 
million years. Clearly the development of this more 
elaborate construction was a crucial step in the 
evolution toward more complex life forms; early 
eukaryotic cells began the evolutionary path that 
led to complex multicellular animals and plants. 
The more complex a multicellular organism, the 
more different types of cells it has; a blue whale, 
for example, has approximately 120 types of cells, 
whereas a mushroom has fewer than 10. Eukaryotic 
cells come in a very wide variety of shapes and 
sizes, but on average a cell has a volume of about 
3.4 × 10–9 ml and weighs roughly 3.5 × 10–9 grams. 
Cell size, on the upper end (400 µm3), is limited 
by the ability of diffusion to bring nutrients to the 
appropriate parts inside the cell and to dispose of 
waste products. The smallest size for a free-living 
organism (0.02 µm3) most likely is set by the catalytic 
efficiency of enzyme and the protein synthetic 
chemistry machinery. 
Organelles
Introduction
Organelles, visible in the eukaryotic cell in Figure 
2.20b, are specialized structures. The functions of 
several of these cell organelles are described in the 
following sections. As depicted in Figure 2.21, a cell 
might be compared to a city, with the corresponding 
functions listed below the images. The high degree 
of spatial/temporal organization of molecules and 
organelles within cells is made possible by protein 
machines that transport components to various des-
tinations within the cytoplasm. These different tiny 
motors are specialized for specific tasks, such as cell 
division, cell movement, crawling, maintenance of 
cell shape, movement of internal organelles, synthe-
sis of ATP, RNA synthesis, DNA synthesis, etc.
Microvillus
Smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
Mitochondrion
Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Golgi apparatus
Lysosome
Plasma
membrane
Ribosomes
Nucleus
Centriole
Microﬁlament
(b)
Mesosome
Nucleoid
Cell wall
Flagellum
Plasma membrane
Ribosomes
(a)
Prokaryotes
Eukaryotes
No nucleus—have a nuclear “area”
Nucleus present
No membrane-bound organelles
Have membrane-bound organelles
DNA present usually as 1 large chromosome
DNA in nucleus
Primitive cells usually quite small
“Modern” cells, can be quite large
Archebacteria, Eubacteria
Plants, Animals, Fungi, Protists
FIGURE 2.20 Comparison of a prokaryotic cell (a) and an eukaryotic cell (b).

[Page 85]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   85
Mitochondria and Phylogenetic Trees
The nucleus contains the genetic material (library), 
and the mitochondria (power plants), through 
utilization of pyruvate and oxygen, produce ATP 
(adenosine  triphosphate), a compound that pro-
vides energy for cellular activities. There is con-
vincing evidence that these mitochondria used to 
be independent structures with a life of their own 
that became incorporated into eukaryotic cells over 
time—very much like bacteria that permanently 
colonize more complex cells.46 Mitochondria, for 
example, contain DNA that uses a slightly different 
code for amino acids than does the same DNA in 
the nucleus of the cell. As in bacteria, the length 
of DNA is closed into a loop and the mitochondria 
reproduced by splitting in two. These are amazing 
findings, as the DNA code for amino acids is other-
wise the same for species as different as humans 
and fish (see under “The Genetic Code”). While 
each of us necessarily has two parents, our mito-
chondria and mitochondrial DNA come from the 
ovum and hence from our mothers. Our mothers, 
in turn, got their mitochondrial DNA from their 
Workers/machines
Proteins 
Roads 
Actin filaments
Highways 
Microtubules
Trucks 
Molecular motors
Power plants 
Mitochondria
Factories 
Ribosomes
Library 
Nucleus with DNA
Post office 
Golgi apparatus
Police
Chaperones
Gates, keys, passes
Ion channels
Electric fences
Membranes
Train tracks
Actin filament network
Motors, generators
ATP synthases
Vehicles
Hemoglobin
Train control center
Centrosome
Copy machines
Polymerases
Chain couplers
Ligases
Bulldozers, destroyers
Proteases, proteasomes
Internet nodes
Neuron synapses
Mail sorting machines
Protein sorting machines
FIGURE 2.21 The cell is like a city.

[Page 86]
86   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
mothers, and so on. Thus, while our nuclear DNA is 
a mish-mash of the DNA of our four grandparents, 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is an almost exact 
copy of the DNA of our maternal grandmother. The 
match is not exact because of mutations: mtDNA 
has a pointwise mutation substitution rate 10 times 
faster than nuclear DNA—so it is a better record of 
evolutionary change.
Evolutionary trees or phylogenies can be recon-
structed by comparing mtDNA (Figure 2.22). In 
fact, the mutations in the mitochondrial DNA pro-
vide the molecular clock that allows us to determine 
how much time has elapsed since the mitochondrial 
Eve lived. University of California Berkeley’s Allan 
Wilson, in 1987, compared mtDNA of many racial 
groups.47 Knowing the average mutation rate, he fig-
ured out that we all derive from a single version of 
mtDNA that existed 200,000 years ago in the cells 
of an African woman—the common ancestor of all 
of humanity. This work is now seen as overly sim-
plistic. Construction of an exact phylogenic tree is 
indeed still controversial: for example, it is not nec-
essarily true that the molecular clock is constant; 
i.e., mutation rates may change, and environmental 
pressure may change (http://www.sciencemag.org/ 
feature/data/tol). Moreover, the mathematical de -
scriptions and algorithms that may lead to a his-
torically correct phylogenetic tree remain to be 
developed (http://tolweb.org/tree). 
Mitochondria and Power
Here we dwell for a moment as we consider the 
operation of the cells’ power  stations—the mito-
chondria—in more detail (Figure 2.23). We study 
how cells derive their power from the sun by relying 
on mitochondria. Energy is required for mechani-
cal work, transportation, and chemical work. When 
considering building artificial cells, powering the 
micro- or nanounits is one of the first priorities. This 
might mean, in human engineering terms, captur-
ing radiant energy (e.g., sunlight) with a solar cell 
Angiosperms
Gymnosperms
Ferns
Ascobolus
Neurospora
Green algae
Sponges
Nematodes
Arthropods
Amoeba
Slime molds
Mollusks
Coelenterates
Urochordates
Vertebrates
Echinoderms
Yeasts
Diatoms
Cilates
Heliozansus
Dinoﬂagellates
Archaebacteria
Gram positive
bacteria
Purple bacteria
Myxobacteria
Cyanobacteria
Mitochondria
Red algae
Brown algae
Chloroplasts
FIGURE 2.22 Evolutionary trees or phylogenies can be reconstructed by comparing mitochondrial DNA.

[Page 87]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   87
and converting it to a fuel that can be stored for later 
use (e.g., hydrogen through water electrolysis).
In Figure 2.24a we show the molecular structure 
of the energy currency of a biological cell, i.e., 
adenosine triphosphate or ATP, the immediate 
source of energy in all cells of all living organisms 
on Earth. The structure of an ATP molecule contains 
three molecules of phosphate linked to each other; 
at the pH of normal biological fluids, they have a 
negative charge. When energy is required, ATP is 
hydrolyzed to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and 
inorganic phosphate (Pi). Back in the mitochondria, 
ADP is recycled back to ATP almost immediately, 
so that the energy is again available to do needed 
work (recharging of the batteries) (Figure 2.24b). 
The production of ATP is due to three different cell 
processes, namely photosynthesis, fermentation, 
and respiration. In photosynthesis, nature uses 
stacks of thylakoids in a chloroplast, a plant 
organelle as shown in Figure 2.25. We will detail the 
photosynthesis process, the conversion of carbon 
dioxide and water into glucose with the help of 
sunlight, shortly.
For now it suffices to say that through photosyn-
thesis, plants, algae, and some bacteria store solar 
energy in the form of the high-energy chemical 
bonds of glucose. In that process carbon dioxide 
and water are consumed, and some leftover oxygen 
is released in the air. This energy consuming pro-
cess is said to be anabolic; i.e., large molecules are 
synthesized from smaller ones in a scenario sche-
matically illustrated in Figure 2.26a (ΔG > 0). Most 
living organisms (including plants and animals) 
then reverse photosynthesis by taking glucose apart 
and releasing energy to power their own growth and 
development. In this second process, oxygen is con-
sumed, and water and carbon dioxide, the original 
ingredients consumed by the plants, algae or bac-
teria, are released. This energy producing process 
is said to be catabolic, i.e., breaking down complex 
Mitochondria inner structure
Inner
membrane
Outer
membrane
Matrix
Cristae
FIGURE 2.23 Mitochondria.
O
O
O
P
P
P
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
O
O
N
N
N
N
OH OH
HC
CH2
C
C
C
CH
Adenine
NH2
Ribose
ATP
H2O
P
P
P
P
P
P
Energy
Inorganic
phosphate
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
(b) Hydrolysis of ATP
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
+
+
Phosphate groups
(a) Structure of adenosine triphosphate
FIGURE 2.24 (a) Molecular structure of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). (b) Hydrolysis of ATP to ADP. 

[Page 88]
88   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
molecules into smaller, simpler ones. This is illus-
trated in Figure 2.26b (ΔG < 0). 
Direct oxidation of glucose with oxygen would 
release 686 kcal/mol (ΔG= –686 kcal/mol) (Reaction 
2.1), but cells cannot use the energy stored in glu-
cose directly.
In the cytoplasm of a cell, first, nine different 
enzymes must help convert the glucose (a chain 
of six carbons with twelve hydrogen atoms and six 
oxygen atoms) in nine successive chemical reactions 
Chloroplast
Tylakoid
membrane
Hydrocarbon tail
(H atoms not shown)
Porphyrin ring
(light-absorbing
“head” of
molecule)
CH2
CH2
H
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
H3C
H3C
CH3
CHO in chlorophyll b
in chlorophyll a
CH
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Mg
C
C
C
C
C
O
O
O
O
O
C
C
C
C
N
N
N
H
H
N
H
H
C
H
Cluster of
pigment molecules
embedded
in membrane
Granum
(stack of thylakoids)
Chloroplasts
Chlorophyll
Leaf
Molecule
Organelle
Cells
Tissues
Organ
Community
FIGURE 2.25 Photosynthesis in plants: from trees to pigment molecules in the thylakoids in chloroplasts.
C6H12O6
6H2O
6CO2
O2
ATP
and
heat
kcal/mol
ΔG = -686 
Reaction 2.1

[Page 89]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   89
to two molecules of pyruvate (a three-carbon 
chain with three hydrogens and three oxygens). 
This complicated process is called glycolysis. After 
glycolysis, it is the pyruvate that carries on as the 
energy source originally produced with the solar 
energy input, and transports it to the mitochondria. 
The mitochondria takes the energy garnered 
during photosynthesis (in the case of plants) or the 
digested food (in the case of animals) and stored as 
pyruvate and converts it to ATP. This conversion in 
the mitchondria occurs at a very high surface inner 
membrane in a complex set of reactions, including 
the famous Krebs cycle. The Krebs cycle is an aerobic 
process (i.e., it involves the use of oxygen) that is 
responsible for cellular respiration. Hydrolysis 
of the ATP result in the release of one of three Pi 
groups, along with 7 kcal/mol, and the formation 
of ADP (Figure 2.24b). ATP thus packs a wallop of 
concentrated solar power. These tiny solar batteries 
are released by the mitochondria into the cell to 
power all types of uphill reactions (ΔG > 0). In 
releasing their power, ATP battery molecules shed 
instantly one phosphate (Pi) and are discharged to 
become ADP (ATP minus one Pi). In biochemistry, 
phosphorylation is the addition of a Pi group to a 
protein or a small molecule. Beyond doubt, protein 
phosphorylation is the most important regula-
tory event in eukaryotic cells. Many enzymes and 
receptors are turned on or off by phosphorylation 
and dephosphorylation. Phosphorylation is cata-
lyzed by various specific protein kinases, whereas 
phosphatases dephosphorylate. The discharged ADP 
solar battery, in need of recharging now, diffuses 
until it finds a mitochondria power station, where it 
will regain its lost phosphate. Cells obviously recycle 
the ATP batteries they use for work.
To make ATP from pyruvate, as we show in Figure 
2.27, the most prevalent and efficient pathway is 
 cellular aerobic respiration. In cellular aerobic res-
piration, the conversion of 1 mol of glucose yields 
up to 36 mol of ATP; therefore, the energy efficiency 
is 36 × 7 kcal/mol divided by 686 kcal/mol = 252/ 
686 = 36.7% (compared with about 3% efficiency 
in the  burning of oil or gasoline). In the absence 
Photosynthesis
Plants
Algae
Some bacteria
Sugars and
other organic
molecules
Energy
of
sunlight
Anabolic
CO2 + H2O
O2 + Sugars
O2
H2O
H2O
CO2
Respiration
Most
living
organisms
Useful
chemical
bond
energy
Catabolic
H2O + CO2 
O2
CO2
Sugars + O2
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.26 (a) Anabolic process: use of energy to conduct unfavorable/uphill reactions (from small to large molecules). 
(b) Catabolic processes: fuel breakdown to deliver energy (from large molecules to small).
Glucose
Pyruvate
2 ATP
With
O2
Without
O2
34 ATP
Lactic
acid
Ethyl
alcohol
+ CO2
Oxidative
respiration
Glycolysis
Fermentation
FIGURE 2.27 Various pathways to making of pyruvate, 
the food source for mitochondria.

[Page 90]
90   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
of oxygen, certain cells are still able to make ATP, 
albeit in a less efficient matter. This can be accom-
plished through fermentation and anaerobic respira-
tion. Fermentation is the breakdown of sugars in the 
absence of oxygen to release energy, carbon dioxide, 
and alcohol (or lactic acid). Yeast cells produce ethyl 
alcohol by fermentation. 
Some prokaryotes are able to carry out anaerobic 
respiration, respiration in which an inorganic 
molecule other than oxygen (O2) is the final 
electron acceptor. For example, certain bacteria 
known as sulfate reducers can transfer electrons to 
sulfate (SO4
2–), reducing it to H2S. Other bacteria, 
called nitrate reducers, can transfer electrons to 
nitrate  (NO3
–), reducing it to nitrite (NO2
–). Other 
nitrate reducers can reduce nitrate even further, to 
nitrous oxide (NO) or nitrogen gas (N2). The total 
energy yield per glucose oxidized is less than with 
aerobic respiration, with a theoretical maximum 
yield of 36 ATP molecules or fewer.
Cellular respiration, fermentation, and anaerobic 
respiration are catabolic, energy-yielding pathways. 
The totality of an organism’s chemical reactions 
is called metabolism. Metabolism manages the 
material and energy resources of the cell. In Figure 
2.28 the various processes that ATP energizes are 
summarized.
Since animals cannot make food directly from 
water and CO2, chloroplasts and mitchondria work 
in tandem, as illustrated in Figure 2.29. Photo-
synthesis and respiration are complementary pro-
cesses in the living world. Photosynthesis uses the 
energy of sunlight to produce sugars and other 
organic molecules. These molecules, in turn, serve as 
energy sources or food. Respiration is a process that 
uses O2 and forms CO2 from the same carbon atoms 
that had been taken up as CO2 and converted into 
sugars by photosynthesis. In respiration, organisms 
obtain the energy that they need to survive. It is 
the cycling of molecules between chloroplasts and 
mitochondria that allows a flow of energy from 
the sun through all living things. Photosynthesis 
preceded respiration on the Earth by, probably, 
billions of years before enough O2 was released to 
create an atmosphere rich in oxygen. Ultimately, 
the process of photosynthesis (Reaction 2.2) can 
be considered one of the most, if not the most, 
important chemical reaction on Earth.
Transport work: ATP phosphorylates transport proteins
Membrane
protein
Solute
Motor protein
Reactants
Product made
Protein moved
Solute transported
X
X
Y
Y
P
P
P
P
P
ADP
+
ATP
Chemical work: ATP phosphorylates key reactants
Mechanical work: ATP phosphorylates motor proteins
FIGURE 2.28 The various processes that ATP energizes: ATP at work.

[Page 91]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   91
 
6CO2 + 12H2O + light energy 
 
⇒ C6H12O6 + 6O2 + 6H2O 
Reaction 2.2
For building artificial cells, we would be better off 
building plant like-cells, as the source for fuel is in 
the atmosphere (water and/or CO2) and harvesting 
energy from the sunlight is relatively simple. So let 
us take a more detailed look at how the chloroplasts 
in plant leaves do it (Figure 2.25). 
Pigments in the leaves of plants absorb sunlight, 
principally through chlorophyll in the chloroplasts. 
Chloroplasts are found mainly in mesophyll cells 
forming the tissues in the interior of the leaf (Figure 
2.25). Chlorophyll comes in two slightly different 
forms, called chl a and chl b. Most leaves contain at 
least two additional types of pigments, carotenes and 
xanthophylls, that are capable of absorbing light of 
different wavelengths. The more abundant chloro-
phylls usually mask the latter two types of pigments. 
There are about half a million chloroplasts per square 
millimeter of leaf surface. The color of a leaf comes 
from chlorophyll, the green pigment in the chloro-
plasts. Oxygen exits and carbon dioxide enters the leaf 
through microscopic pores, stomata, in the leaf. Veins 
deliver water from the roots, and carry off sugar from 
mesophyll cells to other plant areas (Figure 2.30). 
Only chl a can participate directly in the light 
reactions. Other pigments in the thylakoid mem-
brane (e.g., chl b, carotenoids) can absorb light and 
transfer the energy to chl a. These pigments thus 
broaden the spectrum of solar light (wavelengths) 
that can drive photosynthesis. Plants only use a nar-
row range of frequencies from sunlight between 400 
and 700 nm. Light reactions on the thylakoid mem-
brane convert solar energy and produce oxygen, and 
dark reactions fix CO2 in the Calvin-Benson cycle to 
make sugar, as shown in Figure 2.31. 
Molecular Motors
Other subcomponents of biological cells exhibit 
equally fascinating feats of nanoengineering. For 
illustration, consider molecular motors, composed of 
a discrete number of atoms that produce molecular 
or supramolecular motions. Molecular motors derive 
energy from ATP that is present in the cytoplasm 
and nucleoplasm of every cell and is the universal 
energy currency for all biological processes (see 
Figure 2.24). Living things can use ATP like a battery. 
Molecular motors are in a sense nanomachines 
that do mechanical work through the hydrolysis 
of ATP, the energy source of the cell. During 
hydrolysis of ATP, a shape change occurs within the 
motor protein (a mechanochemical process), and 
mechanical work is performed. This mechanical 
work is used to move the motor along a track in 
order to perform a load transport function or to 
apply forces to the filament for cell motility and cell 
Light energy
Ecosystem
Organic
molecules
Photosynthesis
in chloroplasts
Cellular respiration
in mitochondria
CO2 + H2O
+ o2
ATP
Powers most cellular work
Heat energy
FIGURE 2.29 From light to photosynthesis to cellular 
respiration and heat energy.
Leaf cross section
Vein
Mesophyll
Mesophyll cell
Stomata CO2 O2
FIGURE 2.30 Stomata and veins in a green leaf.

[Page 92]
92   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
division. Three types of motors can be distinguished, 
i.e., linear motors (such as myosin, dynein, and 
kinesin), rotary motors (F0-F1 ATP synthase) and 
polymerization motors (RNA, ssDNA); their tracks 
and functions are summarized in Table 2.5. Many 
of proteins can be considered nanoactuators, not 
only rotary or linear motor proteins. In some cases, 
even a simple binding of a protein and a specific 
target 
molecule—a 
chemical 
reaction—results 
in definite shape change—a mechanical effect. A 
conformational change might be put to good use in 
genetically engineered nanoactuators or biosensors 
(see calmodulin example, below).
Kinesin is a linear motor protein that steps along 
the microtubuli, the tubelike fibrils of the cell’s skel-
eton, and is responsible for carrying organelles over 
a long distance within the cell (Figure 2.32). Most 
kinesins “walk” toward the plus ends of micro-
tubules. A single kinesin molecule can drag along 
relatively large things like chromosomes and other 
organelles. Svoboda et al. demonstrated that kinesin 
can even work in vitro on a microscope slide.48 This 
was demonstrated by gluing kinesin on microtubuli 
and observing it drag along a little ball of silica gel. 
Its strength is about 5 piconewtons (the force a laser 
pointer makes on a screen). Optical tweezers are 
well suited for studying molecular motors because 
of their low spring constants. Using optical traps, 
this same group determined that kinesin moves in 
individual steps that are 8 nm (80 Å) in length, a 
size consistent with its dimensions (Figure 2.33).48 
Microtubules can also move themselves on a glass 
slide surface containing bound kinesin (a single 
molecule bound to glass can move a microtubule). 
For the latest on kinesin research, visit the kinesin 
homepage at http://www.proweb.org/kinesin. 
Noji et al. discovered that the γ-subunit of the 
hydrophilic F1 portion of ATPase rotates in response 
to the synthesis/hydrolysis of ATP (Figure 2.34).49 
The moving part of an ATPase is a central protein 
shaft (or rotor, in electric-motor terms) that rotates 
in response to electrochemical reactions with each 
of the molecule’s three proton  channels (compa-
rable to the electromagnets in the stator coil of an 
electric motor). The ubiquitous ATPase was the first 
rotary motor enzyme ever found, and the force gen-
erated by this motor protein (>100 pN) is among 
the greatest of any known molecular motor. The 
enzyme puts out a very large torque, comparable 
ADP
NADP+
Pi
Calvin-Benson
cycle
FIGURE 2.31 Photosynthesis with light reaction and dark 
reaction in the Calvin-Benson cycle.
TABLE 2.5 Molecular Motors and Their Tracks and Functions
Type
Track
Function
Myosin
F-actin, filament
Cell crawling, cell division, muscle contraction
Dynein
Microtubules
Eukaryotic cell (produces the axonemal beating 
of cilia and flagella and also transports cargo 
along microtubules toward the cell nucleus)
Kinesin
Microtubules
Organelle transport, chromosome segregation, 
moves cargo inside cells away from the 
nucleus along microtubules
Polymerase
RNA, single-stranded
Nuclear processes (transcribes RNA from a DNA 
template)

[Page 93]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   93
to a person rotating a 150-m rod. The enzyme can 
spin such a long filament because it automatically 
ratchets down the rotation rate. A no-load rotational 
velocity of 1020 rpm was calculated, and the motor 
has a diameter of less than 12 nm. Montemagno 
et al.,50 then at Cornell University, integrated these 
genetically engineered motor proteins with NEMS, 
for example, by attaching the protein nanomotors 
to arrays of nickel posts and attaching nickel rotor 
blades to the protein molecules.50 The “handle” for 
attaching the ATPase motor to the nanofabricated 
metallic substrates is a synthetic peptide composed 
of histidine and other amino acids. The histidine 
peptide allows the molecular motors to adhere to 
nanofabricated patterns of gold, copper, or nickel—
the three standard contact materials in integrated 
circuits. 
The researchers attached fluorescent microspheres 
(~1 µm in diameter) to the ATPase molecule’s rotor 
and observed the microsphere movement with a dif-
ferential interferometer and with a charge-coupled 
device camera.
The authors envision that F1-ATPase motors will 
be used to pump fluids and open and close valves in 
nano- and microfluidic devices and provide mechani-
cal drives for a new class of nanomechanical devices.50 
This work was cited by Discover magazine as one of 
the most promising new technologies of 1999. Today, 
twelve years later, that promise remains unmet.
Bacteria swim in viscous liquid environments by 
rotating helical propellers known as flagella, shown 
in Figure 2.35 (see also Volume I, Chapter 6, “Mixing, 
Stirring, and Diffusion in Low Reynolds Number 
Fluids”). The bacterial flagellum is a nanomachine 
made of about twenty-five different proteins, each of 
them in multiple copies ranging from a few to tens 
of thousands. It is constructed by self-assembly of 
these large numbers of proteins, each into a different 
Kinesin
Vesicle
Plus
end
Minus
end
Microtubule
Glass slide
FIGURE 2.32 Kinesin motor. Schematic diagram showing 
movements mediated by kinesin, an ATP-driven motor, on 
microtubule tracks. Vesicles and beads containing kinesin 
molecules on their surface move toward the plus end of 
microtubules. Microtubules can also move themselves 
along a glass slide containing bound kinesin.48
Bead
Kinesin
Displacement (nm)
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Time (s)
0
8
16
24
32
40
Optical trap
Microtubule
FIGURE 2.33 Laser tweezers were used to study kinesin motors with the kinesin molecule attached to a bead traveling 
over a microtubule. (From http://www.stanford.edu/group/blocklab.)

[Page 94]
94   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
part that exerts a different function, such as a rotary 
motor, bushing, drive shaft,  rotation-switch regu-
lator, universal joint, helical propeller, and rotary 
promoter for self-assembly. The rotary motor, with 
a diameter of only 30–40 nm, drives the rotation of 
the flagellum at around 300 Hz, at a power level of 
10–16 W, with energy conversion efficiency close to 
100%. These protein motors appear to be fueled by 
a flow of protons across a pH gradient and can push 
an average-sized cell at 30,000 nm/s or 15 body-
lengths per second—and can also run in reverse!51 
In comparison, the surface micromachined motors 
of Volume II, Chapter 7, are hopelessly impractical.
The structural designs and functional mecha-
nisms revealed in the complex machinery of the 
bacterial flagellum could provide many novel tech-
nologies that may become the basis for future nano-
technology, from which we should be able to find 
many useful applications.
Mammalian muscle, nature’s ubiquitous actuator 
for larger organisms, is another chemomechanical 
actuator. Muscle cells are long and cylindrical and 
made up of thick myosin filaments surrounded by 
thin actin filaments. A central myosin filament and 
surrounding actin filaments form a sarcomere unit, 
which has a length of 2.5 µm and a thickness of 
10–20 nm. The thin and thick filaments are inter-
digitated, and upon muscle contraction, the thick 
filaments are pulled along the thin filament in a 
ratchet-like manner (Figure 2.36). The linear motion 
is effected by the myosin head, which is attached to 
the thick filament via a flexible hinge and binds to 
the actin filament (Figure 2.37). This linear protein 
motor again uses chemical energy released in the 
conversion of ATP to ADP and a phosphate ion (Pi). 
The hydrolysis of 1 mol of ATP releases about 10 kcal 
of energy (i.e., 6.96 × 10–20 J per molecule). 
The maximum static muscle force generated per 
unit cross-sectional area (i.e., tension, stress) is about 
0.350 MPa, a constant number for all vertebrate 
muscle fibers. In vertebrate muscle, the maximum 
force generated can be held only for short periods 
of time because of muscle fatigue. The maximum 
sustainable force usually is about 30% of the peak 
value. For this reason, the maximum static sustain-
able stress generated by muscle is about 0.100 MPa. 
The maximum power per unit mass (in W/kg) is an 
important figure of merit for robotic and prosthetic 
actuators. For human muscle, it typically measures 
ATP
Na+
Na+
ADP + Pi
10 nm
δ
β
α
α
ε
γ
b
Cytoplasm
Periplasm
F1
F0
a
c
FIGURE 2.34 ATPase motors. A single molecule of F0 
F1-ATPase acts as a rotary motor—the smallest known. 
A central rotor of radius ~1 nm, formed by its γ-subunit, 
turns in a stator barrel of radius ~5 nm formed by three 
α- and three β-subunits.
Flagellar ﬁlament
Hook
2 7 nm
Outer membrane
Inner (plasma)
membrane
“Bearing”
“Rotor”
Conceptual diagram of the
motor mechanism of E. coli
“Stator”
Peptidoglycan layer
FIGURE 2.35 Bacteria swim in viscous liquid environments by rotating helical propellers called flagella.

[Page 95]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   95
about 50 W kg –1 but can be as high as 200 W kg –1 for 
some muscles for a brief period of time. To illustrate 
the excellent cycle lifetime of a muscle, we need only 
look at cardiac muscle. The heart beats more than 
3 × 109 times in the lifetime of an average person; an 
excellent lifetime compared with any artificial actu-
ator. When trying to mimic a muscle with an artifi-
cial actuator, one of the most difficult properties to 
emulate is the extreme change in stiffness occurring 
between resting muscle and maximally activated 
muscle. Stiffness can increase as much as 5 times 
from rest to a 100% contraction.52 On the basis of 
these observations, researchers preparing artificial 
muscles are now shifting from using stiff inorganic 
materials with a high Young’s modulus, such as Si, 
to low-Young’s modulus organic materials, such as 
hydrogels and redox polymers. 
The beating motion of hair-like cilia on cells and of 
flagella depends on an interplay of a pair of proteins, 
dynein and tubulin (see Figure 2.38). Dyneins walk 
toward the minus ends (the microtubule part with 
less expand and shrink activity) of microtubules, caus-
ing sliding of microtubules, which leads to a beating 
motion. This protein pair is equivalent to the myosin 
and actin pair in muscle tissue (see Figure 2.37). 
Unlike the cells of plants and fungi, animal cells 
do not have a rigid cell wall. This feature was lost in 
the distant past by the single-celled organisms that 
Sacromere
Tick ﬁlament
(myosin ﬁlament)
Tin ﬁlament
(actin ﬁlament)
Z disc
Relaxation
Contraction
Z disc
FIGURE 2.36 Muscle cells: the linear motion of muscles, which results in muscle contraction, is driven by chemical energy 
as ATP is hydrolyzed.
Tick ﬁlament (myosin)
Z line
Tin ﬁlament
(actin)
ATP
Myosin
head
ATP binds to a myosin head, which is
released from an actin ﬁlament
ADP
ADP
P
P
Hydrolysis of ATP cocks the myosin head.
2
4
3
1
Ca2+
Te myosin head attaches to an actin
binding site, with the help of calcium.
Te power stroke slides the actin (thin)
ﬁlament.
New position of Z line
FIGURE 2.37 The linear motion is effected by the myosin head, which is attached to the thick filament via a flexible 
hinge, and binds to the actin filament.

[Page 96]
96   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
gave rise to the kingdom Animalia. Most eukaryotic 
cells, both animal and plant, range in size between 
1 and 100 µm. The lack of a rigid cell wall allowed 
animals to develop a greater diversity of cell types, 
tissues, and organs. Specialized cells that formed 
nerves and muscles—tissues impossible for plants to 
evolve—gave these organisms mobility. The ability 
to move about by the use of specialized muscle tis-
sues is a hallmark of the animal world, though a few 
animals, primarily sponges, do not possess differ-
entiated tissues. Notably, protozoans locomote, but 
only via nonmuscular means, in effect, using cilia, 
flagella, and pseudopodia.
Different types of cells, such as neuronal cells 
and brain cells will be reviewed in more detail in 
the context of equipping micro- or nanomachines 
with a muscle and brains in Chapters 8 and 9, this 
volume, respectively.
Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Forces 
Drive Self-Assembly in Nature 
Introduction
Hydrophobic forces are most important with regard 
to self-assembly such as in protein folding, cell 
wall formation and formation of macromolecular 
assemblies (e.g., DNA hybridization). The concept 
of hydrophobic forces only was introduced in the 
1950s and is hard to define, as the underlying physi-
cal principles are not easily understood.* Jencks’s 
* “The magnitude, range and origin of the hydrophobic interaction 
have been a mystery ever since the pioneering work by Kauzman and 
Tanford” (J. Israelachvili, 2005).53
definition is one of the better ones: “hydrophobicity 
is an interaction between molecules that is stronger 
than the interaction of the separate molecules with 
water, and can not be accounted for by covalent, elec-
trostatic, H-bonding or charge transfer processes.”
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 7, a hydrophobic 
molecule, also termed a nonpolar or lipophilic 
molecule, is a water-fearing or -repelling molecule. 
Since hydrophobic molecules are not electrically 
polarized, and because they are unable to form 
hydrogen bonds, water repels them in favor of 
bonding with other water molecules. Examples of 
hydrophobic molecules include the alkanes, oils, 
fats, and greasy substances in general. Hydrophilic 
or polar molecules is the term used for water-
loving molecules. Examples include polar organic 
groups  such as amino, carboxyl, and hydroxyl 
groups, such as those in amines, carboxylic acids, 
and alcohols. Amphiphilic or amphipathic mole-
cules are molecules that have both a hydrophobic 
and a hydrophilic component, which makes them 
at the same time water-loving and water-repelling. 
They are compounds that exhibit both hydrophilic 
and hydrophobic properties simultaneously, for 
example, fatty acids and detergents. One type  of 
an amphiphilic molecule has a water-soluble  car-
boxylic group head and a water-insoluble hydro-
carbon tail. Amphiphilic molecules of this sort 
are called surfactants. A surfactant is a soluble 
chemical amphiphilic compound that reduces the 
surface tension between two liquids. It is used in 
many detergents and soapy cleaning compounds 
because of its ability to surround grease particles 
and solubilize them. Another type of amphiphilic 
molecules, introduced below, is the phospholipids.
Hydrocarbon groups have greater polarizability 
(not to be confused with polarity) than water, so 
they prefer to interact with each other rather than 
with water. But this effect is rather small, so there 
must be a more dominant effect at work, espe-
cially since even if the force between nonpolar 
molecules is repulsive they are aggregating when 
put together in a polar medium. The complex that 
forms between nonpolar molecules has less unfa-
vorable interaction with the solvent than the sum of 
the uncomplexed molecules (the lesser of two evils 
so to speak) (Figure 2.39). It is this latter effect that 
Ultrastructure of cilia and ﬂagella
Axoneme
Outer doublet
microtubules
Central
microtubles
Dynein
arms
Basal
body
Plasma
membrane
FIGURE 2.38 Dynein, found in cilia and flagella, causes a 
beating motion.

[Page 97]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   97
causes the hydrophobic interaction—which in itself 
is thus incorrectly named since the energetic driv-
ing force comes from the hydrophilic molecules. 
The hydrophobic effect is illustrated in more 
detail in Figure 2.40 and in the sequence of events in 
Figure 2.41. Both figures clarify what happens when 
we dissolve lipid molecules in water. In Figure 2.40, 
we illustrate how hydrophobic compounds upset 
the structure of water and lead to the formation of 
a clathrate. A clathrate, clathrate compound, or cage 
compound is a chemical substance consisting of a 
lattice of one type of molecule trapping and contain-
ing a second type of molecule. The ordering of the 
shell of water molecules around the hydrocarbon 
solute in a clathrate compound (so as to minimize 
“dangling” H-bonds) causes a significant decrease in 
the entropy of the water (ΔS < 0). Typically, the total 
change in entropy, ΔS, in dissolving small hydro-
carbon molecules in water (at 298 K) is about –100 
J K–1 mol–1. This decrease in entropy (associated with 
the ordering of molecules) makes it unfavorable to 
mix “hydrophobic molecules” in water, or solvent 
entropy favors the removal of nonpolar solutes from 
solution. The overall enthalpy change of interaction 
of a nonpolar solute with water, on the other hand, 
is not particularly unfavorable (ΔH < 0) because the 
nonpolar molecules induce cage-like ordering of the 
first shell of water molecules (clathrate), strength-
ening their H-bonding. Comparing the numbers, it 
is clear that the origin of the hydrophobic effect is 
mostly entropic. 
The latter is also clear from the following exam-
ple. When a hydrophobic molecule such as n-butane 
is added to water at 25ºC, the Gibbs free energy 
changes as follows.
ΔG = ΔH – TΔS = –4.3 + 28.7 = +24.5 kJ/mol 
(2.7)
Generalizing, ΔH is related to bond formation/
breaking, and ΔS is related to configurational free-
dom and water ordering. For a favorable reaction, we 
want the equilibrium constant to be K > 1, ΔG < 0, 
ΔH < 0, and ΔS > 0, where K = exp(–ΔG˚/RT) with 
R = 8.3145 JK–1mol–1. In the case of ΔH –  negative, we 
have bond-making gain, and with ΔS –  negative we 
lose entropy because of increased ordering. It is thus 
enthalpically favorable to place n-butane in water, 
but it is unfavorable from an entropic perspective 
(increasing order). 
The sequence of events depicted in Figure 2.41 
illustrates what happens when amphiphilic or 
amphipathic molecules are placed in water to form 
a micelle. A micelle is an aggregate of amphipathic 
molecules in water, with the nonpolar portions in 
the interior and the polar portions at the exterior 
surface, exposed to water. In Figure 2.41a, the water 
molecules around one amphiphilic molecule reduce 
the entropy of the water through ordering (forming 
of a clathrate). In Figure 2.41b, we show a dispersion 
of lipid molecules, where each molecule forces sur-
rounding water molecules to become highly ordered. 
In Figure 2.41c, only lipids at the edge of the cluster 
force the ordering of water. Fewer water molecules 
are ordered, and the entropy is thus increased. 
Finally, in Figure 2.41d, all hydrophobic groups are 
sequestered from water; the ordered shell of water is 
minimized, the entropy is further increased, and a 
micelle is formed. 
The two immiscible phases (hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic) change so that their corresponding 
interfacial area is minimized in the micelle construct. 
This effect constitutes a phase separation. Depending 
on their concentration and ionic strength in solution, 
Nonpolar
molecule
Nonpolar
molecule
Nonpolar
molecule
Nonpolar
molecule
FIGURE 2.39 Aggregation reduces the hydrophobic 
surface area that requires ordering of water molecules for 
optimized solvation.
Tetrahedrally
coordinated
FIGURE 2.40 A water “cage” around another molecule or 
a clathrate.

[Page 98]
98   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the temperature, and other factors, surfactants can 
assemble into spherical micelles, cylindrical micelles, 
or bilayers (membranes) or even saddle surfaces in 
bicontinuous structures (Figure 2.42). A bicontinuous 
surface, as shown in Figure 2.43, separates the oil phase 
and water phase. The oil and water are completely 
separated, but both are continuous across the system. 
Bilayer sheets are bent into “cubic phases,” in which 
sheets are bent into a complex, ordered network of 
channels (see also http://www.nationalacademies.
org/bpa/reports/bmm/bmm.html).
In a low-dielectric-constant solvent, micelles turn 
inside out, shielding their hydrophilic heads and 
forming a reverse micelle. Micelles form spontane-
ously—i.e., ΔG < 0. When water is added to dried 
phospholipids, multilamellar vesicles (MLVs) form, 
Hydrophilic
“head group”
Hydrophobic
alkyl group
Highly ordered H2O molecules form
“cages” around the hydrophobic alkyl chains
“Flickering clusters” of H2O 
molecules in bulk phase
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 2.41 Steps involved in making a micelle. See text for explanation. (a) The water molecules around one 
amphiphilic molecule reduce the entropy of the water through ordering (forming of a clathrate). (b) Dispersion of lipid 
molecules, where each molecule forces surrounding water molecules to become highly ordered. (c) Only lipids at the 
edge of the cluster force the ordering of water. Fewer water molecules are ordered, and the entropy is thus increased. 
(d) All hydrophobic groups are sequestered from water; the ordered shell of water is minimized, the entropy is further 
increased, and a micelle is formed.
FIGURE 2.42 Surfactants can assemble into spheri-
cal micelles, cylindrical micelles, bilayers (membranes), 
or saddle surfaces in bicontinuous structures. (From 
I. W. Hamley. 2000. Introduction to soft matter. 
(2nd  edition), J. Wiley, Chichester. With permission.)

[Page 99]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   99
with water trapped between the successive polar 
head groups of the multiple bilayers. Sonicating 
these produces small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs).
From Micelles to Liposomes 
and Biological Cells
Introduction
It appears that the chemistry of life cannot take 
place in anything much simpler than a cell. A virus, 
a prototype life form, needs to invade a cell and 
assume control of the cell’s chemical machinery by 
reprogramming it to produce more viruses. For life 
to have started, it seems essential that the important 
chemicals were somehow concentrated in order to 
increase their chance of meeting and reacting. This 
could have occurred when water evaporated in a 
small pond, or it could have involved reactions on a 
clay surface (meeting on a two-dimensional plane is 
more probable than meeting in three-dimensional 
space). Another possibility is that the chemicals 
became grouped in some kind of a vesicle. Thus, 
they could not diffuse away into the primordial 
broth. One of the many unanswered questions is, 
when did this cell-wall precursor take hold, before, 
during, or after the prebiotic chemical steps? 
Micelles, Liposomes, and Biological Cells
Another type of an amphiphilic molecule (besides 
the detergents encountered above) consists of a 
phospholipid with an ionic phosphate head group 
and two hydrocarbon chains attached to it. A glyc-
erol molecule links the two hydrocarbon chains 
together, and the phosphate group often has other 
hydrophilic molecules, such as choline and serine, 
attached to it. When a choline attaches, the mol-
ecule is called phosphatidylcholine, one of the most 
abundant phospholipids in all the cell membranes 
(Figure 2.44A). To form a micelle, water-soluble 
heads of amphiphilic molecules maintain con-
tact with water, while the water insoluble ends are 
tucked inside.
A spherical micelle is the most stable configu-
ration of amphipathic lipids that have a conical 
shape, such as fatty acids (Figure 2.44Ba). A bilayer 
is the most stable configuration of amphipathic lip-
ids with a cylindrical shape, such as phospholipids 
(Figure 2.44Bb). Lipid bilayers are back-to-back 
arrangements of monolayers, and they  typically 
form when there is more than one fatty acid chain 
connected to the polar head group. Double-chain 
fatty acids do not pack as well as single-chain fatty 
acids in a micelle configuration. Unilamellar ves-
icles, as shown in Figure 2.44Bc, are known as 
liposomes; multilamellar vesicles containing one 
or more bilayers arranged around the initial unila-
mellar vesicle. These types of vesicles are currently 
used as vehicles to deliver drugs in treatment of 
various diseases. For example, technologies have 
been developed to enclose chemotherapy and 
other drugs in unilamellar liposome bubbles. 
The hydrophobic effect is essential for life. It 
forces the spontaneous clustering of lipids, forming 
biological membranes. Early in the development 
of life on Earth, chemicals organized themselves 
into cells, just like micelles. In humans, they are 
principally composed of phospholipids, formed 
from fatty acids, with some specialized proteins 
embedded in them, as shown in Figure 2.45. A 
wide variety of amphiphilic molecules can be 
accepted into a cell membrane. About half of a 
membrane surface is covered with proteins and 
sugars performing a wide variety of roles.
The bilayer that constitutes the cell surface—the 
plasma membrane—is permeable to some mole-
cules, either passive or mediated by transmembrane 
proteins (pumps), impermeable to others (most 
water soluble molecules), and very flexible; call it a 
FIGURE 2.43 Surfactants can create a bicontinuous 
surface to separate an oil phase and a water phase. (From 
R. A. L. Jones. 2002. Soft condensed matter. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. With permission.)

[Page 100]
100   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
dynamic two-dimensional fluid in which lipids and 
proteins can move laterally. The membrane is also 
a very good electrical insulator, typically holding 
70 mV over 45 Å (i.e., a field strength of 1.6 107 V/m), 
has no corners, and self-assembles.
As widely accepted as the idea of a plasma mem-
brane with embedded proteins as ion channels and 
ion pumps has become, there are still valid objec-
tions to this model, as Gerald Pollack lucidly explains 
in Cells, Gels and the Engines of Life.54 Pollack presents 
plenty of evidence that a cell is not enveloped by an 
ion-impermeant barrier. In this elegantly written 
book, he explains most cell functions by invoking 
the gel nature of the cytoplasm.
Natural Biopolymers
Even the most complex self-assembled structures 
of natural biopolymers, such as nucleic acids and 
proteins, are all driven by very simple balances of 
coil entropy and bond enthalpy; the coil entropy 
wants to expand, but the folded structure is held 
in place by enthalpic bonds such as hydro gen 
bonds, ionic bonds, and hydrophobic bonds. Being 
individually weak, these noncovalent interactions 
nevertheless can sum to an impressive total, often 
several hundreds of kilojoules, when many are 
present within a given macromolecule or between 
macromolecules. This explains the stability of the 
macromolecular structures. But being individually 
Individual units are
wedge-shaped
(cross section of head
greater than that
of side chain)
Individual units are
cylindrical (cross section
of head equals that of
side chain)
Aqueous
cavity
(a) Micelle
(b) Bilayer
(c) Liposome
(B)
Choline
Phosphate
Glycerol
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
cis-double
bond
C
C
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
CH2–N+(CH3)3
CH2
Unsaturated
Saturated
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
Polar
(hydrophilic)
head group
Nonpolar
(hydrophobic)
tails
(A)
FIGURE 2.44 (A) Example of an amphiphilic molecule (phosphatidylcholine). (B) Amphiphilic molecules forming micelle 
(a), lipid membranes (b), and unilamellar liposome (c).

[Page 101]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   101
weak, individual noncovalent bonds in macro-
molecular structures can be broken and reformed 
rather easily. The latter in turn explains the 
flexibility in macromolecular structures. All bio-
chemical processes have thus enthalpic and 
entropic contributions that combine to dictate 
spontaneity. DNA is a straightforward example of 
this, with a balance of mostly H-bonds and coil 
entropy (Figure 2.46). DNA structure arises from 
a favorable enthalpic term (enthalpy-dominated 
state) compensating for an unfavorable entropic 
term (ΔH < 0 and ΔS < 0). At a critical temperature 
Tcritical, this reverses and entropy wins out. This 
melting temperature can be derived by solving 
ΔG = ΔH – TΔS, with ΔH from H-bonds balanced 
by ΔS from the amount of disorder, as follows.
 
T
H
S
critical =
 
(2.8)
Because there are three hydrogen bonds between 
cytosine and guanine and only two between ade-
nine and thymine, a higher C, G content makes for a 
higher melting temperature. The latter is illustrated 
in Figure 2.47. 
In the 1980s, Nadrian Seeman (http://seemanlab4 
.chem.nyu.edu) from New York University took 
advantage of the intrinsic self-assembling proper-
ties of DNA molecules, as described here, to con -
struct DNA molecular complexes. By synthesizing 
branched DNA and exploiting this behavior, Seeman 
and coworkers managed to assemble increasingly 
complex structures that do not occur in the natural 
environment (DNA-mediated assembly is described 
in Chapter 4, Figure 4.49). The use of stable branched 
DNA molecules permits one to make stick figures 
as depicted in Figure 4.49a, where we show a stable 
branched DNA molecule, and in Figure 4.49b, where 
we show such a molecule with sticky ends; four of 
these sticky-ended molecules are shown assembled 
into a quadrilateral. More exploits from the world 
of DNA nanotechnology, such as DNA origami, can 
be found in Chapter 3, this volume, on bottom-up 
manufacturing.
Carbohydrate
Protein
Phosphate head
Fatty
acid tail
Phospholipid
bilayer
FIGURE 2.45 The cell wall of an animal cell is a phospholi-
pid bilayer with embedded proteins regulating a series of 
functions, e.g., transport, recognition.
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
A T
A T
A T
A T
C G
C G
C G
C G
G C
G C
G C
G C
T A
T A
T A
T A
OH
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
H
H
H
N
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
H
H
H
P
P
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
OH
P
O
OH
O
O
O
Cytosine
Adenine
Guanine
Tymine
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
H2C
H2C
H2C
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
P
P
FIGURE 2.46 DNA: a question of entropy of coiling versus enthalpy of the hydrogen bonds (two between adenine and 
thymine and three between cytosine and guanine).

[Page 102]
102   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Proteins are polypeptides prepared from 20 
different amino acids, with a few different ΔH < 0 
bonds holding them together, to form a vast 
number of folded structures that govern biological 
function and biomaterials. As in micelle and 
DNA assembly, entropy and enthalpy balances 
are the basis of protein self-assembling behavior, 
such as the formation of a β-sheet, illustrated in 
the beautifully intricate “β-barrel” structure in 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) (see Volume I, 
Figure  7.108). In self-assembled, native proteins, 
the enthalpy wins over entropy (H dominated) and 
an increase in the temperature helps the entropy 
term till we observe denaturing or unfolding, as 
illustrated in Figure 2.48. Denaturing of a protein 
is the conversion of a biologically functional 
molecule into a nonfunctional form. There are 
many denatured states but only one native state, 
so entropically, the denatured protein state is by 
far the most favored condition for the protein to 
be in. Proteins can regenerate to their native state 
but only slowly. Denatured proteins have a greater 
tendency to aggregate. The transition from native to 
denatured happens at a critical temperature given 
by Equation 2.8. A typical coiling/ordering ΔS 
penalty for a complex protein such as GFP may be 
of the order of 40,000 kJ, the number of H-bonds 
needed to balance this, at ~50 kJ each, is about 800 
(ignoring any hydrophobic bond help). Most of the 
associative effects are enthalpic in origin, except for 
the hydrophobic effect, which is essentially entropic 
in origin.
In the exceptional case of a protein with an 
entropy dominated balance, such as with pyruvate 
carboxylase, a decrease in the temperature lowers 
the entropy term, and we observe denaturation at 
lower temperatures.
Biotechnology and Biomimetics 
Introduction
Today, biotechnology is a major application tar get 
for miniaturization science, as engineered struc -
tures and nature’s building tools have become 
similar in size, and financial rewards promise 
to be much larger for these life science ventures 
than they ever were for mechanical MEMS appli-
cations (see Chapter 10). After putting forward 
a definition for biotechnology and presenting 
examples of the use of miniaturiza tion science 
in biotechnology, i.e., bio-MEMS, we make some 
concluding remarks on biomimetic approaches 
and finish this chapter by comparing some human 
and natural engineered structures. As examples 
of micromachining and nanomachining in bio-
technology (bio-MEMS) we survey three examples 
here: genetically engineered proteins, miniaturized 
PCR and DNA chips. Other bio-MEMS and bio-
NEMS examples, including electrochemical and 
optical immunosensors,  micro physiometers, res-
ponsive drug delivery pills, glu cose sensors, blood 
gas and blood electrolyte sensors, lab on a chips 
(LOCs), etc., can be found throughout the book. 
This section constitutes an attempt at sketch ing 
possible avenues for merging of biotechnology with 
nanochemistry and nanofabrication. 
Biotechnology: Definition
Fermentation processes known from ancient times 
(the oldest known written recipe for beer brewing 
is written on a clay cuneiform tablet, part of an epic 
poem devoted to Ninkasi, the Sumerian goddess 
80
Relative absorbance
85
C+ G = 30%
C+ G = 60%
Tm= 82°C
Tm= 96°C
90
t/°C
95
100
FIGURE 2.47 Melting temperature or critical temperature 
of DNA is reached at the moment that the entropy wins 
out. The higher the CG content, the higher the melting 
temperature.
More hydrocarbon-water
interfacial area,
more water ordered
Unfolded
Folded
Less hydrocarbon-water
interfacial area,
less water ordered
∆S = +
+
HOH
HOH
FIGURE 2.48 Protein folding and unfolding (denaturing).

[Page 103]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   103
of beer) evolved eventually into a larger endeavor 
called biotechnology, employing either cells or cell 
extracts (e.g., enzymes) to produce foods, drugs, 
insecticides, etc. Generally, modern biotechnology 
is an umbrella term that covers various techniques, 
applied mainly to cells or molecules, which take 
advantage of biological processes in very precise 
ways. The discoveries of three different enzymes in 
the late 1960s, especially, heralded its advent. The 
first of these discoveries was reverse transcriptase 
enzyme, which converts RNA into the correspond-
ing DNA; the second, an enzyme that cuts DNA at 
predefined places; and the third, an enzyme that 
joins separate pieces of DNA. Using these gene tech-
nology tools, the pooled content of a cell can thus 
be used to manufacture proteins that can be used 
for human consumption (e.g., as medicine). Because 
the genetic code is universal, almost any cell in any 
organism can “read” a gene and translate it into a 
desired protein. Bacteria that have been genetically 
engineered to carry the human insulin gene, for 
example, can produce human insulin. Cells might 
also be reengineered and substituted in living things 
to correct for inherited deficiency or performance. 
“Gene therapy” has made great progress, especially 
in plant engineering. 
Genetically Engineered Proteins 
Binding chemistry of a target to a specific protein 
at the nanoscale translates into a mechanical move-
ment/motion of the protein, known as a change in 
conformation. This conformational change of pro-
teins upon binding with a target molecule has been 
exploited in the design of very selective and sensitive 
biosensors. This is accomplished by labeling the pro-
tein, say with a fluorescent probe, in such a way that 
the probe does not hinder the binding of the protein 
with its target, while the change in signal reported 
by the probe upon binding is maximized.
Two important examples of genetically engi-
neered proteins: green fluorescent protein (GFP) and 
calmodulin. GFP, from the molecular system of the 
bioluminescent jellyfish Aequorea victoria, we saw in 
Volume I, Chapter 7, are making quite an impact on 
biotechnology today as fluorescent markers. Here we 
will explore genetic manipulation of the calmodulin 
protein and its uses.
Through judicious genetic manipulation of a 
protein such as calmodulin [a 148-amino acid 
(17-kD) molecule, shown in Figure 2.49], a rationally 
designed molecular biosensor can thus be devel-
oped. The key is to always select the right location 
for attachment of the probe in the protein struc-
ture. Calmodulin is a “regulatory” protein, involved 
in protein-protein interactions and in signaling 
pathways that involve stimulating or inhibiting the 
activities of many enzymes and proteins. Calmodu-
lin is a notably tough molecule: it withstands a very 
low pHs and even survives boiling water. One of 
its binding partners is Ca2+ ion, which matches the 
versatility of the protein. Calcium ions are abundant 
in all biological systems, and its importance derives 
from its role as a universal messenger ion. The ion 
conveys signals received at the cell surface to the 
inside of the cell (the concentration of calcium 
inside the cell is 1,000- to 10,000-fold less than in 
the extra cellular fluid). Calcium ions are involved in 
such processes as the regulation of muscle contrac-
tion; the secretion of hormones, digestive enzymes, 
and neurotransmitters; the transport of salt and 
water across the intestinal lining; and the control of 
glycogen metabolism in the liver. The binding of Ca2+ 
to multiple sites of a calmodulin molecule induces 
a major conformational change—a hinge-type 
motion—that converts it from an inactive to an active 
form, allowing for interactions with other proteins 
and peptides and thus regulating the function of 
Ca+2
Phenothiazine
FIGURE 2.49 Model showing the exposure of drug bind-
ing site in calmodulin following binding of Ca2+. Upon 
binding to calcium, calmodulin undergoes a change in 
conformation, which exposes two hydrophobic pockets 
located in the N- and C-domains. Certain hydrophobic 
peptides and the antipsychotic phenothiazine class of 
drugs interact with these exposed hydrophobic pockets.

[Page 104]
104   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the various enzymes and proteins. The calmodulin 
crystal structure has been well studied using x-ray 
crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance 
(NMR) techniques, and it has been found to consist 
of two domains, the N- and C-domains.* Two high-
affinity calcium-binding sites are located in the 
C-domain, and the other two calcium-binding sites 
(the low-affinity sites) are located in the N domain. 
Upon binding to calcium, calmodulin undergoes a 
change in conformation to an active form, which 
exposes two hydrophobic pockets located in the 
N- and C-domains. Certain hydrophobic peptides 
and the antipsychotic phenothiazine class of drugs 
interact with these exposed hydrophobic pockets, 
and in the presence of calcium ions, calmodulin 
also becomes a sensor for those peptides and drugs 
(Figure 2.49). Schauer-Vukasinovic et al.,55 through 
site-directed mutagenesis of calmodulin, produced 
several mutants that varied from one another 
by a single cysteine residue at various positions 
in 
the 
protein 
skeleton. 
N-[2-(1-maleimidyl)
ethyl]- 
7-(diethylamino)coumarin-3-carboxamide 
(MDCC) (Invitrogen, CA, USA-prod #D-10253), a 
commercially available, environmentally sensitive, 
thiol-reactive fluorophore label was attached to the 
cysteine residue in each of the mutants, and the change 
in fluorescence signal upon binding the calcium 
ions was measured. Mutation sites were chosen on 
the basis of both the crystal and NMR structures of 
free calmodulin and calmodulin complexed with 
calcium. The MDCC-labeled calmodulin mutant 
showed a change in the fluorescence signal in the 
presence of calcium ions, the magnitude of which 
was dependent on the concentration of calcium.55 
By comparing the enhancement of the fluorescent 
response of the different mutants, a Ca2+ sensor 
with a detection limit as low as 2 × 10–9 M was built. 
The biggest change was noted for the mutant with 
a single cysteine at amino acid residue 109.55 This 
sensing system is highly selective over other metals, 
including magnesium, europium, and barium. 
A calibration plot for calcium obtained with the 
MDCC-labeled calmodulin (CaM) mutant is shown 
in Figure 2.50. 
* The N terminus of the protein denotes the first amino acid of its 
sequence, while the C terminus corresponds to the last one.
In another study by the same team, when phe-
nothiazine was added to calcium-bound fluorophore-
labeled CaM109, a maximum of 100% quenching 
in the fluorescence was observed. This team then 
developed an compact disc based fluidic platform 
(see also Volume I, Chapter 6 on CD fluidics) for the 
sensing of phenothiazine-class of drugs based on 
this drug-dependent change in fluorescence signal.56 
This biosensing system also has been proposed as a 
model for the high-throughput screening of drugs 
that selectively interact with binding proteins.57 
Polymerase Chain Reaction
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is to genes 
what Gutenberg’s printing press was to the written 
word, but it took the 1995 O. J. Simpson trial to make 
PCR a household word. PCR perhaps is the most 
important tool of biotechnology today; it was con-
ceived by Kary Mullis in 1983 (Figure 2.51). Mullis 
was granted a patent in 1989, and he received the 
1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his invention.58 
The invention of PCR, amplifying the amount of 
DNA in a sample, is as important for the biotechnol-
ogy field as the transistor, amplifying electrons, is 
for electronics. 
Mullis, a maverick, unbending to authority, never 
got the financial rewards or academic credit for his 
invention, a victim, to some degree, of commer-
cial greed and academic jealousy. Mullis’ technique 
enables the replication of any stretch of DNA as long 
as the arrangement of nucleotides at the two ends 
is known. Through PCR, a desired DNA sequence 
log (Ca2+, M)
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10
-11
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fluorescence (%)
FIGURE 2.50 Calibration plot for calcium obtained with the 
MDCC [N-[2-(1-maleimidyl)ethyl]- 7-(diethylamino) coumarin-
3-carboxamide]-labeled calmodulin (CaM) mutant. The 
x-axis denotes the concentrations of free calcium.56

[Page 105]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   105
of viral, bacterial, plant, or human origin can be 
amplified hundreds of millions of times in a mat-
ter of hours. By amplifying minute amounts of DNA 
to analyzable quantities and thus circumventing the 
need for lengthy cell-culture methods, the technique 
has had major impact on clinical medicine, genetic 
disease diagnostics, forensic science, and evolution-
ary biology. In addition, the ability to isolate genes 
from organisms by essentially copying them directly 
from their genome has allowed for the rapid cloning 
of a myriad of genes whose function was unknown. 
This has also benefited the fields of genomics and 
proteomics and thus had an impact on not only sci-
ence but medicine and biotechnology as well. 
Through miniaturization, PCR is becoming faster 
and applicable to ever smaller samples. The origi-
nal PCR process is based on the heat-stable DNA 
polymerase enzyme from Thermus aquaticus (Taq) 
(see Figure 2.52), a thermophilic bacterium that can 
withstand high temperatures and that can synthe-
size a complementary strand to a given DNA strand 
in a mixture containing the four DNA bases and two 
primer DNA fragments (each about 20 bases long) 
flanking the target sequence. 
The mixture is heated to separate (denature or 
melt) strands of double-helix DNA containing the 
target sequence and then cooled to allow 1) the 
primers to find and bind (anneal) to their comple-
mentary sequences on the separate strands, and 2) 
the Taq polymerase to extend the primers into new 
complementary strands. The Taq polymerase needs 
about 1 min to synthesize 1 kb pair, so the synthesis 
time depends on the length of the product. Repeated 
heating and cooling cycles multiply the target DNA 
exponentially, since each new double strand sepa-
rates to become two templates for further synthesis. 
In Figure 2.53a, we illustrate how each PCR cycle 
doubles the amount of DNA.
A typical temperature profile (Figure 2.53b) for 
PCR is as follows:
 
1. Denature at 93°C for 15–30 s
 
2. Anneal primer at 55°C for 15–30 s
 
3. Extend primers at 72°C for 30–60 s
The primer extension step has to be increased by 
roughly 60 s/kb to generate products longer than 
a few hundred bases. The above are typical instru-
ment times; in fact, the denaturing and annealing 
steps occur almost instantly, but temperature rates in 
commercial instruments (Figure 2.53c) usually are 
less than 1°C/s when metal blocks or water are used 
for thermal equilibration and samples are contained 
in plastic microcentrifuge tubes. Instantaneous tem-
perature changes are not possible because of sample, 
FIGURE 2.51 Kary Mullis, inventor of polymerase chain 
reaction.
FIGURE 2.52 The bacterium Thermus aquaticus was first discovered in several springs in the Great Fountain area of the 
Lower Geyser Basin at Yellowstone National Park.

[Page 106]
106   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
container, and cycler heat capacities, and extended 
amplification times of 2–6 h result. During the peri-
ods where sample temperature is making a transi-
tion from one temperature to another, extraneous, 
undesirable reactions occur that consume impor-
tant reagents and create unwanted and interfering 
compounds.59 Micromachining has improved PCR 
in several respects. 
By micromachining thermally isolated, low-
thermal-mass PCR chambers, one is able to mass-
produce a faster, less expensive, more energy 
effi cient, and more specific PCR instrument. To 
appreciate better the fast thermal cycling of a 
smaller heater, see Chapter 8 on miniaturization of 
thermal elements. Given the PCR chambers’ small 
size, smaller amounts of sample and expensive 
reagents are required. Moreover, rapid transitions 
from one temperature to another ensure that the 
sample spends a minimum of time at undesirable 
intermediate temperatures, so that the amplified 
DNA has optimum fidelity and purity.59 Northrup 
et al.60 fashioned Si microchambers with integrated 
(a)
Step 1 – Denaturation (optimal temperature is 94°C). By heating the DNA, the double
strand melts and opens to single-stranded DNA. 
Step 2 – Annealing (optimal temperature is 60°C). Te single-stranded primers bind to
their complementary single-stranded bases on the denaturated DNA. 
Step 3 – Extension: 72°C is the ideal temperature for the Taq polymerase to attach and
start copying the template. Te result is two new helixes in place of the ﬁrst. 
Step 4 – By applying this cycle several times, the quantity of DNA obtained is quickly
enough to perform any analysis. Starting with one DNA molecule, after just 20 cycles
there will be a million copies, and after 30 cycles there will be a billion copies. 
0
0
0
20
Temperature (°C)
40
60
80
100
1
1
2
2
3
3
1
2
3
4
Time (min)
5
6
7
8
9
10
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 2.53 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR). (a) How PCR cycle doubles DNA. (b) A typical PCR temperature pro-
file (1, denature; 2, anneal primers; 3, extend primers; see text). (c) Commercial PCR instrument from Cepheid: the 
SmartCycler II System.

[Page 107]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   107
thermally isolated heater elements and found 
that thermal cycling resulted in amplification with -
out the need for active cooling. This is a direct result 
of the more effec tive cooling of these miniaturized 
Si structures (see Chapter 8). Northrup et al.60 found 
that they could heat the PCR reactants as quickly 
as 35°C/s. Further work showed that integrated 
heaters on both sides of the reactant volume are 
required for optimal temperature uniformity. 
Later, it became evident that to make an economic 
miniatur ized PCR instrument for diagnostic 
applications, the heater/cooler should be made 
part of a fixed reader instrument to enable a less 
expensive disposable unit. Along this line, Wilding 
et al.61 performed a less integrated experiment with 
Si/glass microchambers of 4.4 to 8.9 µL inserted in a 
commercially available heater/cooler structure. The 
PCR total cycling time was reduced, but specificity 
was found to be inferior to that of commercial 
cyclers. This inferior performance may be linked to 
the fact that Si is poisonous to the Taq polymerase 
enzyme. The specificity problem can be avoided 
by derivatizing the Si surface or by machining 
PCR chambers from a more enzyme-compatible 
material. Another glaring problem with the two 
described Si-micromachined PCR approaches is 
that they do not provide an easy way to apply and 
remove the DNA sample. This is a major problem 
with miniaturized PCR and fluidic microsystems 
in general: the fabrication of connectors, recepta-
cles, and packages that link the microstructure to 
the macroworld is still in its infancy (see Chapter 
4). In principle, to avoid a hybrid connecting/
packaging approach, this requires a manufacturing 
method with a very wide dynamic range, i.e., from 
microns to several millimeters or even centimeters. 
Also, for this reason using Si is not necessarily 
the best approach. The next three PCR examples 
illustrate nonsilicon alternatives.
Wittwer and Garling62 and Wittwer et al.63 opti-
mized PCR temperature and cycle times, using a 
thermal cycler based on recirculating hot air and 
10-µL samples in thin glass capillary tubes, with 
the sample temperature monitored by a miniature 
thermocouple. They found that product specific-
ity could be improved significantly while decreas-
ing the required amplification time by an order 
of magnitude. For a 536-base pair β-globin frag-
ment from human DNA, optimal denaturation at 
92–94°C took place in less than 1 s. Annealing for 1 
s or less at 54–56°C gave the best product specificity 
and yield. Only elongation, at 75–79°C, required 
longer times. Denaturation yield actually decreased 
with times greater than 30 s, and nonspecific ampli-
fication was minimized with a rapid denaturation to 
annealing temperature transition. Wittwer’s device 
has been commercialized by Idaho Technology; the 
RapidCycler from this company can perform 30 
PCR cycles in less than 10 min.
The Si PCR work of Northrup et al.60 eventually 
led to a commercial portable PCR instrument, i.e., 
the SmartCycler system (http://www.smartcycler. 
com) from Cepheid (see Figure 2.53c). This instru-
ment incorporates a nonsilicon, rather large but 
thin PCR chamber with high thermal conductiv-
ity ceramic heater plates and integrated tempera-
ture sensors. At Cepheid it was understood early 
on that a major negative consequence of minia-
turizing analysis equipment, in extremely small 
sample sizes, presents numerous chemicals and 
organisms that are present at levels below the 
typical detection limits. The topic of scaling of 
sample size was reviewed in Volume I, Chapter 6, 
on fluidics. There we saw that  biological chemi-
cals associated with clinical chemistry assays 
(between 1014 and 1020 copies/mL) and immuno-
assays (between 107 and 1018 copies/mL) are read-
ily assayed with very small sample volumes, in 
the range of picoliters and  nanoliters. However, as 
evident from Figure 10.49, the minimum sample 
volume required for accurate DNA assays (from 
107  copies/mL to fewer than 100 copies/mL) is 
100 µL, but a volume several milliliters of sample 
is more typical. As a consequence, an important 
Cepheid focus is the design of microfluidic diag-
nostic systems with sample preparation of larger 
input volumes. Along this line, the company fab-
ricated a DNA capture device in which a continu-
ous flow of biological sample results in a gradual 
accumulation of nucleic acid on the large silicon 
dioxide surface area of the chip.59 It is not clear to 
this author why the latter device should be in Si, 
as there are many very large surface, porous mate-
rials available that are much less expensive.

[Page 108]
108   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
DNA Chips
Introduction
With the rough draft of the Human Genome 
Project completed, the next most important ques-
tion to solve is how genes relate to human health. 
Why do some people get certain diseases while oth-
ers remain disease-free? A vast amount of expand-
ing data supports the fact that it is rare for a single 
defect in one location on one gene to be responsible 
for a specific disease. The trend is toward the study 
of the biochemical and molecular functioning of a 
set of genes and how this complicated interaction 
leads to a diseased state. One way to tackle this 
study, we saw in Volume II, Chapter 8, is by using 
DNA microarrays. A DNA microarray, or DNA chip, 
consists of DNA molecules ranging from 20 to 1000 
or more base pairs concentrated into specific areas 
on a solid support such as a glass chip.64 The arrays 
are used as a capturing device of specific comple-
mentary gene products. Thousands of the same oli-
gonucleotides can be attached in a specific location 
so that gene expression may be observed by count-
ing the amount of oligos that bind. In this way, spe-
cific gene expression can be observed in particular 
cells, during specific stages of development, in dis-
eased versus normal individuals, after administra-
tion of a drug, or in malignant cells, for example 
(see Volume II, Figure 8.23). Alternatively, one can 
incorporate many different oligonucleotides rep-
resenting different genes on the same chip so that 
screening for the expression of many genes simul-
taneously is possible. The uses of this technology 
are broad and include disease diagnosis, individual 
response to drug therapy, and understanding the 
difference of gene expression between healthy and 
normal individuals.
Almost all current genetic testing either uses 
sequencing or hybridization. Sequencing involves 
hydrolyzing (digesting) a piece of DNA under 
controlled conditions, derivatizing the pieces as they 
come off the DNA strands, and analyzing them by 
chromatography or electrophoresis. In hybridization, 
pieces of genes bind to other pieces containing 
complementary sequences. Of the two techniques, 
sequencing is the more comprehensive and versatile, 
but hybridization is faster and, for small pieces of 
genes, more efficient. Rapid identification of genes 
or gene sequencing has become one of the main 
aims of medical diagnostics.
The field of DNA arrays involves microfluid-
ics, MEMS machining, and self-assembly of DNA 
probes, which puts it at the forefront of mixing top-
down and bottom-up manufacturing techniques. 
For the various microfabrication methodologies of 
DNA chips see Volume II, Chapter 8. In what follows 
we briefly review the major applications of micro-
fabricated DNA chips.
Applications of DNA Arrays
In a typical cDNA array experiment, the genes of 
interest are first amplified using PCR (see above). 
After purification, the PCR products are printed 
on microscope glass slides by using a robot (see 
Volume  II, Figure 8.22). For example, a DNA 
microarray, containing all of the genes in yeast 
(6400 of them) can be used to look at specific 
changes of gene expression in metabolism. Using 
in vitro reverse transcription, both the test and ref-
erence total RNA are labeled using two different 
fluorescent dyes. Laser excitation causes a specific 
emission that generates fingerprint-like spectra, 
which are measured using a scanning confocal 
laser microscope. The data are basically viewed as a 
change in the color of the two fluorescent readings 
at a specific point on the slide (a gene) when com-
pared with a reference sample. 
In an alternative DNA array approach, Fodor et al.65 
at Affymax (http://www.affymax.com) developed an 
elegant method combining on-chip combinatorial 
chemistry with established hybridization tech-
niques and advanced fluorescence detection to 
make arrays of oligonucleotides (see Volume II, 
Figure 8.16). After synthesizing oligonucleotide 
arrays onto a glass slide, the glass slide is incubated 
with fluorescent-labeled DNA probes. After the 
DNA probes are hybridized to the oligonucleotide 
array, the complementary sequences are determined 
by fluorescent scanning. The oligonucleotide array 
format is used to detect mutations, locate target 
regions within genes, investigate gene expression, 
and identify gene function.65 In this approach, the 
chemical synthesis and analysis of large numbers 

[Page 109]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   109
of potentially useful compounds can be carried out 
on a single small chip (say, a centimeter square); 
therefore, it becomes orders of magnitude quicker 
and cheaper to identify potential ligands to build 
new drugs or analyze DNA sequences.66 A key 
advantage of this approach is that it enables chips to 
be manufactured directly from sequence databases, 
thereby removing the uncertain and burdensome 
aspects of sample handling and tracking. Another 
advantage of this technology is that the use of 
synthetic reagents minimizes chip to chip variation 
by ensuring a high degree of precision in each 
coupling cycle. One disadvantage of this approach, 
however, is the need for photomasks, which are 
expensive and time-consuming to design and 
build. In Volume II, Chapter 8, we described how 
the more recent maskless array synthesizer might 
get around the latter obstacle (Figure 8.19). Also, 
the hybridization can occur only through DNA 
fragments finding each other through diffusion, 
which is slow.67 The Nanogen DNA chip described in 
Example 8.2 (Volume II, Chapter 8) is much faster, 
as DNA fragments reach the chip hybridization sites 
through electrophoresis (Nanogen, a San Diego–
based company, went out of business in early 2010). 
A more detailed list of pros and cons of the various 
DNA array approaches is presented in Volume II, 
Chapter 8. The integration of DNA arrays within a 
sample preparation platform (e.g., a microfluidic CD) 
was discussed in Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics. 
Biomimetics: Some Concluding Remarks 
Early 
examples 
of 
successful 
biomimetics 
include artificial materials for implants, tissue 
engineering, an artificial retina based on the 
architecture of the human eye, and neural network 
software based on the human brain. The devices 
mentioned are relatively large, however, and are 
fabricated using top-down methodologies. The 
neural network software example is only a very 
crude approximation of a human brain. Human-
made devices crafted with bottom-up methods 
will open up a much more rewarding paradigm 
in human manufacturing; nanochemistry holds 
the promise of the versatility of design offered 
by nature itself, and molecular self-assembly 
and replication add to the tremendous appeal of 
this type of nanotechnology. Obviously, there is 
something very attractive about the small size of 
nature’s preferred building blocks such as proteins. 
In biological systems, the energy efficiency is 
approximately proportional to the 2/3 power of 
the linear dimension. This is because metabolism 
is proportional to the second power of the linear 
dimension (surface of the organism, 12), and 
energy uptake (feeding) is proportional to the 
body volume (13), so the smaller organism is, the 
higher its efficiency (see the discussions of scaling 
laws in Chapter 7). Nature provides excellent 
examples in the design of efficient micro- and 
nanosystems as it optimizes scaling laws in the 
microdomain and even exploits the quantum-size 
effects of its components. These biosystems have 
been tested and selected by eons of evolution, and 
at a time when we find that micromachining tools 
are limiting the fabrication of ever smaller devices, 
exploration of some of nature’s tools and building 
blocks promises to be very rewarding. As one of 
the many motivating examples of the promise of 
biomimetics, consider enzymes. There is a plethora 
of enzymes that outperform synthetic catalysts by 
several orders of magnitude. For instance, there is 
no artificial catalyst for producing ammonia from 
its elements at ambient temperature and pressure, 
as the nitrogenase of nodule-forming bacteria does 
(the industrial Haber-Bosch synthesis of ammonia 
from nitrogen and hydrogen at high temperatures 
and pressures pales in comparison).
Most miniaturization, especially in integrated 
circuits (ICs), over the next ten years will be based on 
top-down nanofabrication, and Moore’s law will 
continue to run its course. In parallel, we will continue 
to adapt bottom-up nanochemistry principles and 
combine them with nanofabrication. There is a 
significant gap between the scale of individual 
mole cular structures of nanochemistry and the sub-
micrometer structures of nanofabrication. It is exactly 
in that gap, from about one nanometer to several 
hundred nanometers, where fundamental materials 
properties are defined. It is also on the nanometer 
scale that quantum effects become significant. 
There is little doubt that biotechnology analysis 
tools will keep on improving at an increasingly 

[Page 110]
110   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
faster rate. Desktop DNA sequencers and 3D protein 
readers will be a reality in the not-so-distant future. 
Genetic engineering will have the most profound 
impact, though, on how humankind looks at manu-
facturing. Since it is already possible to synthesize a 
virus bottom-up, given the sequence of the bases in 
its genes, it seems quite likely that we will be able 
to manufacture synthetic viruses designed to enter a 
cell and carry out diagnostic and therapeutic tasks. 
Venter, we saw earlier, is using bottom-up synthesis 
methods to create a minimal gene setup required 
to sustain life in a test tube. Photovoltaic solar cells 
today have a high conversion efficiency of about 
10–15% but are expensive to deploy and maintain. 
Crops grown for energy are also expensive, involve 
har vesting, and are only 1% efficient. It is conceiv-
able that genetic engineering will enable the produc-
tion of energy crops that convert sunlight into fuel 
at a 10% efficiency.68 Through nanochemistry, the 
current digital information technology revolu tion 
might well be followed by a new analog manu-
facturing revolution. Today, computers let us shape 
our digital environment, but by giving computers 
the means to manipulate the analog world of atoms 
as easily as they manipulate bits, the same kind of 
personalization may be brought to our physical 
three-dimensional environment. In this context 
Gershenfeld from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Media Laboratory envisions a personal 
fabricator akin to the personal computer.69 
A human society based on nanomachining could 
perhaps be a much more balanced one, with a man-
ufacturing approach based on how the species itself 
is made. Products will be based on a fundamental 
understanding of the assembly of their ultimate 
components, atoms, molecules, and proteins, and 
on how to induce self-assembly into useful objects. 
Materials will be degradable, flexible, and fully reus-
able. The smaller building blocks used in manu-
facture will enable products of more variety and 
intelligence. There will be less emphasis on the tra-
ditional engineering materials, such as steel, wood, 
stone, composites, and carbon, and proteins will 
become much more important. 
The transition toward a nanosociety will require a 
major shift in workforce skill level as manipulation 
of data and applying knowledge of bioengineering 
will be part of a manufacturing worker’s daily duties. 
In academia, less hyperspecialization and better 
grounding in all the sciences and engineering will 
be a must as the traditional “dry” engineering and 
sciences, such as electrical engineering and mechanical 
engineering, will merge with the “wet” sciences and 
engineering, such as biology and bioengineering.
Appendix 2A: Uses of Extremophiles
Source
Uses
Hyperthermophiles
DNA polymerases
DNA amplification by PCR
Alkaline phosphatase
Diagnostics
Proteases and lipases
Dairy products
Lipases, pullulanases, and proteases
Detergents
Proteases
Baking, brewing, and amino acid production 
from keratin
Amylases, α-glucosidase, pullulanase, and 
xylose/glucose isomerases
Baking, brewing, and amino acid production 
from keratin
Alcohol dehydrogenase
Chemical synthesis
Xylanases
Paper bleaching
Lenthionin
Pharmaceutical
S-layer proteins and lipids
Molecular sieves
Oil degrading microorganisms
Surfactants for oil recovery
Sulfur oxidizing microorganisms
Bioleaching, coal and waste gas desulfurization
Hyperthermophilic consortia
Waste treatment and methane production
(Continued)

[Page 111]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   111
Appendix 2A: (Continued)
Source
Uses
Psychrophiles
Alkaline phosphatase
Molecular biology
Proteases, lipases, cellulases, and amylases
Detergents
Lipases and proteases
Cheese manufacture and dairy production
Proteases
Contact-lens cleaning solutions, meat tenderizing
Polyunsaturated fatty acids
Food additives, dietary supplements
Various enzymes
Modifying flavors
ß-Galactosidase
Lactose hydrolysis in milk products
Ice nucleating proteins
Artificial snow, ice cream, other freezing 
applications in the food industry
Ice minus microorganisms
Frost protectants for sensitive plants
Various enzymes (e.g., dehydrogenases)
Biotransformations
Various enzymes (e.g., oxidases)
Bioremediation, environmental biosensors
Methanogens
Methane production
Halophiles
Bacteriorhodopsin
Optical switches and photocurrent generators in 
bioelectronics
Polyhydroxyalkanoates
Medical plastics
Rheological polymers
Oil recovery
Eukaryotic homologs (e.g., myc oncogene 
product)
Cancer detection, screening antitumor drugs
Lipids
Liposomes for drug delivery and cosmetic 
packaging
Lipids
Heating oil
Compatible solutes
Protein and cell protectants in variety of 
industrial uses, e.g., freezing, heating
Various enzymes, e.g., nucleases, amylases, 
proteases
Various industrial uses, e.g., flavoring agents
γ-Linoleic acid, ß-carotene, and cell extracts 
(e.g., Spirulina and Dunaliella)
Health foods, dietary supplements, food coloring, 
and feedstock
Microorganisms
Fermenting fish sauces and modifying food 
textures and flavors
Microorganisms
Waste transformation and degradation, e.g., 
hypersaline waste brines contaminated with a 
wide range of organics
Membranes
Surfactants for pharmaceuticals
Alkaliphiles
Proteases, cellulases, xylanases, lipases, and 
pullulanases
Detergents
Proteases
Gelatin removal on x-ray film
Elastases, keratinases
Hide dehairing
Cyclodextrins
Foodstuffs, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals
Xylanases and proteases
Pulp bleaching
Pectinases
Fine papers, waste treatment, and degumming
Alkaliphilic halophiles
Oil recovery
Various microorganisms
Antibiotics
Acidophiles
Sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms
Recovery of metals and desulfurication of coal
Microorganisms
Organic acids and solvents

[Page 112]
112   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Appendix 2B: The Twenty Amino 
Acids Found in Biological Systems
Alanine, arginine, asparagine, aspartic acid, cysteine, 
glutamic acid, glutamine, glycine, histidine, isoleu-
cine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, 
proline, serine, threonine, tryptophan, tyrosine, 
and valine. 
All amino acids have the same general formula:
Amino
end
Carboxyl
end
Side
chain
R
C
COO–
H
H3+N
α carbon
COO–
H
C
CH
COO–
C
COO–
COO–
COO–
COO–
COO–
COO–
COO–
COO–
COO–
COO–
C
C
C
H
H
CH2
H3C
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
+H3N
H
+H3N
+H3N
C
H
+H3N
C
Phenylanine
(phe)
Methionine
(met)
Isoleucine
(Ile)
Leucine
(leu)
Valine
(val)
H
+H3N
C
H
+H3N
C
H
+H3N
C
C
C
O
N
CH
N
HC
H
H
+H3N
C
H
+H3N
C
H
+H3N
C
H
+H3N
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
H2N
C
O
H2N
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
COO–
COO–
C
H
+H3N
Amino acids with hydrophilic side groups
Amino acids with hydrophobic side groups
Aspartic acid
(asp)
Asparagine
(asn)
Glutamic acid
(glu)
Glutamine
(gln)
Histidine
(his)
Lysine
(lys)
Arginine
(arg)
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH
C
NH2+
NH3+
H+
NH2
COO–
C
H
H
+H3N
COO–
COO–
C
H
+H3N
C
OH
Tyrosine
(tyr)
Treonine
(thr)
Proline
(pro)
Alanine
(ala)
Serine
(ser)
Glycine
(gly)
Cysteine
(cys)
Tryptophan
(trp)
C
H
+H3N
CH3
H2O
CH2
H2
CH2
CH2
COO–
Amino acids that are in between
C
H
+H3N
COO–
C
C
H
OH
H
H
+H3N
COO–
C
H
+H3N
COO–
C
HC
N
H
C
H
+H3N
CH2
H
COO–
C
C
H
OH
CH3
H
+H3N

[Page 113]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   113
Appendix 2C: The Universal Code
Questions
 
2.1:  Immunoassays are based on the specific 
binding of antibodies with antigens.
 
  
(a)  Describe an ELISA.
 
  
(b)  Explain how nonspecific binding can 
produce unwanted signals in both 
immunoassays and in DNA assays. 
(Nonspecific binding refers to the bind-
ing of adsorption of molecules onto 
the surface without any preference or 
selectivity.)
 
2.2: With the aid of diagrams, describe:
 
  
(a) A competitive immunoassay
 
  
(b) A sandwich immunoassay
 
2.3:  Why are living systems, at first glance, violat-
ing the second law of thermodynamics?
 
2.4:  Briefly discuss the “who was on first” 
dilemma: DNA, RNA, or proteins?
 
2.5:  What models are complexity and communi-
cation sciences contributing to the biogen-
esis question?
 
2.6:  Draw a diagram to illustrate how proteins 
are manufactured.
 
2.7:  List examples of emergent properties of com-
plex systems.
 
2.8:  Find some examples of man-made materials 
that feature self-repair.
 
2.9:  Which of the following statements regarding 
GFP is True/False?
 
  
  The excitation maxima of GFP are 
at 395 and 470 nm.
 
  
 
  GFP is extracted from A. victoria 
jellyfish.
 
  
 
  GFP has a highly unstable molec-
ular structure.
 
  
  GFP emits light at high intensity but 
with a very low quantum efficiency.
 
  
 
  GFP gets activated by red or infra-
red light.
2.10: What are DNA microarrays? What are their 
applications?
2.11:  Define what an antigen and an antibody are. 
What class of proteins are antibodies? Sketch 
an antibody, and illustrate where the antigen 
binds to the antibody.  Explain what forces con-
tribute to the antigen-antibody interaction.
2.12: Explain the error catastrophe in gene copying.
2.13:  Explain the difference between DNA cloning, 
reproductive cloning, and biomedical or ther-
apeutic cloning. 
2.14:  PCR is a very important analytical meth-
odology to amplify genetic material. Briefly 
describe how it works and the merits/prob-
lems miniaturization of PCR entails.
2.15: Contrast human manufacturing techniques 
with nature’s methods.
2.16:  What does the term “binding constant” refer 
to in antibody chemistry? What is the value of 
a typical binding constant between an antigen 
and an antibody? What does the term “cross-
reactivity” mean?
2.17:  What is the difference between polyclonal and 
monoclonal antibodies? Briefly discuss the 
advantages and/or disadvantages of mono-
clonal vs. polyclonal antibodies.
2.18:  The antigen-antibody interaction is used in 
a good number of bioanalytical techniques. 
One such example is affinity chromatography. 
Phe
Phe
Leu
Leu
Ser
Ser
Ser
Ser
Tyr
Tyr
STOP
STOP
Cys
Cys
STOP
Trp
U
U
C
A
G
G
A
U
C
A
G
Leu
Leu
Leu
Leu
Pro
Pro
Pro
Pro
His
His
Gln
Gln
Arg
Arg
Arg
Arg
U
C
A
G
Ile
Ile
Ile
Met
Tr
Tr
Tr
Tr
Asn
Asn
Lys
Lys
Ser
Ser
Arg
Arg
U
C
A
G
Val
Val
Val
Val
1st base in codon
2nd base in codon
tRNA
anticodon
U C A
A G U
A U G
U A C
codon
5'
mRNA  3'
Ser
Tyr
3rd base in codon
Ala
Ala
Ala
Ala
Asp
Asp
Glu
Glu
Gly
Gly
Gly
Gly
U
C
A
G
FIGURE A2C.1 The genetic code.

[Page 114]
114   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Describe the principle of affinity chromatog-
raphy and give one example where you would 
need to use affinity chromatography.
2.19: Match the following terms with the appropri-
ate definitions:
 
Thanks to Mr. Youssef Farhat, UC Irvine.
2.20: 
 What is a biosensor? Draw a schematic of a 
typical biosensor with its components and 
explain its operation with an example.
References
 
1. Vogel, S. 1998. Cats’ paws and catapults. New York: W. W. 
Norton.
 
2. Gibson, D. G., G. A. Benders, C. Andrews-Pfannkoch, 
E. A. Denisova, H. Baden-Tillson, J. Zaveri, T. B. Stockwell, 
A. Brownley, D. W. Thomas, M. A. Algire, C. Merryman, L. 
Young, V. N. Noskov, J. I. Glass, J. C. Venter, C. A. Hutchison 
III, and H. O. Smith. 2008. Complete chemical synthe-
sis, assembly, and cloning of a mycoplasma genitalium 
genome. Science 319:1215–20.
 
3. Morris, R. 1999. Artificial worlds: Computers, complexity, and 
the riddle of life. New York: Plenum.
 
4. Crick, F. 1981. Life itself: Its origin and nature. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
 
5. Haynie, D. T. 2001. Biological thermodynamics. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
 
6. Stewart, I. 1998. Life’s other secret: The new mathematics of 
the living world. New York: Wiley.
 
7. Casti, J. L. 1989. Paradigms lost. New York: William 
Morrow.
 
8. Casti, J. L. 2000. Paradigms regained. New York: William 
Morrow.
 
9. Poundstone, W. 1999. Carl Sagan: A life in the cosmos. New 
York: Henry Holt.
 10. Davies, P. 1999. The fifth miracle: The search for the origin and 
meaning of life. New York: Simon & Schuster.
 11. de Duve, C. 1995. Vital dust: The origin and evolution of life 
on earth. New York: Basic Books.
 12. Ridley, M. 2000. Genome: The autobiography of a species in 23 
chapters. New York: Perennial.
 13. Lee, D. H., K. Severin, Y. Yokobayashi, and M. R. 
Ghadriri. 1997. Emergence of symbiosis in peptide self-rep-
lication through a hypercyclic network. Nature 390: 591–94.
 14. Ertem, G., and J. P. Ferris. 1996. Synthesis of RNA oligom-
ers on heterogeneous templates. Nature 379:238–40.
 15. Woese, C. R., and G. E. Fox. 1977. Phylogenetic structure of 
the prokaryotic domain: The primary kingdoms. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 74:5088–90.
 16. Capra, F. 1996. The web of life. New York: Doubleday.
 17. Kauffman, S. 2000. Investigations. Oxford, United Kingdom: 
Oxford University Press.
 18. Rebek, J. 1994. Synthetic self-replicating molecules. Sci Am 
271:48–55.
 19. Loewenstein, W. R. 1999. The touchstone of life. Oxford, 
United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
 20. Shapiro, R. 1991. The human blueprint: The race to unlock the 
secrets of our genetic script. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
 21. Watson, J. D. 1968. The double helix. New York: New 
American Library.
 22. Crick, F. 1988. What mad pursuit: A personal view of scientific 
discovery. New York: Basic Books.
 23. Maddox, J. 1988. What remains to be discovered. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
 24. Robinson, D. W. 1994. Medicine, molecules, and micro-
engineering. Nanobiology 3:147–48.
 25. Goldberg, A. L., S. J. Elledge, and J. W. Harper. 2001. The 
cellular chamber of doom. Sci Am 284:68–73.
 26. Dawkins, R. 1989. The selfish gene. Oxford, United Kingdom: 
Oxford University Press.
 27. Eigen, M., and P. Schuster. 1979. The hypercycle: A principle 
of natural self-organization. New York: Springer-Verlag.
 28. Edwards, S. A. 2006. The nanotech pioneers: Where are 
they taking us? Weinheim, Berlin: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH 
& Co.
 29. Dawkins, R. 1986. The blind watchmaker. New York: W. W. 
Norton.
 30. Britten, R. J., and E. H. Davidson. 1969. Gene regulation 
for higher cells: a theory. Science 165:349–57.
 31. Agrawal, A., Q. M. Eastman, and D. G. Schatz. 1998. 
Transposition mediated by RAG1 and RAG2 and its impli-
cations for the evolution of the immune system. Nature 
394:744–51.
 32. Cantor, C. R. 1990. Orchestrating the Humane Genome 
Project. Science 248:49–51.
 33. Dunham, I., N. Shimizu, B. A. Roe, S. Chissoe, A. R. Hunt, 
J.  E. Collins, et al. 1999. The DNA sequence of human 
chromosome 22. Nature 402:489–95.
 34. Kenyon, C. 1996. Ponce d’Elegans: genetic quest for the 
fountain of youth. Cell 84:501–4.
(1) Fluorophore
(a)  Crystals composed of 
materials from periodic 
groups II-VI, III-V, or 
IV-VI and can be 
conjugated to 
biomolecules
(2)  Stokes shift
(b)  Method used to 
measure the ability of a 
mole cule to move 
around in a cell over 
time
(3)  FRAP
(c)  Intense fluorescent 
probe used in many 
biological studies
(4)  Quantum 
dots
(d)  Difference in 
wavelength between 
fluorescence excitation 
maximum and the 
fluorescence emission 
maximum
(5)  Green 
fluorescent 
protein
(e)  Molecule that can be 
excited by light to emit 
fluorescence

[Page 115]
Nature as an Engineering Guide: Biomimetics   115
 35. Kenyon, C. 1996. Environmental factors and gene activi-
ties that influence lifespan. C. elegans. Ed.  D. L. Riddle. 
Cold Spring Harbor Monograph Series no. 33. Cold Spring 
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
 36. Passwater, R. A. 1985. The antioxidants. New Canaan, CT: 
Keats Publishing.
 37. Hayflick, L., and P. S. Moorhead. 1961. The serial cultivation 
of human diploid cell strains. Exp Cell Res 25:585–621.
 38. Hayflick, L. 1985. The cell biology of aging. Clin Geriatr 
Med 1:15–27.
 39. Hayflick, L. 1994. How and why we age. New York: Ballantine 
Books.
 40. Hayflick, L. 2000. New approaches to old age. Nature 
403:365.
 41. Wilmut, I., A. E. Schnieke, J. McWhir, A. J. Kind, and K. H. S. 
Campbell. 1997. Viable offspring derived from fetal and 
adult mammalian cells. Nature 385:810–13.
 42. Briggs, R., and T. J. King. 1952. Transplantation of living 
nuclei from blastula cells into enucleated frogs’ eggs. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 38, 455–63.
 43. Di Berardino, M. A., R. G. McKinnell, and D. P. Wolf. 2003. 
The golden anniversary of cloning: A celebratory essay. 
Differentiation 71:398–401.
 44. Takahashi, K., K. Tanabe, M. Ohnuki, M. Narita, T. Ichisaka, 
K. Tomoda, and S. Yamanaka. 2007. Induction of pluripo-
tent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined 
factors. Cell 131:861–72.
 45. Yu, J., M. A. Vodyanik, K. Smuga-Otto, J. Antosiewicz-
Bourget, J. L. Frane, S. Tian, J. Nie, G. A. Jonsdottir, V. 
Ruotti, R. Stewart, I. I. Slukvin, and J. A. Thomson. 2007. 
Induced pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human 
somatic cells. Science 5858:1917–20.
 46. Margulis, L., and D. Sagan. 1986. Microcosmos: Four bil-
lion years of evolution from our microbial ancestors. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
 47. Cann, R. L., M. Stoneking, and A. C. Wilson. 1987. 
Mitochondrial DNA and human evolution. Nature 
325:31–36.
 48. Svoboda, K., C. F. Schmidt, B. J. Schnapp, and S. M. Block. 
1993. Direct observation of kinesin stepping by optical 
trapping interferometry. Nature 365:721–27.
 49. Noji, H., R. Yasuda, M. Yoshida, and K. Kinoshita. 1997. 
Direct observation of the rotation F1-ATPase. Nature 
386:299–302.
 50. Montemagno, C., G. Bachand, S. Stelick, and M. 
Bachand. 1999. Constructing biological motor powered 
nanomechanical devices. (Special conference issue of 
Nanotechnology: Sixth Foresight Conference on Molecular 
Nanotechnology.) Nanotechnology 10:225–31.
 51. Kudo, S., Y. Magariyama, and S. Aizawa. 1990. Abrupt 
changes in flagellar rotation observed by laser dark-field 
microscopy. Nature 346:677–79.
 52. Hunter, I. W., and S. Lafontaine. 1992. A comparison of 
muscle with artificial actuators. Technical Digest: 1992 Solid 
State Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, 
SC.
 53. Meyer, E. E., K. J. Rosenberg, and J. Israelachvili. 2006. 
Recent progress in understanding hydrophobic interac-
tions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:15739–46.
 54. Pollack, G. H. 2001. Cells, gels and the engines of life. Seattle, 
WA: Ebner and Sons Publishers.
 55. Schauer-Vukasinovic, V., L. Cullen, and S. Daunert. 1997. 
Rational design of a calcium sensing system based on 
induced conformational changes of calmodulin. J Am 
Chem Soc 119:11102–103.
 56. Douglass, P. M., B. R. Wenner, R. D. Johnson, G. Barrett, 
J. C. Ball, P.-H. Hsu, J. Lee, L. G. Bachas, M. Madou, and 
S. Daunert. 2000. Biomimetic detection schemes on the 
lab CD. Proceedings, NanoSpace 2000. Houston, TX: The 
Institute for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research.
 57. Wenner, B. R., P. M. Douglass, S. Shrestha, B. V. Sharma, 
S.  Lai, M. Madou, and S. Duanert. 2001. Genetically 
designed biosensing systems for high-throughput screen-
ing of pharmaceuticals, clinical diagnostics, and environ-
mental monitoring. Progress in biomedical optics and imaging. 
SPIE.
 58. Mullis, K. 1998. Dancing naked in the minefield. New York: 
Vintage Books.
 59. Petersen, K., W. McMillan, G. Kovacs, A. Northrup, 
L. Christel, and F. Pourahmadi. 1998. The promise of min-
iaturized clinical diagnostic systems. IVD Technology July 
[online].
 60. Northrup, M. A., M. T. Ching, R. M. White, and R. T. Watson. 
1993. DNA amplification with a microfabricated reaction 
chamber. 7th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan.
 61. Wilding, P., M. A. Shoffner, and L. J. Kricka. 1994. PCR in a 
silicon microstructure. Clin Chem 40:1815–18.
 62. Wittwer, C. T., and D. J. Garling. 1991. Rapid cycle DNA 
amplification: Time and temperature optimization. 
BioTechniques 10:76–83.
 63. Wittwer, C. T., G. C. Fillmore, and D. J. Garling. 1990. 
Minimizing the time required for DNA amplifications 
by efficient heat transfer to small samples. Anal Biochem 
186:328–31.
 64. Schena, M., R. A. Heller, T. P. Theriault, K. Konrad, 
E. Lachenmeier, and R. W. Davis. 1998. Microarrays: 
Biotechnology’s discovery platform for functional genom-
ics. TIB Tech 16:301–06.
 65. Fodor, S. P. A., J. L. Read, M. C. Pirrung, L. Stryer, A. T. Lu, 
and D. Solas. 1991. Light-directed, spatially addressable 
parallel chemical synthesis. Science 251:767–73.
 66. Eggers, M., M. Hogan, R. K. Reich, J. Lamture, D. Ehrlich, 
M. Hollis, B. Kosicki, T. Powdrill, K. Beattie, S. Smith, et al. 
1994. A microchip for quantitative detection of molecules 
utilizing luminescent and radioisotope reporter groups. 
Biotechniques 17(3):516–25.
 67. Friend, S. H. 1999. DNA microarrays and expression profil-
ing in clinical practice. BMJ 319:1306.
 68. Dyson, F. J. 1999. The sun, the genome, and the internet—
Tools of scientific revolutions. Oxford, United Kingdom: 
Oxford University Press.
 69. Gershenfeld, N. 1999. When things start to think. New York: 
Henry Holt and Company.
 70. Gibson, D. G., J. I. Glass, C. Lartigue, V. N. Noskov, R.-Y. 
Chuang, M. A. Algire, G. A. Benders, M. G. Montague, L. Ma, 
M. M. Moodie, C. Merryman, S. Vashee, R. Krishnakumar, 
N. Assad-Garcia, C. Andrews-Pfannkoch, E. A. Denisova, 
L. Young, Z.-Q Qi, T. H. Segall-Shapiro, C. H. Calvey, 
P. P. Parmar, C. A. Hutchison III, H. O. Smith, and J. C. Venter. 
2010. Creation of a bacterial cell controlled by a chemically 
synthesized genome. Science 329(5987):52–56.

[Page 116]
[empty page]

[Page 117]
117
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Top-Down versus Bottom-Up 
Manufacturing
Important Concepts in Bottom-Up 
Manufacturing
Self-Assembly and Self-
Organization
Biomimetic Nanomanufacturing
Supramolecular Chemistry
Molecular Assembler
Nanostructure Properties
Nanoparticle Manufacture
In Situ Fabrication
Gas Phase Synthesis
Carbon Nanostructures: Fullerenes
Carbon Nanotube Applications
Questions
References
3
Nanotechnology: 
Top-Down and 
Bottom-Up 
Manufacturing 
Approaches 
Compared
Our ability to arrange atoms lies at the foundation of technology.
K. Eric Drexel 
1986
Channel
20 nm
Source
Drain
Gate
4 nm
 Top-down nanotechnology. Electron 
micrograph of an SiO2/Si interface in a 
Si N-channel MOS transistor fabricated 
using top-down methods.
(a) Kanji character for “atom,” by 
Lutz and Eigler, IBM, Almaden. An 
example of manipulation/mech-
anosynthesis of iron atoms on a 
copper surface with a scanning 
tunneling microscope. (Courtesy of 
D. Eigler.) Mechanical manipulation 
of atoms is a bottom-up technique. 
(b) Cover of American Scientist: the 
carbon nanotube launch station. 
Carbon nanotubes are usually 
made with bottom-up techniques.
(a)
(b)

[Page 118]
118   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Introduction
Nario Taniguchi coined the word nanotechnology in 
1974 to describe machining with tolerances of less 
than 1 µm (see Volume II, Figure 6.3). Humans are 
still best at building structures we can grasp with 
our hands and see with our eyes, and we have only 
relatively recently started to intentionally craft 
objects at the nanoscale with nanotechnology. Over 
the last two decades, nanotechnology has come to 
mean two quite different things. In the broadest 
sense  it is any technology dealing with building 
structures between 1 and 100 nm in size, in a nar-
rower sense, as promoted by K. Eric Drexel, it involves 
designing and building machines in which every 
atom and chemical bond is precisely specified.1
About the first definition, one commentator 
quipped that some companies are willing to say 
their product is based on nanotechnology if it is 
made of atoms!1 Clearly, some further refinement 
is in order for a working definition. Our criteria for 
nanotechnology are that the miniaturized structures 
have at least one dimension smaller than 100 nm, 
are crafted with a novel technique, and have been 
intentionally designed with a specific nanofeature in 
mind. Medieval church stained glass, with embed-
ded gold nanoparticles, does not qualify, since the 
reason for the color dependence on the size of the 
particles was not yet appreciated in the Middle Ages 
(Figure  3.1). Finally, nanotechnology attempts to 
control or manipulate matter at the atomic scale. 
Our definition dovetails nicely with the criteria 
adopted by the National Nanotechnology Institute 
(http://www.nano.gov/):
 
1. Nanotechnology involves structures in the 
1–100-nm range
 
2. Nanotechnology creates and uses structures 
that have novel size-based properties
 
3. Nanotechnology takes advantage of the ability 
to control or manipulate at the atomic scale.
The manufacture of devices with dimensions 
between 1 and 100 nm is based on either top-down 
manufacturing methods (starting from  bigger 
building blocks, say a whole Si wafer, and chiseling 
them down into smaller and smaller pieces  by 
cutting, etching, and slicing) or bottom-up manu-
facturing methods (in which small particles such 
as atoms, molecules, and atom clusters are added 
for the construction of bigger functional units). 
The top-down approach to nanotechnology we 
call nanofabrication or nanomachining—an extension 
of  the micromachining approaches [micro electro-
mechanical system (MEMS)] introduced in pre-
vious chapters. The bottom-up approach we call 
nanochemistry. Nanochemistry is also called molecu-
lar nanotechnology; it is the arranging and building 
of more complex organic and inorganic struc tures 
at molecular level by chemistry, molec ular biology, 
or mechanical positional assembly. An example 
of this second approach is the self-assembly of 
a monolayer from individual molecules on a 
gold surface (see Volume II, Figure 8.14). Bottom-up 
methods are nature’s way of growing things. In bio-
mimetics, one studies how nature, through eons 
of time, developed manufacturing methods, mate-
rials, structures, and intelligence. These biomimetic 
studies, expanded upon in Chapter 2, this volume, 
are now inspiring design, materials, and engineer-
ing of human-made miniature objects.
Both nanomachining and nanochemistry are 
considered nanotechnology. We start this chap-
ter off by contrasting these two opposite methods 
to obtain nanostructures. Along the way we high-
light the Drexel-Smalley debate about the “correct 
path” toward nanotechnology. We then list all the 
FIGURE 3.1 Stained glass: Labors of the Months (Norwich, 
England, ca. 1480). The ruby color is due to embedded 
gold nanoparticles.

[Page 119]
Nanotechnology   119
properties that make nanodevices special, i.e., phys-
ical and chemical behavior that depend on particle 
size and allow one to engineer their properties. In 
one extreme, we have atoms and molecules, gener-
ally less than a nanometer in size, studied in quan-
tum chemistry, and in the other extreme we have 
bulk condensed matter physics that deals with solids 
with an infinite array of bound atoms. Nanoscience 
deals with the  in-between mesoworld where neither 
 quantum chemistry nor the classic laws of physics 
apply. The listing of nanoparticle properties is fol-
lowed by a section on preparation of nanostructures 
in general: from high-energy ball milling to pho-
tolithography to gas phase and liquid phase pro-
cesses. Finally, as more specific examples, we detail 
properties and highlight bottom-up manufacturing 
approaches of carbon nanotubes, graphene sheets, 
and nanowires.
Top-Down versus Bottom-Up Manufacturing
General Characteristics of Top-Down 
and Bottom-Up Manufacturing
Top-down nanofabrication is principally based on 
lithography and traditional mechanical machin-
ing, etching, and grinding, whereas bottom-up 
nanochemistry is based on chemical synthesis, 
self-assembly, and positional assembly. The distinc-
tion is clarified in Figure 3.2. These complementary 
developments constitute different aspects of nano-
technology; both aim to create and use structures, 
devices, and systems in the size range of about 0.1–
100 nm (covering the atomic, molecular, and macro-
molecular length scales).
There are some important distinctions to be made 
between these two approaches to making very small 
things. Whereas top-down methods essentially 
impose a structure or pattern on a substrate, in self-
assembly and self-organization-based bottom-up 
methods the assembly or organization of atomic 
and molecular constituents into larger structures 
is inherent through processes in the manipulated 
system. Self- assembly and self-organization are 
driven by thermodynamics and hold the intriguing 
potential of delegating more and more mechanical 
or logical operations to materials instead of to man-
ufacturing machines. Assembly of atoms or mol-
ecules into larger aggregates in chemical synthesis 
is driven by chemical reactions with the Gibbs free 
energy changes dominated by the enthalpy changes 
associated with breaking and creating bonds (ΔG = 
ΔH − TΔS). In self-assembly the driving forces are 
Bottom-up
Chemical synthesis
Particles
Molecules
Cosmetics
Fuel additives
Displays
Crystals
Films, tubes
Self-assembly
Positional assembly
Lithography
Cutting, etching, grinding
Precision-engineered
surfaces
High-quality optical mirrors
Quantum
well lasers
Computer chips
MEMS
Electronics devices
Chip masks
Experimental atomic
or molecular devices
Top-down
Atoms/molecules
1Å
1 nm
10 nm
Bottom-up technology
SWNT
0.7~2 nm
MWNT
CNT
10 nm
Calixarene
100 nm
Cluster/supermolecules
7 nm~
45 nm~
Integrated
Circuit
Top-down technology
Ultraﬁne fabrication
FIGURE 3.2 Contrasting bottom-up nanofabrication with top-down nanochemistry.2 (SWNT: single wall nanotube; 
MWNT: multiwall nanotube; CNT: carbon nanotube.)

[Page 120]
120   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
weak interactions (hydrogen bonds, van der Waals 
forces, hydrophobic/hydrophilic interactions, etc.; 
see Volume I, Chapter 7) and are usually driven by 
entropy changes only. Both chemical synthesis and 
self-assembly-based bottom-up processes are based 
on growth phenomena, and any growth scenario is 
governed by the competition between kinetics and 
thermodynamics. Positional assembly is the least 
mature bottom-up technique and uses mechanical 
means, e.g., an atomic force microscope (AFM), to 
assemble nanostructures by forcing atoms or mol-
ecules in close enough proximity and with the right 
orientation to form or break bonds (see Volume II, 
Figures 2.43 to 2.45).
A top-down manufacturing process (for example, 
the writing of an e-beam pattern) is deterministic, 
but a bottom-up process (for example, the chemi-
cal synthesis of a quantum dot from a colloidal 
solution) is stochastic. In the latter case, instead of 
dealing with only one possible “reality” of how the 
process might evolve under time, in a stochastic or 
random process there is some indeterminacy in its 
future evolution, described by probability distribu-
tions. This means that even if the initial condition 
is known, there are many possibilities to which the 
process might go, but some paths are more prob-
able and others less (statistics take over). Current 
top-down manufacturing techniques are in a sense 
crude and wasteful compared with the bottom-up 
manufacturing techniques we survey in this chapter. 
Top-down, making a smooth edge requires grinding 
away and discarding trillions of atoms (i.e., remov-
ing excess material). The hope for bottom-up manu-
facturing is to build with atomic precision without 
wasting material.
Applying modified integrated circuit (IC) meth-
ods, MEMS led to major advances in manufactur-
ing strategies, but the method still presents a limited 
choice of materials and works with building blocks 
that are large and crude compared with the nano-
chemistry arsenal. As humankind learns to build 
with the same construction set nature uses, we 
are bound to challenge nature in nanoengineer-
ing. Because it uses relatively large building blocks, 
human manufacturing is rapid. The expectation is 
that nature, because it uses much smaller building 
blocks, for example, atoms with a diameter of 0.3 nm, 
must be very slow. To offset the time it takes to work 
with small, basic building blocks, nature, in grow-
ing an organism, relies on additive processes featur-
ing massive parallelism and self-assembly. Massive 
parallelism and self-assembly are two areas where 
human technology still is very backward compared 
with nature’s methods. In Table 3.1 we compare 
some of the key characteristics of bottom-up manu-
facturing (nanochemistry) with MEMS technology.
In Figure 3.3 we illustrate the convergence over 
time of top-down and bottom-up methodologies. 
The lines representing top-down manufacturing 
in Figure 3.3 are a simplified representation of a 
1974 diagram by Norio Taniguchi (see Volume II, 
Figure 6.3). The higher of the two lines, marking 
TABLE 3.1 MEMS and Nanochemistry Compared
MEMS Technology
Nanochemistry
Top-down
Bottom-up
Miniaturization with micrometer and 
submicrometer tolerance
Miniaturization with atomic accuracy
Builds mostly on solid-state physics and the 
band model from quantum mechanics 
Builds almost exclusively on quantum mechanics
Evolved from the integrated circuit fabrication 
technology
Evolved from molecular engineering, colloid 
chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, and 
scanning proximal tool assembly
Many MEMS products are commercially 
successful 
Only a few nanomaterials are on the market
Deterministic processes
Stochastic processes
Limited set of building materials 
Huge number of possible building materials 
Relatively large building blocks make for a fast 
process
Very small building blocks necessitate massive 
parallelism and self-assembly

[Page 121]
Nanotechnology   121
progress of absolute tolerance in top-down machin-
ing, corresponds to precision machining. The lower 
line represents absolute tolerance in ultraprecision 
machining, lithography, and energy beam tech-
niques. Some caution is in order about the use of 
the term absolute tolerance in nanotechnology: a 
more rigorous definition of nanotechnology should 
differentiate between absolute tolerances in lateral 
and vertical nanostructures. Deposition of nano-
meter-thick films is relatively easy with all types of 
“traditional” chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and 
physical vapor deposition (PVD) techniques, but pat-
terning of a thin film laterally, with critical dimen-
sions (CDs) that extend from about 100 nm down to 
atomic orders of magnitude, is still quite a challenge 
when employing top-down methods. Bottom-up 
methods hold the potential for nanometric control 
in all three dimensions. This explains why we tend 
to make quantum wells with lithography-based top-
down methods, since only the thickness direction 
requires tight control, but quantum wires and quan-
tum dots are mostly made with bottom-up methods, 
since for those quantum structures we also need 
control in the lateral directions. Vertically layered 
structures, i.e., nanoscaled thin films, are obviously 
much easier to achieve than laterally patterned fea-
tures. When people discuss breakthroughs in top-
down nanotechnology, they mostly refer to better 
lateral patterning techniques. In the same context, in 
Volume II, Chapter 6, we explain how the excellent 
absolute tolerances for precision and ultraprecision 
mechanical machining only hold true for surface 
finishes, i.e., in the thickness direction, while in 
the lateral directions absolute tolerances are again 
worse. Mechanical machining lateral tolerances are 
worse than the lateral tolerances achievable with 
lithography, and those in turn are worse than what 
we can achieve with nanochemistry techniques: 
using electron beam machines we can cut shapes 
with a precision of 2.5 nm, about 1,000 times better 
than what is achievable in a standard machine shop 
(2.5 µm is standard, and 1 µm may be achieved in 
specialty shops), and precision in nanochemistry is 
about 1 Å, 25 times better than what e-beam offers 
today. The two lines in Figure 3.3 representing the 
bottom-up manufacturing progress in achievable 
absolute tolerances show how bottom-up processes 
evolved to enable, ever-larger structures through 
progress in nanochemistry. It is seen from this fig-
ure that from the mid-1970s on, feature sizes that 
could be achieved by nanofabrication (top-down) 
and nanochemistry (bottom-up) started to overlap. 
Over the next ten years, the size overlap of objects 
fabricated with either approach will continue, and 
molecular engineers and supramolecular chemists, 
jointly with IC, MEMS, and nanoelectromechani-
cal system (NEMS) specialists, now making devices 
with 45-nm feature sizes and below, will find new 
ways to combine top-down and bottom-up manu-
facturing methods.
In Volume II, Chapter 6, we commented that the 
reason for the slowdown in electronic device min-
iaturization hinges on securing more mechanical 
stability in the positioning stages, but even more 
so on manufacturing cost and the fact that tran-
sistors are becoming too leaky below the 32-nm 
node, where quantum effects start playing a role. 
To further extend manufacturing accuracy in elec-
tronics one has to look beyond current manufac-
turing methodologies and consider methods such 
as molecular engineering and nanofabrication of 
quantum devices. Micromachining of special lithog-
raphy tools will play a pivotal role in those new 
machining approaches. For example, the scanning 
tunneling microscope (STM), based on microma-
chining ultrasharp tips on Si cantilevers, creates 
machining opportunities with accuracies on the 
atomic level, well beyond the predictions of the 
1940
1 mm
10 µm
1 µm
100 nm
10 nm
1 nm
0.1 nm
1950
1960
1970
“Top-down” approach
Precision &
ultraprecision
machining
Lithography
Energy beams
Nanotechnology
Nanophase materials
Chemistry
“Bottom-up” approach
Biochemistry
Top-
down/
bottom-
up
synthesis
1980
Year
Dimensional scale
1990
2000
2010
FIGURE 3.3 Convergence of bottom-up nanochemistry 
and top-down nanofabrication. The nanotechnology line 
is placed at 100 nm2.

[Page 122]
122   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Taniguchi and Moore curves in Volume II, Figure 
6.3. For mechanical NEMS structures, operation in 
the micro- and nanodomains imposes barriers other 
than those described for electronic devices. New 
design philosophies, producing results that are more 
error- insensitive with simpler mechanisms, smaller 
numbers of parts, and, wherever possible, flexible 
members rather than rigid ones must be adopted. 
Most of this book deals with top-down machining; 
in this chapter we deal in some more detail with bot-
tom-up manufacturing.
Important Concepts in 
Bottom-Up Manufacturing
Introduction
Before reviewing nanostructure properties and 
listing methods for bottom-up nanotechnology 
manufacturing, some important contributing con-
cepts and their definitions are in order. What fol-
lows are clarifications and definitions for concepts 
that are often utilized in bottom-up manufacturing 
but are not always well understood, such as self-
assembly, self-organization, biomimetics, supramo-
lecular chemistry, self-replication, and molecular 
assemblers.
Self-Assembly and Self-Organization
Self-Assembly
Self-assembly and self-organization are important con-
cepts in both nanotechnology and biology. According 
to Maasden and Kaiser, about 10% of papers dealing 
with nanotechnology published between 1990 and 
2005 address the concept of self-assembly, and among 
those, 3% deal with self-orga nization.3 The distinc-
tion between self-assembly and self-organization is 
not always readily apparent, and this causes consider-
able confusion, especially when self-replication (see 
below) is thrown into the discussion.
Thermodynamics represents the simplest way to 
differentiate between self-assembly and self-orga-
nization. Self-assembly concerns equilibrium situa-
tions and is purely driven by the tendency of systems 
to minimize their free energy in accordance with the 
second law of thermodynamics. Self-organization, 
on the other hand, occurs in systems that are open 
and are driven by a constant input of energy and 
that are far from thermodynamic equilibrium. As 
we pointed out earlier, in self-assembly free energy 
minimization is often driven by entropy changes, 
ΔS  (Equation 2.7). For natural examples of self-
 assembly, consider phospholipids with hydropho-
bic and hydrophilic ends placed in aqueous solution 
spontaneously forming stable structures (Figures 
2.41–2.43, this volume) or the intricate three-dimen-
sional (3D) patterns in protein folding (Figure 2.11, 
this volume). In technology, self-assembly is taken 
advantage of, for example, in sensors such as DNA 
probes and immunosensors, but is not used much in 
human manufacturing yet. We use self-assembly in 
manufacturing, for example, when growing crys-
tals, in building self-assem bled monolayers (see 
Volume II, Figure 8.14), and in colloid chemistry. In 
colloidal chemistry one can assemble inorganic sol-
ids, such as CdSe crystals, with astonishing regular-
ity in size and properties, comparable to what can 
be accomplished with nanolithography, and this 
method has become an important route for building 
quantum dots (see Figure 3.23).
There is an upswing in self-assembly work that 
is bringing a renewed excitement to the nanotech-
nology field. In Chapter 4, this volume, on packag-
ing, for example, we detail the differences between 
deterministic and stochastic parallel microassembly 
and clarify the need and tremendous opportunities 
for self-assembly in packaging of nanocomponents. 
Recent examples of work in self-assembly based 
packaging, clarified in Chapter 4, include DNA-
mediated self-assembly of metallic and semicon-
ductor components and micro-origami assembly 
of optical components and of small polymer sheets 
(see also the example that follows).
Example of Self-Assembly: 
Scaffolded DNA Origami
Weight
The reproducible generation of atomically precise 
 patterns and shapes is at the heart of nanotechnol-
ogy. Although research has shown improvement 
at creating nanosized shapes, it is still a tremen-
dous challenge to create desired nanostructures 
that always do have the same size and shape with 

[Page 123]
Nanotechnology   123
atomic accuracy. Here we review a recently devel-
oped method that holds that potential. It involves 
a technique for folding long single strands of DNA 
(ssDNA) into arbitrary two-dimensional shapes 
using synthesized DNA staple strands in so-called 
“scaffolded DNA origami.” Scaffolded DNA origami 
builds on Seeman’s DNA nanotechnology, discussed 
in Chapters 2 and 4, this volume (e.g., Figure 4.49) 
and pushes it quite a few steps further.
Origami is the art of folding paper; it originated 
in China as “Zhe Zhi” and was adapted by Japanese 
monks in the sixth century AD (see an example of 
origami in Figure 3.4). Ancient origami is not self-
assembly, but the scaffolded DNA origami reviewed 
here is. DNA by its nature does exhibit self-assembly 
(see base pairing in Chapter 2, Figure 2.6). The same 
characteristics that make DNA so effective geneti-
cally also make it a good choice for programmed 
self-assembly in nanotechnology:
 
◾DNA can be manipulated to create exact copies 
that are extremely accurate (atomic accuracy).
 
◾DNA is predictable and programmable.
 
◾DNA also has the ability to store enormous 
amounts of information.
The most important part of controlling the way a 
DNA strand folds is knowing its genetic nucleotide 
structure. The scaffold strand that has been used 
most often is circular genomic DNA from the virus 
M13mp18 (natural M13mp18 is 7249 bases long). 
Synthesized DNA staple strands then bind to com-
plementary base pairs on the scaffold M13mp18 
viral genome as illustrated in Figure 3.5. Both the 
DNA strand and the staple strand must be known to 
avoid unwanted pairing and to ensure that the sta-
pling takes place in desired locations only, as illus-
trated in Figure 3.6.
The design for a desired shape is made by raster fill -
ing the shape with the ∼7-kilobase single-stranded 
scaffold molecule and by choosing more than 200 
short  oligonucleotide staple strands to hold the 
scaffold in place. Once synthesized, a large excess of 
staples (100×) is mixed with scaffold and annealed 
in a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) machine 
(<2 h) (for details on how PCR works, see Chapter 
2, this volume, Figure 2.53). Synthesized DNA sta-
ples self-assemble, with the viral strands resulting in 
folded area shapes (squares, disks, five-pointed-star, 
etc.) approximately 100 nm in diameter, with a spa-
tial resolution of 6 nm. A nucleotide may serve as a 
6-nm pixel in these designs, so any type of word or 
image can be programmed. Individual DNA struc-
tures can also be made to form larger assemblies 
of two-dimensional (2D) periodic lattices. Sample 
DNA origami are deposited on mica and imaged 
with an AFM in tapping mode. Experimentally veri-
fied by the creation of a dozen shapes and patterns, 
the method is easy, has a high yield, and lends itself 
well to automated design and manufacture. So far, 
computer-aided design (CAD) tools for scaffolded 
DNA origami are simple, require hand-design of 
the folding path only, and are restricted to two-
 dimensional designs. If the method gains wide 
acceptance, better CAD tools will be required.4
A
A
A
A
A
A
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
G
G
G
G
T
G
G
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
G
G
G
G
G
G
C
FIGURE 3.5 DNA staple concept. The sequence of DNA provides a unique address for each location. Staple strands bind 
locations together according to the design.
FIGURE 3.4 Origami art. (From Origami.com, http://www.
origami.com.)

[Page 124]
124   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Self-Organization
Self-organization is a term for those types of pat-
tern forming systems that are open and thus driven 
by a constant input of energy and that are far from 
thermodynamic equilibrium. The Rayleigh-Bénard 
instability, or, more simply, Bénard heat convection, 
is regarded as a classic case of self- organization. 
This type of heat convection is named after French 
chemist Henri Bénard, who first recorded the effect 
in 1900. Because the British physicist Lord Rayleigh 
further investigated Bénard’s observation, the condi-
tions that produce it came to be called the Rayleigh-
Bénard instability. Anyone can observe the formation 
of Bénard cells by heating a thin layer of oil in a pan, 
as illustrated in Figure 3.7. With the oil uniformly 
heated from below, a constant heat flux is estab-
lished, moving from the bottom to the top of the 
oil layer in the pan. The oil itself remains at arest, 
and when the temperature difference between top 
and bottom of the oil layer reaches a certain criti-
cal value, thermal conduction is replaced by heat 
convection, in which the coherent motion of large 
number of molecules transfers the heat. At this 
point a very strikingly ordered pattern of hexago-
nal cells (a “honeycomb”) appears, in which hot oil 
rises through the center of the cells, while cooler liq-
uid descends to the bottom along the cell walls. The 
same physics underlies a weather phenomenon that 
leaves hexagonal patterns behind in sand or snow. 
The sun heats up the desert sand or a snowfield, 
and warm air from the surface rises, while cold air 
descends from the upper layers of the atmosphere. 
The conflict is resolved again by the emergence of 
orderly patterns of fluid flow under the action of an 
imposed temperature gradient, resulting in hexago-
nal circulation vortices that leave their imprints on 
sand dunes in the desert and on arctic snowfields.
During the 1960s, Ilya Prigogine (1917–2003), 
 winner of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1977, 
de veloped a new, nonlinear, irreversible thermo-
dynamics, that mathematically describes the self-
 organization phenomenon described here.5 It is 
~ 100 nm
a
b
c
d
e
f
FIGURE 3.6 The design for a desired shape is made by raster filling the shape with the 7-kilobase single-stranded 
scaffold molecule and by choosing more than two hundred short oligonucleotide staple strands to hold the scaffold in place.4
(a)
(b)
Rolling convection cells
Termal jostling
FIGURE 3.7 (a) Patterns of hexagonal Bénard cells viewed from above. The most interesting stable patterns appear right 
at the edge of chaos. This is happening far from equilibrium, thanks to the energy flowing through an open system and 
being dissipated. (b) The hexagonal cells—the simple global order—is more efficient at dissipating heat than the simple 
local motions.

[Page 125]
Nanotechnology   125
quite unlikely that anyone would have deduced these 
 phenomena from the Navier-Stokes equations (see 
Vol ume I, Chapter 6). On the basis of Prigogine’s 
work, Bénard cells are now understood to arise from 
the properties of the liquid state at a bifurcation point 
in which a self-organizing structure emerges. The 
huge number of degrees of freedom of individual 
molecules in the fluid at this critical point suddenly 
organize into a coherent and simple flow pattern that 
dissipates heat more effectively than simple thermal 
conduction. In this new emergent behavior, convec-
tion (transport of heat by mass movement) in self-
 organized  spatial structures becomes the dominant 
process. This change is initiated by an instability (noise) 
in the system, and the result obeys the second law of 
thermodynamics, since this mechanism is a more effi-
cient way of disposing of the system’s heat. More dis-
order must generally prevail (increase in ∆S), but one 
can still have a local increase in order, such as in the 
hexagonal Bénard cells, as long as overall they contrib-
ute to the wider disordering of the surroundings, i.e., 
the dissipation of energy as entropy or waste heat.
What is happening at a molecular level in the frying 
pan is that when the pan is only gently warmed, each 
heated molecule moves by itself, and the molecules 
all chaotically barge about and only eventually emerge 
at the surface, where they shed their excess heat. But 
at a certain critical temperature, a phase transition 
occurs. The jostling molecules are becoming entrained 
into a coherent flow, the rolling convection current 
that moves them smoothly from the heated bottom 
to the cooler surface. The hexagonal cells—the simple 
global order—is more efficient at dissipating heat than 
the simple local motions (see Figure 3.7b). But when 
one heats a Bénard cell just a little more, its orderly 
hexagonal cells soon break up and instead turbulence 
results and disorder appears again. The order turns 
out to exist only for a very finely controlled balance 
between heat input and heat dissipation.
In self-organization what differs from what hap-
pens in self-assembly is that internal variations, 
called fluctuations or noise, trigger self-organization. 
The increase in orga nization corresponds to a decrease 
of entropy equivalent to an increase in redundancy, 
information, or constraint. In other words, after 
the self-organization process, less ambiguity about 
which state the system is in results. Prigogine called 
systems that continuously export entropy in order to 
maintain their organization dissipative structures, i.e., 
systems that exist far from thermodynamic equilib-
rium, dissipate the heat generated to sustain them, 
and have the capacity to change to higher levels of 
orderliness or self-organization. In classic thermo-
dynamics the dissipation of energy in heat transfer, 
friction, and the like was always regarded as waste. 
Dissipative structures introduced a radical change 
in this view by showing that in open systems, dis-
sipation becomes a source of order. According to 
Prigogine, dissipative systems contain subsystems 
that continuously fluctuate. At times, a single such 
fluctuation or a combination of them may become 
so magnified by possible feedback that it shatters the 
preexisting organization in what is called an emer-
gent new property. At such moments, called bifurca-
tion points, it is impossible to determine in advance 
whether the system will disintegrate into “chaos” 
or leap to a new, more differentiated, higher level 
of “order.” While dissipative structures receive their 
energy from outside, the instabilities and jumps to 
new forms of organization are the result of internal 
fluctuations amplified by positive feedback loops. 
Thus, amplifying “runaway” feedback, which was 
traditionally seen as destructive, now appears as a 
source of new order and complexity in this model.
Self-assembly and self-organization are fundamen-
tally different from a thermodynamics point of view: 
while self-assembly stems from minimization of the 
free energy, self-organization requires an open system 
and a constant energy input.* Whereas self-assembly 
is quite well understood and is clearly important at 
small length scales in biology (protein folding, for 
example), self-organization is not as well understood, 
and the length scale at which it comes into play in 
biology is still under debate. For the specific case of 
cell membrane assembly, it is believed that both pro-
cesses eventually lead to quite similar patterns, but 
that their evolution occurs on very different length 
and time scales. Self-assembly produces periodic 
protein patterns on a spatial scale below 0.1 µm in a 
few seconds followed by extremely slow coarsening, 
* Unfortunately, important players in this field, such as Whitesides, 
seem to maintain their own definitions of self-assembly, and J.M. 
Lehn uses both terms more or less interchangeably to characterize 
the synthesis of supramolecular structures.

[Page 126]
126   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
whereas self-organization results in a  pattern wave-
length comparable to the typical cell size of 100 µm 
within a few minutes, suggesting different biological 
functions for the two processes.6 One thing that every-
one agrees on is that living organisms cannot arise 
wholly from self-assembly, because in the absence of 
a continuous supply of energy they die. In summary, 
crudely said: viruses self-assemble, but elephants 
(perhaps) self-organize (http://www. softmachines.
org/wordpress/?p=178). Another parallel to living 
systems here is that such dynamical structures are not 
devised to exhibit this behavior: they develop sponta-
neously from random initial conditions (we empha-
size: not from special initial conditions).
The behavior of interest, such as that of the Bénard 
cells, is often found in the transition between order 
and chaos—at the edge of chaos—and is classified as a 
kind of organized complexity. The same type of behav-
ior is involved in adaptive path minimization by ants, 
wasp and termite nest building, army ant raiding, fish 
schooling and bird flocking, coordinated cooperation 
in slime molds, synchronized firefly flashing, evolu-
tion by natural selection, game theory, the evolution 
of cooperation, etc. When a flock of birds is taking off 
from a lake (see Figure 3.8), birds compete for posi-
tion, try to get free of the maelstrom of their fellow 
birds and go up into the air. They want to be part of 
the flock, yet at the same time try to avoid collisions 
with each other. Computer models show that each 
bird’s attempt to keep a minimum and maximum 
distance from others causes flight paths to couple into 
feedback loops of attraction and repulsion. Positive 
and negative feedback balance so that the individual 
birds appear transformed into a single organism. The 
late Prigogine wrote about the reception his irrevers-
ible thermodynamics received at first:
It is difficult today to give an account of the hostil-
ity that such an approach was to meet. For example, 
I remember that towards the end of 1946, at the 
Brussels IUPAP meeting, after a presentation of the 
thermodynamics of irreversible processes, a special-
ist of great repute said to me, in substance: “I am 
surprised that you give more attention to irreversible 
phenomena, which are essentially transitory, than 
to the final result of their evolution, equilibrium.”
Ilya Prigogine
1980
Biomimetic Nanomanufacturing
Introduction
Biomimetics is the application of designs, materi-
als, and systems found in nature to engineering and 
technology. As we saw in Chapter 2, this volume, 
where we cover biomimetics in much more detail, 
engineers and scientists tend to increasingly turn 
toward nature for inspiration on designs, materi-
als, and systems, spawning a number of technology 
innovations. There is an obvious reason behind this 
trend: the rigorous competition of natural selection 
means that waste and inefficiency are not tolerated 
in natural systems, unlike many of the technologies 
developed by humans. For this same reason, many 
researchers now give natural, biomimetic manufac-
turing methods another look. Within this context, 
the guiding principles involved in the construction 
of living organisms are as follows.7,8
 
◾The use of composites (rather than monolithic 
materials in human engineering)
 
◾Several successive levels of organization (hier-
archy), often in the form of two prevalent 
natural design motives: fractals (trees, lungs, 
the brain, the cardiovascular system, etc.) or 
layered structures (tree rings, onions, etc.) and 
combinations thereof
 
◾Very wide range of manufacturing sizes: from 
atoms to several meters, i.e., 1012 orders of 
magnitude
FIGURE 3.8 Flock formation as an example of emergent, 
spontaneous organization. (From http://www.cs.vu.nl/∼schut/
bird12.jpg.) 

[Page 127]
Nanotechnology   127
 
◾The use of carbon instead of Si
 
◾Ambient temperature versus the high tempera-
tures used in human engineering
 
◾Low energy (ATP) versus high energy
 
◾Mobility of components (Brownian motion) 
versus rigidity with no or few fluctuations
 
◾Operation in aqueous solution rather air (wet 
vs. dry engineering)
 
◾Compartmentalization in cells
 
◾Plasticity: soft, flexible materials that change 
conformation in response to the environment 
versus rigid components
 
◾Self-assembly (see above), self-organization 
(see above), and self-replication all through 
weak bonds
 
◾Order out of noise versus noise as a nuisance 
(see above)
 
◾The use of templates (e.g., the reading of genes 
by messenger RNA to build proteins in the cells’ 
ribosomes, as shown in Figure 2.12)
 
◾Variable number of components versus fixed 
number of components
 
◾Adhesive surfaces (van der Waals) versus sepa-
rated surfaces
 
◾Robustness through stochastics versus through 
redundancy
These principles provide inspiration for the imple-
mentation of human nanotechnology. As noted in 
Chapter 2, this volume, biomimetics should not 
be taken too far beyond inspiration from nature, 
because  the ultimate goal in nature is spreading 
genetic information to the next generation, not 
to generate the most efficient manufacturing tech-
nique. We add a few comments now for several of the 
attributes of a natural growing process listed above.
Nanocomposites
Nanocomposite materials are widespread in bio-
logical systems, such as bone, cell walls, and soft 
body tissue. The nacre (mother-of-pearl) of abalone 
shell, an oriented coating composed of alternat-
ing layers of aragonite (CaCO3) and a biopolymer, 
is an oft-studied example (Figure 3.9). The lami-
nated structure provides strength, hardness, and 
toughness. Nacre is twice as hard and 1000 times 
as tough as its constituent phases. Humankind has 
accumulated plenty of experience with compos-
ite materials, but attempts to make “biomimetic” 
nanocomposite assemblies are quite recent. Along 
this line, Sellinger et al. reported on an efficient 
self-assembly process for preparing nanolaminated 
organic-inorganic coatings that mimic nacre.9 New 
biomimetic materials such as scaffolds for regrowth 
of tendons tend to be composites too, although not 
on the nanoscale; in the case of tendon scaffolds, 
composites are made from carbon fibers and poly-
lactic acid.7
Hierarchical Organization and 
Range of Manufacturing Sizes
Proteins, bone, and tissue fibers have a hierarchical 
organization (see Figure 2.11 for the various protein 
structural levels) much more complex than that 
of materials of the nonliving world (e.g., crystals). 
This organization bestows many benefits on living 
organisms, such as a high strength-to- density ratio 
and the ability to serve several functions simulta-
neously. The ability of humans to mimic this feat 
is still limited and will improve only if we become 
more adept at manipulating a wider variety of mate-
rials at the nanoscale, use smaller building blocks, 
and build in three dimensions with more dexter-
ity. Traditional lithography is mostly limited to 2D 
structures and is impractical for printing feature 
sizes below 0.1 µm. While 3D lithography tech-
niques, as described in Volume II, Chapter 9, are 
limited in feature size, they do offer a possible route 
to 3D microstructures.
Two ubiquitous design patterns of hierarchical 
structures in nature are fractals (trees, brains, river 
FIGURE 3.9 Abalone shell nanocomposite structure: (a) 
abalone shell and (b) scanning electron microscope image 
of the aragonite composite structure.

[Page 128]
128   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
deltas, fjords, snowflakes, blood circulation sys-
tem, etc.; see Figure 3.10) and layers (onions, tree 
rings, etc.) and combinations thereof. Consider a 
tree where the trunk forks into branches and the 
branches into smaller twigs. Twigs have leaves, 
which themselves repeat the dendrite pattern in 
their veins. The tree also has a layered build-up radi-
ally in its stem, branches, and twigs. An object is 
called a fractal if it has structures at a large number 
of levels. If they are identical, the fractal is said to 
be self-similar (see Chapter 7, this volume, on scal-
ing, for more details on the similarity concept). Self-
similarity can also be called scale invariance because 
we always find the same pattern upon zooming into 
at different length-scales.
In Chapter 9, this volume, we show that the 
underlying reason for fractal hierarchical struc-
tures is simply that such a shape maximizes sur-
face area while minimizing the energy involved in 
reaching each point on that surface. A fractal net-
work can both absorb and excrete at a maximal rate, 
whether it is water and electricity, oxygen, carbon 
dioxide, bloodstream nutrients, or even neural con-
trol information. We calculate in Chapter 9 that for 
a fractal the resistance is minimized and the surface-
to- volume (S/V) scale is invariant. We also demon-
strate that in a zero-order approximation, a layered 
structure attains the same goals as a fractal, with 
both resistance and S/V scaling, in the same way a 
fractal does when miniaturized.
Using these ubiquitous hierarchical design 
patterns (fractals and layers) and combinations 
thereof, nature covers sizes of biological life forms 
from the atom to several meters (e.g., a 10-m-tall 
tree), i.e., it covers at least twelve orders of mag-
nitude in size. Human manufacturing techniques, 
on the other hand, typically are limited to much 
smaller ranges of size capability (e.g., lithography 
from 90 nm to 1 cm, i.e., hardly three orders of 
magnitude). In Figure 3.11, we sketch the chal-
lenge involved in making an artificial fractal, say 
a carbon tree. As indicated in this drawing, as the 
size ranges we work with approach the atomic and 
molecular size, stochastic manufacturing tech-
niques (1 Å–100 nm), perhaps from a solution in a 
beaker, must take over from the larger scale deter-
ministic manufacturing means, such as lithography 
(100 nm–1 cm) and computer numerical controlled 
(CNC)  machining (1 cm–10 m). In other words, we 
are forced to switch to different manufacturing 
options as we move across different length-scales.
The Use of Carbon Instead of Si
Although silicon, human’s foremost technological 
material, is abundant in silicate minerals, carbon is 
the key to life. In Chapter 5, this volume we explore 
how in nature, carbon occupies a very special place 
as the essential building block of life, and we notice 
how also in human enterprise carbon in its various 
forms has acquired an enviable position. To name 
a few, diamonds are made of carbon, and graph-
ite, coke, diamond-like carbon, and glassy carbon 
are all forms of carbon. So are the more recently 
discovered buckyballs, carbon fibers, and carbon 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.10 Examples of fractals. (a) Romanesco cauliflower. (b) The fractal coastline of eastern Greenland, with its 
many fjords.

[Page 129]
Nanotechnology   129
nanotubes (CNTs). It can rightfully be argued that 
carbon is now also becoming a more and more 
important material in human technology. Some key 
advantages of carbon compared with Si are summa-
rized in Table 5.9. As we see from this table, carbon 
polymerizes better than Si (making organic chem-
istry a field all on its own); it comes in all types of 
forms (amorphous, graphite, nanotubes, etc.); it has 
a wide electrochemical stability window; and it is 
biocompatible, low cost, chemically inert, and easy 
to functionalize.
In Chapter 5, this volume, we further introduce 
the reader to a vision of a carbon-based MEMS and 
carbon-based NEMS world.
Ambient Temperature, ATP, Soft 
Materials, Compartimentalization 
(Cells), and Water Management 
Of the many motivating examples of the promise 
of biomimetics we encountered in Chapter 2, this 
volume, consider enzymes. There are a plethora of 
enzymes that outperform synthetic catalysts by sev-
eral orders of magnitude. For instance, there is no 
human-made catalyst for producing ammonia from 
its elements at ambient temperature and pressure, 
as the nitrogenase of nodule-forming bacteria does 
(the industrial Haber-Bosch synthesis of ammonia 
from nitrogen and hydrogen at high temperatures 
and pressures pales in comparison).
Molecular motors, also covered in Chapter 2, 
this volume, are in a sense nanomachines that do 
mechanical work through the hydrolysis of ATP, 
the energy source of the cell (Figure 2.24). During 
hydrolysis of ATP, a shape change occurs within the 
motor protein (a mechanochemical process), and 
mechanical work is performed. The force generated 
by a motor protein is as large as 100 pN, a very large 
torque, comparable to a person rotating a 150-m 
rod. Such a rotary motor, with a diameter of only 
30–40 nm, drives the rotation of the flagellum at 
around 300 Hz at a power level of 10–16 W, with 
energy conversion efficiency close to 100%. These 
Leaf structure: Lithography (100 nm–1 cm)
Main structure: CNC machining (1 cm–10 m)
Internal cellular structure:
Stochastic techniques, word missing 
assembly (1 Å–100 nm)
FIGURE 3.11 Making an artificial carbon tree would require switching to various manufacturing strategies, depending 
on the size. (Drawing by George O’Quinn, UC Berkeley.)

[Page 130]
130   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
protein motors appear to be fuelled by a flow of pro-
tons across a pH gradient and can push an average-
sized cell at 30,000 nm/s, or 15 body-lengths per 
second—and can also run in reverse! The structural 
designs and functional mechanisms revealed in the 
complex machinery of the bacterial flagellum could 
provide many novel technologies that may become 
the basis for future nanotechnology, from which we 
should be able to find many useful applications.
In comparison, the surface micromachined mo -
tors of Volume II, Chapter 7 (see Figure 7.64) are 
hopelessly impractical. The biological motors are 
more error- insensitive, with simpler mechanisms 
and smaller numbers of parts, and wherever possible, 
flexible members rather than rigid ones are adopted.
In biology, it is important to note that the com-
partmentalization in cells constitutes an efficient 
water management system. Since neither proteins 
nor DNA functions in a dry environment, water 
needs to be actively controlled by the cell wall. It 
is no coincidence that more and more of the nano-
technology is focusing on nanochemistry (wet) 
instead of nanofabrication (dry). In human tech-
nology, when working with small droplets the 
evaporation rate is very high because of the high 
surface-to- volume ratio, requiring a water manage-
ment system. Similarly, when working with natural 
polymers, results can only be obtained when work-
ing in an aqueous environment.
Self-Replication and the Use of Templates
We defined self-assembly and self-organization ear-
lier in this chapter: self-replication is yet different. 
Self-replication is a process in which an object makes 
a copy of itself. Biological cells, we saw in Chapter 
2, this volume, will, given a suitable environment, 
reproduce by cell division. During cell division, DNA 
is replicated and is transmitted to offspring during 
reproduction. Biological viruses can reproduce, but 
only by hijacking the reproductive machinery of 
cells. Computer viruses reproduce using the hard-
ware and software already present on computers. 
Memes reproduce using the human mind and cul-
ture as their reproductive machinery. In self-replica-
tion, we saw in Chapter 2, this volume, molecules 
such as DNA encode the genetic information for 
cells and the resulting organisms, thus allowing the 
information to be passed on from cell to cell and 
from generation to generation.10 PCR and research 
results with RNA and certain peptides, described in 
Chapter 2, this volume, are manifestations of this 
self-replication capability of biological molecules.
Example of Self-Replication in Human 
Engineering: Self-Replicating Robots
Self-replicating machines have been the subject of 
theoretical discussion since the early days of comput-
ing and robotics. Only three human made mechani-
cal devices that can replicate themselves have been 
reported so far. One uses Lego parts assembled in 
a two-dimensional pattern by moving them along 
tracks, and another uses an arrange ment of wooden 
tiles that tumble into a new arrange ment when given 
a push. The third and most recent self-replicating 
machine is the most fascinating one. Hod Lipson, 
from Cornell Laboratory, made the first robots that 
self- replicate.11 His robots are made up of a set of 
modular cubes called molecubes; each cube contains 
identical machinery and a computer program for 
replication. These machines are simple compared 
with biological replication, but they demonstrate 
that mechanical replication is possible and is not 
limited to biology. Electromagnets on the face of the 
cubes allow them to selectively attach to and detach 
from one another, and a complete robot consists of 
several cubes linked together. Each cube is divided 
in half along a long diagonal, which allows a robot 
composed of many cubes to bend, reconfigure, and 
manipulate other cubes (Figure 3.12).
A tower of cubes can thus bend itself over at a right 
angle to pick up another cube (Figure 3.13). To start 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.12 (a) Each module of the self-replicating robot 
is a cube about 4 in. on a side, able to swivel along a diag-
onal. (b) A cutaway drawing shows the motor mechanism.11

[Page 131]
Nanotechnology   131
the replication process, a stack of cubes bends over 
and sets its top cube on the table. Then it bends to 
one side or another to pick up a new cube and deposit 
it on top of the first cube on the table. Repeating this 
process, one robot made up of a stack of cubes cre-
ates another just like itself. One robot cannot reach 
across another robot of the same height. The robot 
being built assists in completing its own construc-
tion. These replicating robots are very dependent on 
their environment; they draw power through con-
tacts on the surface of the table and cannot replicate 
unless the experimenters “feed” them by supplying 
additional modules.
Supramolecular Chemistry
Chemistry beyond the molecule gave rise to 
supra molecular chemistry—a new field of chem-
istry pioneered by researchers such as Nobel lau-
reate  Jean-Marie  Lehn from the University of 
Strasbourg.12,13 Self-assembly leads to large supra-
molecular architectures: no chemist needs to specify 
the individual atom or molecule positions in these 
 systems.14 For example, after disintegration of ribo-
somes (see Figure 2.12 for a ribosome in action) into 
their protein and RNA building blocks, the mole-
cules will reorganize into functional units in a test 
tube given the right conditions.
An early suggestion of supramolecular chemistry 
came from Nobel laureate Hermann Emil Fischer 
who, in 1890, suggested that enzyme-substrate 
interactions take the form of a “lock-and-key,”* 
implying the concepts of molecular recognition and 
host-guest chemistry. The same lock-and-key assem-
bly is involved in neurotransmitters assembling 
with molecular recognition sites on proteins that 
elicit chemical responses, for example, acetylcho-
line recognition at nerve-muscle junctions, resulting 
in muscle contractions.15 The fundamental concepts 
underpinning supramolecular science are processes 
in which atoms, molecules, aggregates of molecules, 
and components arrange themselves into ordered, 
functioning entities without human intervention.16 
In the early twentieth century noncovalent bonds 
were understood in gradually more detail. The weak 
interactions typically involved are as follows (see 
Volume I, Chapter 7, for more details):
 
◾Hydrogen bonds (described by Latimer and 
Rodebush in 1920)
 
◾Electrostatic attractions
 
◾Van der Waals forces (the existence of intermo-
lecular forces was first postulated by Johannes 
Diderik van der Waals in 1873)
 
◾Hydrophobic interactions
 
◾Weak covalent bonds
Through supramolecular chemistry with weak 
ionic and hydrogen bonds and van der Waals inter-
actions (0.1–5 kcal/mol), structures with dimensions 
of 1–100 nm are possible. For chemical synthesis, the 
largest of these dimensions often is too large, and for 
microfabrication, it often is too small. The types of 
interactions listed above allowed scientists to finally 
interpret protein and DNA behavior. Chemists 
started to study synthetic structures based on no 
covalent interactions, such as micelles and  micro-
emulsions. Eventually, these concepts, derived from 
* The lock-and-key concept of biochemical interactions has, over the 
years, been modified in favor of a “hand-in-a-glove” concept, because 
some reorganization (conformational change) is required to make 
two biomolecules complementary to each other.
0:00
0:11
0:29
0:42
2:20
2:34
FIGURE 3.13 Frames from a video show the replication 
process. A robot consisting of a stack of four cubes begins 
by bending over and depositing one of its cubes on the 
table. The remaining three cubes pick up additional cubes 
from “feeding stations” and transfer them to the new 
robot, which assists in the process by standing itself up. 
Video is available online at http://www.news.cornell.edu/
stories/may05/selfrep.ws.html.

[Page 132]
132   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
biological systems, were applied to synthetic chemi-
cal systems. The first big breakthrough along this line 
came in the 1960s with the synthesis of the crown 
ethers by Charles J. Pedersen.17 Donald J. Cram, 
Jean-Marie Lehn, and Fritz Vögtle became active in 
the synthesis of shape- and ion-selective receptors, 
and throughout the 1980s research in the area gath-
ered a rapid pace, with concepts such as mechani-
cally interlocked molecular architectures emerging. 
The emerging science of nanotechnology also had a 
strong influence on the subject, with building blocks 
such as fullerenes, nanoparticles, and dendrim-
ers becoming involved in synthetic systems. By the 
1990s, supramolecular chemistry had become an 
established avenue toward nanoelectronic and nano-
mechanical systems, with researchers such as Fraser 
Stoddart developing molecular machinery and highly 
complex self-assembled structures18 and research-
ers such as Itamar Willner developing sensors and 
methods of electronic and biological interfacing.19 
Stoddart pioneered the development of the use of 
molecular recognition and self-assembly processes in 
template-directed protocols for the syntheses of two-
state mechanically interlocked compounds (bistable 
catenanes and rotaxanes) that have been employed 
as molecular switches and as motor-molecules in the 
fabrication of nanoelec tronic devices and NEMS (see 
Figure 3.14 for a rotaxane switch).20 Rotaxanes can 
act as molecular switches because they can oscillate 
back and forth between two stable states.
Yet more recently, electrochemical and photo-
chemical motifs have become integrated into sup-
ramolecular systems in order to increase fun ctionality, 
research into synthetic self-replicating system 
began, and work on molecular  information process-
ing devices began. For example, the Stod dart and 
Zink groups have developed donor-chromophore-
 acceptor-based molecular triads that can transduce 
light into electrical energy by mimicking the pho-
tosynthesis pathway.21 A nanoscale power supply in 
the form of a light-harvesting mol ecular triad has 
been developed (Figure 3.15). Donor-chromophore-
acceptor-based molecular  triads that can convert 
light to electrical energy are some of the most effec-
tive molecules that can serve the purpose of energy 
transduction. Yet more im pressively, it has been 
demonstrated that the photocurrent generated by 
the triad can be utilized to drive a supramolecu-
lar machine in the form of a pseudorotaxane.22 The 
molecular triad is based on tetrathiafulvalene-
porphyrin-fullerene (TTF–P–C60), which generates 
electrical current by harnessing light energy when 
self-assembled onto gold electrodes. The triad is com-
posed of three unique electroactive components: 1) 
an electron donating TTF unit, 2) a chromophoric 
porphyrin unit, and 3) an electron-accepting C60 
unit. A disulfide-based anchoring group was tagged 
to the TTF end of the molecule in order to allow self-
assembly onto gold surfaces. In a closed electrical 
circuit, the triad-functionalized working electrode 
generates a switchable photo current of ∼1.5 µA/cm2, 
when irradiated with a 413 nm krypton-ion laser. 
The electrical energy generated by the triad is then 
exploited to drive a supramolecular machine in 
the form of a [2]pseudorotaxane composed of a 
π-electron-deficient tetracationic cyclobis(paraquat-
Oﬀ
On
(a)
(b)
B
1
H3CN
CH2 6
CH2
NCH3
H2
H2
N
N
N
N
N
+
8Br–
N
N
N
Cucurbituril (CB(6)) =
N
O
O
H
H
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
B
Oﬀ
A
FIGURE 3.14 Rotaxene switch. (a) Model; (b) molecular structure and another model. A cucurbituril is a macrocyclic 
molecule consisting of several glycoluril [=C4H2N4O2=] repeat units, each joined to the next one by two methylene [-CH2-] 
bridges to form a closed band. Cucurbiturils are commonly written as cucurbit[n]uril, where n is the number of repeat 
units. A common abbreviation is CB[n]. Adapted from Stoddart and Nepogodiev.20

[Page 133]
Nanotechnology   133
p-phenylene) 
(CBPQT4+) 
cyclophane 
and 
a 
π-electron-rich 1,5-bis[(2-hydroxy-ethoxy)-ethoxy]
naphthalene (BHEEN)  thread (Figure 3.15). The 
dethreading of CBPQT4+ cyclophane from the 
BHEEN thread was monitored by measuring the 
increase in the fluorescence intensity of the BHEEN 
unit. A gradual increase in the fluorescence intensity 
of the BHEEN upon illumination confirmed that the 
dethreading process is driven by the photocurrent 
generated by the triad.
Dendrimers form a special set of molecules in 
supramolecular chemistry. They are globular poly-
mer-based macromolecules of monodisperse size in 
which all bonds emerge treelike from a central core 
in a regular branching pattern and may be as small 
as 3 nm across (the size of a typical protein). These 
fractal-like macromolecules, introduced by Tomalia 
et al.23 and Newkome et al.24 in 1985 have attracted 
a lot of attention because of their novel structure 
and intriguing properties.25,26 Dendrimer synthesis 
allows for nearly complete control over the critical 
molecular design parameters, including size, shape, 
reaction site distribution, surface/interior chemistry 
(e.g., number and size of internal voids), flexibility, 
and topology. The process involves a stepwise, repet-
itive sequence that guarantees completed reactions 
for each generation of reaction products, resulting in 
monodisperse final products. There are three major 
strategies involved in effective dendrimer synthe-
sis: the starburst divergent strategy, the convergent 
growth strategy, and the self-assembly strategy. In 
the divergent approach, growth starts at the core 
and proceeds radially outward toward the periph-
ery, and in the convergent approach, growth starts 
at what will become the periphery of the dendrimer 
and proceeds inward. Although the majority of den-
drimers prepared to date have been constructed of 
covalent bonds25,27 using convergent or divergent 
Power
Au
V
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
BHEEN
BHEENCBPOT3+
[2]Pseudorolaxane
O
O
O
O
+N
N+
N+
N+
OH
HO
O
O
O
O
+N
N
HN
O
NH
H HN
O
O
O
O
S S
S
S
O
O
O
O
S
S
N+
+N
+N
OH
HO
CBPOT3+
Triad
hv
Pt
Supramolecular machine
H
FIGURE 3.15 The photocurrent generated by the triad can be utilized to drive a supramolecular machine in the form 
of a pseudorotaxane. The [2]pseudorotaxane is composed of a π-electron-deficient tetracationic cyclobis (paraquat-p-
 phenylene) (CBPQT4+) cyclophane and a π-electron-rich 1,5-bis[(2-hydroxy-ethoxy)-ethoxy] naphthalene (BHEEN) thread. 
Adapted from Saha et al. 2005. Powering a supramolecular machine with a photoactive molecular triad. Small 1:87–90.22

[Page 134]
134   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
strategies, several noncovalent dendrimers25,28 have 
been prepared by a variety of self-assembly pro-
cesses involving, for example, hydrogen bonding29 
or supramolecular coordination chemistry.30
Balzani and coworkers31,32 described the use 
of metal branching coordination centers, such as 
 ruthenium and osmium, and multidentate ligands 
for the construction of metallodendrimers centers 
more than a decade ago. Since this work, a large num-
ber of self-assembled dendritic structures have been 
prepared by using metal ligand complexes (Figure 
3.16a), hydrogen bonding moieties (Figure 3.16b), or 
ionic interactions (Figure 3.16c) for the assembly.
Figure 3.16a shows a small bimetallic dendrimer 
obtained in a flexible synthesis strategy that is used 
to prepare many larger dendrimers with a vari-
ety of arrangements of the internal and peripheral 
metal centers.32 These polynuclear complexes may 
be redox-active and/or luminescent, can be used 
as electrochemical and/or photochemical molecu-
lar devices, and may prove useful in areas such as 
energy  harvesting and conversion, signaling, and 
diagnostics. Among the numerous self-assembling 
dendritic systems that have been reported, those 
involving assembly into columnar or spherical 
structures are particularly intriguing. Percec and 
coworkers33,34 used van der Waals inter actions and 
H-bonding to self-assemble functionalized poly-
ether dendrons into cylindrical columnar or spheri-
cal assemblies that mimic the shape and architecture 
of certain types of viruses. Similarly, Aida and 
co workers35 have used weak metal-metal interactions 
to effect the hierarchical self-assembly of small den-
drimers into luminescent superhelical fibers. Given 
their sizes, optical properties, and electronic proper-
ties, such assemblies could well find display, storage, 
or other applications in micro- and nanoelectronics.
As summarized in Figure 3.17, dendrimers can be 
designed to aggregate to form cylinders or spheres 
depending upon the nature of the fundamental build-
ing unit. Pie-shaped dendrimers assemble into cyl-
inder segments (donuts) that then further aggregate 
into cylinders (Figure 3.17a). Cone-type dendrim-
ers organize into spheres (two to twelve per sphere 
depending on generation), which then pack into the 
unusual Pm3-n (A-15)-type cubic crystal structure 
having spheres at the corners and body center of the 
cube plus two on each face (Figure 3.17b).
The layered architecture of dendrimers, their glob-
ular shape, highly controlled monodisperse size, 
(a)
Ru
Ru
N
N
N
N
N N
N
N
N
H
H
H
H
H
H
N
N
N
N
N
N
N N N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Os
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X = H or Br
N
Dentritic shell
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N N
H
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
O
O
O
O
O
Ru
(b)
(c)
Ln3+
FIGURE 3.16 (a) Self-assembled metallodendrimer. (b) Self-assembly of dendrimer by hydrogen bonding. (c) Schematic 
representation of self-assembled ionic dendrimer. (From Denti, S., et al. 1992. J Am Chem Soc 114:2944–50; Balzani, V., 
et al. 1996. Chem Rev 96:759–833; Fréchet, J.M.J. 2002. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:4782–87. 31,32,36)

[Page 135]
Nanotechnology   135
radially controlled chemical makeup, multivalent 
periphery, variable inner volume, and controlled 
intramolecular dynamics endow dendrimers with 
unique features such as the ability to morph into a 
variety of supramolecular arrangements in response 
to external stimuli. On the basis of these properties, 
dendrimers may provide the key to reliable and eco-
nomical fabrication of functional nanoscale materi-
als with unique electronic, optical, optoelectronic, 
magnetic, chemical, or biological properties. Some 
of these applications are already being researched. 
Specially designed dendrimers with a hydrophobic 
interior and a hydrophilic38 periphery, so-called 
“unimolecular micelles,” are capable of molecular 
inclusion and solubilize hydrophobic molecules, 
such as pyrene in aqueous solution, and are at least 
as good at it than traditional micelles; moreover, they 
do not display a critical micelle concentration.39,40 
Classic micelles are thermodynamic aggregates 
of amphiphilic molecules and therefore dynamic 
assemblies of small molecules, while “unimolecular 
micelles” are static and retain their cohesion regard-
less of concentration. Also, dendrimer monolayers 
are finding a number of applications from surface-
confined chemical sensor arrays41,42 or affinity 
biosensors43,44 to resists for nanolithography.38,45
Molecular Assembler
A molecular assembler was defined by K. Eric 
Drexler  as a “device able to guide chemical reac-
tions by positioning reactive molecules with atomic 
precision.”46 Some biological molecules, such as ribo-
somes, constructing a wide variety of proteins from 
their amino acid constituents, fit this definition (see 
Figure 2.12). However, the term molecular assembler, 
as defined by Drexel, refers to artificial mechani-
cal machines, envisioned to work in air rather than 
in an aqueous solution. Molecular assemblers are 
broader than self-replicating machines (see above 
and Figures 3.12 and 3.13), as in theory they can both 
self-replicate and make other products. Drexel logi-
cally pointed out that if self-replication of molecular 
assemblers is not restrained, it might lead to com-
petition with naturally occurring organisms. This is 
referred to as the “gray goo” scenario.47 One method 
to construct molecular assemblers in solutions is to 
mimic natural evolutionary processes. As a result, 
production of complex molecular assemblers might 
evolve from simpler systems.
One of the most outspoken critics of the mechan-
ical “molecular assemblers” was Richard Smalley 
(1943–2005). Smalley argued that such assemblers 
were not physically possible and introduced two 
major objections to them, termed the “fat fingers 
problem” and the “sticky fingers problem.”48 He 
believed that these two problems would exclude the 
possibility of molecular assemblers that worked by 
precision picking and placing of individual atoms.
In the fat fingers problem, Smalley argues that in 
an ordinary chemical reaction, five to fifteen atoms 
near the reaction site engage in an intricate three-
dimensional waltz in a very cramped region of space 
measuring no more than a nanometer on each side, 
so there is not enough room in the nanometer-size 
reaction region to accommodate all the fingers of the 
mechanical manipulators necessary to exert com-
plete control of the chemistry. Drexel’s counterargu-
ment is that two reactants can be brought together 
with controlled trajectories if one reactant is bound 
to a substrate and the second reactant is positioned 
and moved by a single finger. He correctly points 
out that this has already been done experimen-
tally by using the tip of an STM.49 For example, Ho 
and Lee50 physically bound a CO molecule to an 
iron atom on a silver substrate using an STM (see 
Volume II, Figures 2.44 and 2.45, for more complex 
STM molecular assembly). Drexel also points out 
that if steric constraints near the tool tip do make 
(a)
(b)
R
a
a
R
R: CO2H
FIGURE 3.17 Assembling cylinders (a) and spheres 
(b) from dendritic molecules.37

[Page 136]
136   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
it too difficult to manipulate particular individual 
atoms or small molecules with sufficient reliabil-
ity, a simple alternative is to use conventional solu-
tion or gas phase chemistry for the bulk synthesis 
of somewhat larger nanoparts, consisting of 10–100 
atoms. These larger nanoparts could then be bound 
to a positional mechanical device and assembled 
into larger structures without further significant 
steric constraints. This is the approach taken by the 
ribosome in the synthesis of proteins, where indi-
vidual amino acids are sequentially assembled into 
an atomically precise polypeptide without the need 
to manipulate individual atoms. Atomically precise is 
a description of the precision of the final product, 
not a description of the manufacturing method. It 
must be argued though that once we are dealing with 
a cluster of atoms the original objective of atomic 
scale control has been abandoned and a ribosome 
still recognizes the individual base pairs to stitch the 
protein together from its amino acid components.
Smalley also advances the sticky fingers problem, 
which is the claim that “the atoms of the manipula-
tor tool will adhere to the atom that is being moved. 
So it will often be impossible to release this minus-
cule building block in precisely the right spot.”48 
Drexel’s counterargument is that the sticky fingers 
problem is not a fundamental barrier to building 
mechanical assemblers since reactions exist that 
allow the synthesis of a useful range of precise mol-
ecular structures. As an example, he mentions that the 
application of a voltage between a manipulator tool 
and the workpiece that cause the target atom or moi-
ety to move to the desired position. He points again 
to work by Ho and Lee50 for experimental proof.
A final criticism by Smalley was that these 
mechanical assemblers would be far too slow to be 
ever practical.48 Here, a counterargument could be 
the possible use of arrays of assemblers, as we saw in 
the IBM Millipede (see Volume II, Figure 2.4b).
All in all, the Smalley-Drexel debate is about how 
to make molecular assemblers, not whether they are 
possible or not. To push either extreme, i.e., to claim 
that only biology/chemistry can do it (Smalley) or 
to put too much emphasis on mechanical assembly 
(Drexel), is to ignore that the solution might well be 
one that incorporates a combination of both. Drexel 
is indeed pointing at chemical synthesis (up to a nan-
ocluster) and then mechanical positioning for further 
assembling of these clusters as a possible solution.
Nanostructure Properties
Introduction
In this section we introduce all the different proper-
ties that nanostructures bring to the table that do dif-
fer from microstructure properties. On the broadest 
level the differences may be summarized as shown 
in Table 3.2. Nanostructures occupy very high sur-
face area and have a vastly increased surface area 
per unit mass, e.g., upwards of 1000 m2 per gram. 
In terms of suface-to-volume (S/V) ratio, a 3-nm 
iron particle has 50% of its atoms on the surface, a 
10-nm particle has 20%, and a 30 nm particle only 
5% (see Volume I, Figure 2.49). Nanoparticles are 
quantum mechanical, wave-like, with discrete ener-
gies and quantized currents. Quantum size effects 
result in unique mechanical, electronic, photonic, 
and magnetic properties. The chemical reactivity of 
nanoscale materials greatly differs from that of more 
macroscopic forms. Microfabricated microstruc-
tures, on the other hand, exhibit relatively small 
S/V, behave mostly classically (semiclassically) and 
TABLE 3.2 Comparison of Microstructures and Nanostructures
Microstructure
Nanostructure
Physics
Semiclassic
Quantum mechanical
Electron nature
Particle-like
Wave-like
E- or k-space
Continuous
Discrete
Current
Continuous
Quantized
Decision
Deterministic
Probabilistic
Fabrication method
Microfabrication
Nanofabrication
Surface area/volume
Small
Very large
Packing density
Low
Very high

[Page 137]
Nanotechnology   137
are  particle-like, with continuous energy and cur-
rents. All the properties of nanoparticles we men-
tion below are ultimately a consequence of the more 
fundamental ones listed in Table 3.2.
Melting Temperature, Thermal 
Transport, and Heat Capacity
In Chapter 7, this volume, on scaling, we learn that 
the surface-to-volume (S/V) ratio of particles scales 
as 1/r, where r is the characteristic dimension of the 
particles. The smaller a particle, the more of its atoms 
find themselves at it surface. A bulk solid material 
will typically have less than 1% of its atoms on its 
surface, whereas 10-nm particles have about 15% of 
surface atoms. The high S/V ratio of nanoparticles 
makes them more reactive as catalysts in chemical 
reactions and lowers their melting temperature (Tm). 
There is an inverse linear relationship between melt-
ing temperature and the surface-to-volume ratio. This 
makes sense since atoms on a surface are more easily 
accessed and rearranged than atoms in the bulk. As a 
consequence, the melting temperature of particles is 
always lower than the bulk. As observed from Figure 
3.18 the melting point of gold particles decreases dra-
matically as the particle size gets below 5 nm. For 
nanoparticles embedded in a matrix, melting point 
may be lower or higher, depending on the strength of 
the interaction between the particles and the matrix.
Macroscopic thermal transport theory, with 
Fourier’s law (Volume I, Equation 3.53) and the dif-
fusion equation (Volume I, Equation 3.54), breaks 
down for applications involving thermal transport in 
NEMS. Whereas for bulk materials, interface effects 
(surface or grain boundaries) dominate only at low 
temperatures, in  nanometer-scale thin films and par-
ticles, the room temperature thermal conductivity 
can be significantly modified. One can think about 
the reduction in thermal conductivity in these struc-
tures as corresponding to a lower mean free path for 
the energy flux. In the case of conductors, electrons 
dominate the thermal conductivity and the mean 
free path depends on electron scattering phenom-
ena. At lower temperatures, the electron mean free 
path (λe) is constant and controlled by defect scatter-
ing, whereas at higher temperatures, phonon scatter-
ing takes over and the mean free electron path falls 
off, as shown in Volume I, Figure 3.161, where we 
plot mean free electron path (λe) versus temperature. 
From Volume I, Figure 3.162, plotting electronic ther-
mal conductivity (κe) versus temperature for Cu and 
Al, we see that thermal conductivity increases with 
temperature in the defect scattering regime and then 
goes down with temperature increase when pho-
non conduction takes over at higher temperatures. 
Phonons dominate the thermal conductivity in insu-
lators. Phonons, like electrons, scatter at boundaries, 
defects, and other phonons (phonon-phonon scat-
tering). For nanodevices the device boundary might 
take over from defect control. Scattering of heat 
flow at any of these interfaces significantly reduces 
thermal conductivity. The size effect on the thermal 
conductivity can exceed two orders of magnitude for 
layers of thickness near 1 µm at  T < 10 K. Figure 3.19 
illustrates this for three different thin-film Si layers 
(thickness ds) versus bulk Si.52
Heat capacity (Cv) of a material is related to its 
atomic structure or its vibrational and configurational 
0
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Particle radius [nm]
Melting point [ºC] Tm
FIGURE 3.18 Melting temperature (Tm) of gold particles as 
a function of their radius.51
104
103
102
Bulk
Si
Data
ds = 1.60 µm
ds = 0.83 µm
ds = 0.42 µm
Predictions
ds = 1.60 µm
ds = 0.83 µm
ds = 0.42 µm
101
5
5
10
100
350
Temperature (K)
Termal conductivity (W m–1 K–1) (κe)
FIGURE 3.19 Thermal conductivity (κe) of thin Si films 
versus bulk Si. ds is the Si layer thickness.52

[Page 138]
138   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
entropy, which is controlled by all the possible near-
est-neighbor configurations. Nanocrystalline materi-
als feature ultrafine crystalline grains. A large fraction 
of atoms are located in the metastable grain bound-
aries in which the nearest-neighbor configurations 
are much different from those in the crystallites. The 
grain-boundary possesses an excess volume with 
respect to the perfect crystal lattice, therefore, heat 
capacities (Cv) of the nanocrystalline materials are 
expected to be higher than those of the correspond-
ing coarse-grained polycrystalline counterparts.
For nanocrystalline materials, the Cv values, in 
practice, are indeed observed to be higher than their 
bulk counterparts. For example:
Pd: 48% up from 25 to 37 J/mol·K at 250 K for 
6 nm crystalline
Cu: 8.3% up from 24 to 26 J/mol·K at 250 K for 
8 nm
Ru: 22% up from 23 to 28 J/mol·K at 250 K for 
6 nm
The phonon contribution to the molar specific 
heat capacity (Cv) of these polycrystalline mate-
rials, we saw in Volume I, Chapter 3, is given by 
the Dulong-Petit law (Volume I, Figure 3.15), with 
values for different materials approaching Cv = 3R 
or 25 J/mol·K at high temperatures. As calculated 
by Debye, a constant value for Cv is reached at 
T >> θD and for T << θD (where θD is the Debye tem-
perature) he found:
 
C
R
T
v
D
=
π
θ
12
5
4
3
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(Volume I, Equation 3.331)
A T 3 temperature dependency for the specific heat 
stems from a T 4 dependency of the internal energy 
U (C
dU
dT
v =
). Since the density of phonon states, 
[G(E)], depends on the dimensionality of the struc-
ture, the specific heat of the lattice also depends on 
the dimensionality of the structure (3D, 2D, 1D, or 
0D). Generalizing for different dimensions (D), one 
derives:
 
U
T
and C
T
D+1
v,lat
D
∝
∝
 
(Volume I, Equation 3.338)
Besides phonon contributions, if the material is 
an electronic conductor, the electronic contribution 
to the heat capacity must be counted as well. The 
electronic specific heat capacity for a 3D structure 
we introduced in Volume I, Chapter 3 as follows.
 C
dU
dT
k TG(E 
 E )
2
k T
E
n
k
v,el
B
2
F 3D
2
B
F
D
B
=
=
=
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
π
π
2
3
3
 
(Volume I, Equation 3.307)
This expression must be modified again for differ-
ent dimensionalities since the internal energy (U) 
depends on the density of electronic states G(E)#D 
and C
dU
dT
v,el =
. 
Thermoelectric Power
In the 1960s, semiconductor thermoelectrics were 
considered for replacement of mechanical refrig-
erators and diesel generators. The idea was that if 
transistors could replace vacuum tubes for electron-
ics, then surely thermoelectrics could replace those 
outdated machines. The efficiency of cooling and 
heating is controlled by a dimensionless parameter 
Z given by the following equation:
 
ZT
S
T
2
=
σ
κ
 
(8.78)
where T is the absolute temperature; σ and κ are the 
electrical and total thermal conductivities (lattice 
and electrons) of the material, respectively; and S 
is  the Seebeck coefficient. Consequently, require -
ments for a good thermoelectric material are a 
high figure of merit ZT; this in turn requires a high 
Seebeck coefficient (S), a high electrical conductiv-
ity (σ), and a low thermal conductivity (κ). For the 
best thermoelectric materials, one has a ZT of ∼0.9, 
which remained the upper limit for many years. 
The biggest problem was that ZT had to be improved 
from ∼0.9 to 3 or higher to become commercially 
attractive [ZT needs to improve to >1.3 at 300 K for 
a major impact in electronics cooling and to around 
2.5 for a revolutionary impact in air- conditioning 
and power from  waste heat (energy scavenging)]. 
Minimizing thermal conductivity and maximizing 
electrical conductivity has been the biggest dilemma 
for the last forty years. Dresselhaus et al. show that 

[Page 139]
Nanotechnology   139
lower dimensional structures such as nanowires based 
on Bi, BiSb, Bi2Te3, and SiGe nanotechnology give 
additional controls and can lead to a higher ZT (see 
Chapter 8, this volume).53 Combining a super lattice 
with a nanowire structure enhances thermopower 
because of the sharper density of states than ordinary 
1D nanowires (enhances S) and reduction of the lat-
tice thermal conductivity by increasing the phonon 
scattering  at  the segment interfaces (de creas es κ). 
The reason is that the higher density of electron states 
at the Fermi level increases σ, the increased phonon-
boundary scattering lowers κ, and both factors con-
tribute to making ZT higher. Figure 8.32 shows the 
thermoelectric figure of merit ZT of a Bi quantum well 
and Bi quantum wire as a function of size.
In 2008, two teams, one at Caltech and one at 
the University of California, Berkeley, separately 
reported that they could increase Si’s ability to 
convert heat into electric current by as much as 
100  times54,55 (see also http://www.spectrum.ieee.
org/jan08/5879). Bulk Si used to be a poor material 
for thermoelectric conversion, because its thermal 
conductivity is too high; heat travels across it too 
well so that it is difficult to create the necessary tem-
perature gradient. Bulk Si at room temperature has 
a ZT of only 0.01, but the Berkeley team increased 
that to 0.4, and the Caltech team increased it to 0.6. 
This puts Si nanowires almost on par with bismuth 
telluride. Making thermoelectric devices out of Si, 
which is much more abundant, cheaper, and easier 
to handle than bismuth telluride, could help create 
a large market for these devices.
By fashioning Si into nanowires with diameters of 
10–100 nm and introducing defects in the wires that 
slow the flow of phonons, both teams have found 
that they can decrease silicon’s thermal conductiv-
ity without losing too much of its electronic conduc-
tivity, and in doing so increase ZT. Defects at three 
different length scales were engineered into the 
nanowires. First, with silicon in the shape of nano-
wires, the material is small enough compared with 
the phonons that the size of the wires themselves 
affects how the phonons move. Secondly, the surface 
of the nanowires is made rough, introducing a set of 
defects at a smaller scale. Finally, the silicon nano-
wires are doped with boron to introduce defects at 
the atomic level. Heath at Caltech induced a greater 
drop in thermal conductivity by making his nano-
wires even smaller than Yang’s group at Berkeley—
only 10–20 nm in diameter.55 Normally, a wire can 
carry two types of phonons: one that causes the wire’s 
diameter to expand or contract, and one that causes 
it to lengthen or shorten. But when the nanowires 
get small enough, these two vibration modes merge 
into a single type of phonon, which slows down 
the heat transport even more. Unfortunately, using 
wires only 10 nm wide may give the best results for 
thermal conductivity, but the electrical conductivity 
crucial to thermoelectric conversion also drops.
One of the applications for these silicon nano-
wires is for recycling waste heat from computer 
chips into electricity, i.e., energy scavenging (see 
Figure 3.20).
Mechanical Properties
Small grains, over a certain size range, lead to 
improved strength and hardness in lightweight 
 nanocomposites and nanomaterials, altering bend-
ing and compression properties. This mechanical 
change is explained as follows. Dislocations are 
blocked by grain boundaries, so slip is blocked, and 
therefore, since the smaller the grain size the larger 
the surface of the grain boundaries, a larger elas-
tic limit is obtained. The latter is expressed in the 
empirical Hall-Petch equation representing the max-
imum elastic yield strength (σY = stress at which the 
material permanently deforms) of a polycrystalline 
material as a function of grain size. As we learned 
FIGURE 3.20 A nanofurnace: an array of nanowires (green) 
convert heat from the temperature difference between 
two slivers of a microchip. Current flowing in through a 
heater (red) causes the temperature difference. (From 
James Heath, http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/jan08/5879.)

[Page 140]
140   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
in Volume I, Chapter 2, Hall and Petch,  work ing 
independently, found that the yield strength of 
a polycrystalline material follows the following 
dependence:
 
σ
σ
Y
0
K
d
=
+
 
(Volume I, Equation 2.70)
where d is the average diameter of the grains in 
micrometers, with σ0 the frictionless stress (N/m2) 
and K a constant. The strength of a material thus 
depends on grain size (see Table 3.3). The strength 
of a material thus depends on grain size. In a small 
grain, a dislocation gets to the boundary and stops, 
i.e., slip stops. In a large grain, the dislocation can 
travel farther. So small grain size equates to more 
strength. For example, the elastic limit of copper 
doubles when the grain size falls from 100 µm to 
25  µm. Instead of yield strength, one might also 
plot the hardness (H) of the material as a function 
of grain size, which creates a similar relationship.
The Hall-Petch relation holds for conventional 
grain sizes (from 0.1 to 100 µm) but for grains 
smaller than 20 nm, this relation breaks down (see 
Figure 3.21). For nanometer grains, a reverse Hall-
Petch effect has actually been observed, i.e., the 
strength and hardness of materials from a small 
grain size on starts to decrease with decreasing 
grain size. In other words, an optimal grain size (dc) 
exists, as suggested by the plot in Figure 3.21 (see 
also Volume II, Figure 7.54). The classic Hall-Petch 
relationship is based on the idea that grain bound-
aries act as obstacles to dislocation movement and 
since dislocations are carriers of plastic deforma-
tion, this manifests itself macroscopically as an 
increase in material strength. The Hall-Petch behav-
ior breaks down when the smallest dislocation loop 
no longer fits inside a grain. The deformation mech-
anism for materials with very small grains (<20 nm) 
is different and it has been suggested that plastic 
deformation in this case is no longer dominated by 
dislocation motion and it is believed that individual 
atoms migrate, diffuse, and slide along grain bound-
aries and through triple junctions (Y-shaped grain 
boundary intersections).
The increase of the surface-to-volume (S/V) ratio 
in nanoparticles leads to an increasing dominance 
of the behavior of the surface atoms over those in 
the interior of the particle. This results in more 
interactions between the intermixed components in 
ceramic nanocomposites; those nanophase powders 
compact more easily in the sintering process, and 
successful sintering enhances their hardness.
Chemical Effects
Surface chemistry effects that are barely noticeable 
in large particle systems become overwhelming in 
nanoparticle systems that demonstrate enhanced 
reactivity due to their unusual adsorptive proper-
ties. In bulk solids, all molecules are surrounded by 
and bound to neighboring atoms, and forces are in 
balance. Surface atoms on the other hand are bound 
only on one side, leaving unbalanced atomic and 
molecular forces on the surface. These forces attract 
gases and molecules through the van der Waals 
force, and at low temperatures this leads to physical 
adsorption or physisorption. At high temperatures, 
electron sharing or valence bonding with gas atoms, 
resulting in chemical adsorption or chemisorp-
tions, may satisfy those same unbalanced surface 
TABLE 3.3 The Strength of a Material Depends on 
Grain Size
Material
Yield Strength
Cold worked copper
393 MPa
400-nm copper
443 MPa
100-nm nanograin copper
900 MPa
10-nm nanograin copper
2.9 GPa
dc ~ 10 nm
Grain size, d-1/2
Dislocation slip
Grain boundary sliding
Yield
stress
Maximum attainable yield strength
via GB strengthening
Hall-Petch strengthening limit
FIGURE 3.21 Hall-Petch reversal.

[Page 141]
Nanotechnology   141
forces. Chemisorption is a much stronger interaction 
than physisorption, with a heat of adsorption up to 
800 KJ/mol. Adsorbing gas or vapor molecule splits 
into atoms, radicals, or ions, which form a chemical 
bond with the adsorption site. These processes are 
the basis for heterogeneous catalysis (key to produc-
tion of fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, synthetic fibers, 
solvents, surfactants, gasolines, other fuels, and 
automobile catalytic converters). Nanostructured 
materials offer many advantages for this type of 
catalysis applications including the following:
 
◾Huge surface area, high proportion of atoms on 
the surface
 
◾Enhanced intrinsic chemical activity as size 
gets smaller, for example, likely due to changes 
in crystal shape
 
◾When the shape changes from cubic to polyhe-
dral, the number of edges and corner sites goes 
up significantly
 
◾As crystal size gets smaller, anion/cation vacan-
cies can increase, thus affecting surface energy; 
also, surface atoms can be distorted in their 
bonding patterns
 
◾Enhanced solubility, sintering at lower T, more 
adsorptive capacity
All the properties discussed so far, unlike the 
quantum effects that we turn our attention to next, 
change gradually as the dimensions of the particles 
change.
Blue Shift in Semiconductor Nanoparticles
In Volume I, Chapter 3, we saw that whenever elec-
trons are confined to a small space their behavior 
as tiny quantum wave packets takes precedence over 
their particle behavior. For a particle confined to a 
region of the x-axis of length Δx, the uncertainty in 
momentum is given by Δpx ∼ /Δx (see Equation 3. 
106). If the particle has a mass m, the confinement 
gives it an additional kinetic energy of magnitude 
Ec = (Δpx)2/2m ∼ 2/2m(Δx)2 (Volume I, Equation 
3.162). The confinement energy becomes signifi-
cant if it is comparable to or greater than the kinetic 
energy of the particle due to its thermal motion, 
i.e., Ec ∼ 2/2m(Δx)2 > ½kBT, and the quantum size 
effect will be important if Δx ∼ /(mkBT)1/2 ∼ /px ∼ 
λDB (Where λDB is the thermal de Broglie wavelength, 
i.e., roughly the average de Broglie wavelength of the 
particles in an ideal gas at the specified temperature, 
see Volume I, Equation 3.216). Thus, if the particle 
motion is confined in a region of the order of the 
particle de Broglie wavelength, one will observe 
effects of size quantization.
When the de Broglie wavelength of an electron 
is comparable to the size of the system in one or 
more directions, since only an integer number of 
half-waves of the electrons can be put in any finite 
system, one obtains a set of discrete electron states 
and energy levels, each of which is characterized 
by the corresponding number of half-wavelengths. 
This situation is summarized for 3D, 2D, 1D, and 
0D degrees of freedom of electrons in Figure 3.22 
(see also Volume I, Chapter 3).
A semiconductor quantum dot (QD) can be 
regarded as an artificial solid-state atom with delta- 
function-like density of states. Electrons in a quan-
tum dot arrange themselves as if they were part of 
an atom, even though there is no nucleus for them 
to surround. The atom these assembled electrons 
emulate depends on the number of electrons and the 
exact geometry of the confining nanoprison. Here 
we calculate, as an example, the spacing between the 
lowest two energy levels, ΔE = En+1− En, for a spherical 
3D
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
n = 1
ny = 1,
nz = 1
ny = 2,
nz = 1
ny = 1,
nz = 2
ny = 2,
nx = 2,
nz = 1
ny = 1,
nx = 2,
nz = 1
ny = 2,
nx = 1,
nz = 1
ny = 1,
nx = 1,
nz = 1
n = 2
n = 3
E
DOS
DOS
DOS
DOS
ky
kx
Ly > Lz
Lx > Ly > Lz
Ly
Ly
kx
ky
kx
uz
2D
1D
0D
Lz
Lz
Lx
FIGURE 3.22 Quantization in zero (3D), one (2D), two 
(1D), and three (0D) directions.

[Page 142]
142   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
CdSe semiconductor quantum dot (see Figure 3.23). 
Such a spherical nanocrystal may be made from solu-
tion using colloid chemistry instead of the epitaxial 
methods used to make the cubic nanoparticle consid-
ered in Volume I, Figure 3.141. The dimensions of this 
nanocrystal are smaller than the electron de Broglie 
wavelength or the exciton Bohr radii (see also Volume 
I, Chapter 3). Semiconductor QDs possess high radia-
tive efficiency, are compatible with semiconductor 
device technology, and are considered promising ele-
ments for implementing the coherent control of the 
quantum state, which is essential for quantum infor-
mation processing.
In the case of an electron in a spherical quantum 
well, the Hamiltonian separates into angular and 
radial parts, and because of the spherical symme-
try this results in the following eigen-energies and 
eigen-states:
 
E
E
and
(r, , )
Y
,
R
r
n,l,m
n,l
l,m
n.l
=
Ψ
θ φ
=
θ φ
(
)
( ) 
(3.1)
with Yl,m
,
(
)
θ φ  the spherical harmonics and R
r
n.l
)
(  the 
radial wave functions. The energy levels and wave 
functions do of course depend on the details of the 
confining potential. If that potential is an infinite 
spherical well, where V = 0 for r < R and V = ∞ for r > R, 
then the solutions are the atom-like spherical Bessel 
functions from Volume I, Figure 3.81, described in 
the following expressions:
 
E
m R
and
n,1
n
e
= ℏ2β ,
*
1
2
2
2
 
(3.2)
 
R
j
r
R
for r
R
n,1
n
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
1
1
β
<  
,
 
(3.3)
where jl(x) is the lth spherical Bessel function and 
the coefficient βn,l is the nth zero crossing of jl(x), 
with example values β
π
0,0 =
 (1S), β0,1 = 4 5
.  (1P), 
β0,2 = 5 8
.  (1D), β
π
1,0 = 2  (2S), and β1,1 = 7 7
.  (2P). 
In parentheses and boldface, we list the atomic 
notations for the orbitals involved. This outcome 
explains why these spherical nanocrystals are often 
called artificial atoms.
The spacing between the lowest two energy lev-
els ΔE = E0,1 − E0,0, also called the 1S transition, for a 
CdSe nanocrystal with a conduction band effective 
mass me
* of 0.13 me and a radius R of 2 nm is calcu-
lated, using Equation 3.2, as follows:
 
E
e
R
n,1
n,1
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2 9
2
0 0
2
.
,
V
β
β
 
(3.4)
or ∆E = E0,1 − E0,0 = 0.76 eV, which is much larger 
than the thermal energy of the carriers (kT). This 
result is schematically represented in Figure 3.23, 
where in panel c we compare the absorption α of 
light by bulk CdSe with that by a nanocrystal of 
CdSe, clearly  indicating that the bandgap is wider 
for the nanoparticle, which results in a blue shift. 
The probability of optical transitions between two 
quantum states is controlled by Fermi’s Golden 
Rule (see Volume I, Chapter 3), which predicts that 
optical absorption must be proportional to the den-
sity of states, because a photon cannot be absorbed 
if there is no final state available for the electronic 
transition to go to. Bulk semiconductor and nano-
crystal have the same overall absorption per unit 
volume when integrated over all frequencies. But in 
the case of a nanocrystal, the absorption spectrum 
consists of a series of  discrete transitions with very 
high absorption transitions (sharp peaks), whereas 
a bulk semiconductor has a continuous absorption 
Conduction
band
Valence
band
Eg (bulk)
Eg (bulk)
Eg (QD)
Eg (QD)
(a) 
(b)
1D (e)
1P (e)
1S (e)
1S (h)
1P (h)
1D (h)
Absorption α
Bulk
QD
1S
1P
1D
Photon energy
(c)
FIGURE 3.23 Blue shift in CdSe quantum dot. (a) CdSe 
bulk semiconductor. (b) CdSe quantum dot (QD). 
(c) Quantum dot photon energy absorption spectrum.

[Page 143]
Nanotechnology   143
spectrum. This spectral concentration of a quantum 
dot enhances all resonant effects and increases the 
energy selectivity. The sharpening of the density of 
states (DOS) at specific energies induced by quan-
tum confinement is at the origin of many improve-
ments in the properties of nanostructured materials 
compared with bulk materials.
The 1S (e) electron level shown in Figure 3.23b 
increases in energy with a decreasing R, while the 
1S (h) energy level decreases for a decreasing R. As a 
consequence, the bandgap of CdSe grows over a wide 
range as one varies R, resulting in a dramatic shift in 
the optical spectra with changing particle size. This 
is called the blue shift, as the energies shift to higher 
values or shorter wavelengths for a decreasing parti-
cle size. The particle size sensitivity of optical spectra 
enables one to tune continuously those spectra from 
blue to infrared, for both absorption and emission. 
This can lead to applications ranging from new more 
intense light-emitting diodes to more stable fluores-
cent labels. As an important example, the very strong 
optical transitions at particular frequencies have 
motivated researchers to develop quantum dot lasers 
(the laser principle, which is explained in Volume I, 
Chapter 5). Arakawa and Sakaki, in 1982, predicted 
significant increases in the gain and decreases in the 
threshold current of semiconductor lasers utilizing 
quantum dots.56 These predictions set off an intense 
effort worldwide to fabricate such structures.
In Volume I, Chapter 5, we compared the energy 
 separation calculated above for a semiconductor 
 particle to that of a metal nanoparticle of the same size 
(2 nm). We found that quantum effects are much more 
readily observed for semiconductor particles than for 
metal particles (see “Optical Properties of Metals”).
Plasmonic Effects in Metal Nanoparticles
Surface plasmon (SP) waves are coherent  electron 
oscillations at the interface between any two mate-
rials where the real part of the dielectric function 
changes sign across the interface (say a metal- 
dielectric interface). In the case of metal nanopar-
ticles, we saw in Volume I, Chapter 5, that these 
surface plasmon waves are localized and are readily 
observed. These “localized plasmons” may be excited 
directly by light absorption. For metallic nanopar-
ticles significantly smaller than the wavelength of 
light, light absorption then concentrates to a narrow 
wavelength range and results in brilliant colors (see 
Volume I, Figure 5.94). With changing particle size 
and shape, those colors change because of changes 
in the surface plasmon resonance frequency ωp, the 
frequency at which conduction electrons oscillate in 
response to the alternating electric field of the inci-
dent electromagnetic radiation (see Equation 5.216). 
For a gold spherical particle, the frequency is about 
0.58 of the bulk plasma frequency. Although the 
bulk plasma frequency for bulk gold is in the UV 
range, the SP frequency is in the visible range (close 
to 520 nm). The Au plasmon effects are illustrated 
by the historic stained glass which adorn medieval 
cathedrals (see Figure 3.1). Only materials with free 
electrons (essentially Au, Ag, and Cu and the alkali 
metals) possess plasmon resonances in the visible 
spectrum. Au and Ag often are used in nanophoton-
ics because of their excellent chemical stability and 
very good conductivity. For nonspherical particles, 
such as rods, the resonance wavelength depends also 
on the orientation of the electric field. Confinement 
and quantization phenomena are visible in semicon-
ductors already at dimensions of 200 nm, whereas 
in metals they typically are seen only at 1–2 nm. 
Metallic nanostructures exhibit major changes in 
their optical spectra due to light absorption by plas-
monics waves at the surface of these structures. The 
plasmonic effects of metal nanoparticles often mask 
the metal nanoparticle quantum effects.
Transparent Ceramic Nanoparticles
Previously, we dealt with the fascinating quantum 
properties of semiconductor quantum dots and the 
plasmonic behavior of metal nanoparticles. Here we 
clarify the properties of insulating ceramic nanopar-
ticles. Ceramics can be defined as inorganic, non-
metallic materials. They are typically crystalline in 
nature and are compounds formed between metallic 
and nonmetallic elements, such as aluminum and 
oxygen (alumina: Al2O3), calcium and oxygen (cal-
cia: CaO), and silicon and nitrogen (silicon nitride: 
Si3N4). The two main categories of ceramic nanopar-
ticles are metal oxide ceramics, such as titanium, 
zinc, aluminum, calcium, and iron oxides, to name 
just a few, and silicate nanoparticles (silicates, or 
silicon oxides), generally in the form of nanoscale 

[Page 144]
144   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
flakes of clays. It is the width of the forbidden band-
gap (Eg) that determines whether these ceramics act 
as insulators (Eg > 2 eV) or as semiconductors (Eg < 
2 eV). The fact that the dimensions of these ceramic 
nanoparticles are below the critical wavelength of 
light renders them transparent, which makes for a 
convenient property for their use in packaging, cos-
metics, and coatings. Ceramic nanoparticles, like 
metal and semiconductor nanoparticles, also can 
be formed into coatings and bulk materials at lower 
temperatures than their non-nanocounterparts, 
reducing manufacturing costs.
Superhydrophobicity and the Lotus Effect
In Volume I, Chapter 6, we saw how nanofeatures 
on a surface improves the wettability for hydrophilic 
surfaces (θ < 90°). A drop on such surface will seem 
to sink into the hydrophilic surface (see Volume I, 
Figure 6.45a). This phenomenon is called superhy-
drophilicity. For hydrophobic surfaces (θ > 90°) the 
wettability decreases for a nanotextured surface com-
pared with a polished surface of the same material. 
It is energetically unfavorable to wet a rough hydro-
phobic surface and this result in an increased water 
repellency or superhydrophobicity (Volume I, Figure 
6.45b). Superhydrophic surfaces, like a lotus leaf, are 
also self-cleaning. As we saw in Volume I, Figure 6.46, 
a droplet on an inclined  superhydrophobic surface 
does not slide off; it rolls off. When droplets roll over 
contaminant particles, the particles are removed from 
the surface if the force of absorption of the particles by 
the droplet is higher than the stiction force between 
the particles and the surface. Usually the force needed 
to remove particles is very low because of the mini-
mized contact area between the contaminants and 
the surface. As a result, the droplet cleans the leaf by 
rolling off the surface. The combination of the chem-
istry, the nanostructures, and the adherence proper-
ties of dirt and water to the surface, is what Barthlott 
and Neinhuis named the lotus effect.57 In the lotus 
plant, the effect arises because lotus leaves have a very 
fine surface structure and are coated with hydropho-
bic wax crystals of around 1 nm in dia meter. In the 
lotus plant, the actual contact area is only 2–3% of the 
droplet- covered surface.
Several surface treatments have been developed 
for roof tiles, fabrics, wood, paper, etc., that can stay 
dry and clean themselves in the same way as the 
lotus leaf (see Figure 3.24). Water does not adhere to 
the wood surface shown in Figure 3.24 but rolls off 
the paint, picking up and washing away debris in the 
process. By remaining dry, the coating also resists 
better mold, mildew, and algae. The lotus effect can 
be achieved, for example, by using special fluoro-
chemical or silicone treatments on structured sur-
faces or with compositions containing microscale 
and nanoscale particulates. In one method, by Guo 
et al.,58 an aluminum surface is made superhydro-
phobic by immersing it in sodium hydroxide for sev-
eral hours (which roughens the surface) followed by 
spin coating a layer of perfluorononane to a thick-
ness of 2 nm. This procedure increases the water 
contact angle from 67° to 168°. Electron microscope 
images show that the aluminum surface resembles 
that of a lotus surface, with a porous microstructure 
containing trapped air. Any surface treatment that 
creates micro- or nanoscale roughness with features 
having a height to width ratio greater than 1 that is 
subsequently coated with a thin hydrophobic coat-
ing will exhibit the lotus effect. Clothing that repels 
water has already been developed and marketed by 
brands such as Gap and Dockers; it uses a fabric 
named Nano-Care http://www.usato day.com/tech/
columnist/cckev060.htm.
The BASF’s lotus-effect aerosol spray, demon-
strated in Figure 3.24, combines nanoparticles 
with hydrophobic polymers such as polypropylene, 
FIGURE 3.24 Water-repellant wood: BASF’s lotus-effect 
aerosol spray combines nanoparticles with hydropho-
bic polymers such as polypropylene, polyethylene, and 
waxes. As it dries, the coating develops a nanostructure 
through self-assembly. BASF says that the spray particu-
larly suits rough surfaces such as paper, leather, textiles, 
and masonry.

[Page 145]
Nanotechnology   145
polyethylene, and waxes. It also includes a propel-
lant gas. As it dries, the coating develops a nano-
structure through self-assembly.
Magnetic Properties of Nanoparticles
Magnetic behavior of nanostructured materials was 
investigated from the early days of nanotechnology. 
One of the key findings so far is that the coercivity Hc, 
the intensity of the magnetic field needed to reduce 
the magnetization of a ferromagnetic material to zero 
after it has reached saturation, as a function of particle 
size goes through a maximum (see Figure 8.52).59,60 
The coercivity first increases linearly with decreasing 
grain size. The reason for the coercivity Hc increasing 
proportional to 1/d is that as particles decrease in size 
the magnetic domain size starts to coincide more and 
more with the grain size. As an example, for Fe the 
1/d scaling is observed from 100 µm down to 40 nm. 
In the single-domain region a change of magnetiza-
tion can only be produced by rotation of the mag-
netization of a single grain or crystallite as a whole, 
which requires strong magnetic fields, depending on 
the shape and anisotropy of the particle. As the size 
of the magnetic elements is further scaled down the 
coercivity goes over a peak and then decreases very 
fast (with a d6 dependence). In this regime, a trans-
formation from ferromagnetic to superparamag-
netic behavior takes place. Typical particle sizes for 
the ferrro- to superparamagnetic phase transforma-
tion are between 10 and 20 nm for oxides and 1–3 
nm for metals. In the superparamagnetic state of the 
material, the room temperature thermal energy, kT, 
overcomes the magnetostatic energy of the domain 
or particle. The resulting fluctuations in the direction 
of magnetization cause the magnetic field to aver-
age to zero. Thus, the material behaves in a manner 
similar to paramagnetism, except that instead of each 
individual atom being independently influenced by 
an external magnetic field, the magnetic moment of 
the entire crystallite tends to align with the magnetic 
field. Superparamagnetic particles are attracted to a 
 magnetic field but retain no residual magnetism after 
the field is removed (no hysteresis). These superpara-
magnetic nanoparticles, feature a high saturation 
magnetization, high relative permeability, low coer-
civity, high resistivity, and low hysteresis loss, and 
all of this benefits a large number of applications,* 
including in ferrofluids (see Figure 8.53).
The quest for a high-throughput manufacturing 
method for nanoparticles—be they semiconduc-
tors, metals, or insulators—is driven by their many 
extraordinary properties, some of which are sum-
marized in Table 3.4.
Nanoparticle Manufacture
Introduction
Generally, nanoparticle manufacturing techniques 
sort out in either “bottom-up” methods or “top 
down” methods. In bottom-up methods, as we saw 
above, the nanoparticles are synthesized directly 
to the desired shape and size. One such bottom-up 
method is chemical synthesis in a liquid. An exam-
ple of a top-down technique is a mechanical method 
such as ball milling (also called mechanical attrition). 
A further way of categorizing nanoparticle produc-
tion techniques is based on the phase in which the 
process takes place, i.e., gas phase, liquid phase, and 
solid phase methods. The solid phase method is 
limited in terms of producing nanometer scale par-
ticles. The liquid phase method and the gas phase 
method are more suitable. Yet another way of clas-
sifying nanoparticle manufacturing techniques, the 
method we adapt in this chapter, is as follows:
 
1. In situ fabrication: These techniques incorporate 
lithography, vacuum coating [e.g., molecular 
beam epitaxial growth (MBE) and metallor-
ganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) 
epitaxial growth] and spray coating on solid 
surfaces.
 
2. Mechanical manufacturing: This is a top-down 
method that reduces the size of particles by 
attrition, for example, ball milling or planetary 
grinding.
 
3. Liquid phase synthesis (wet chemistry): This 
is fundamentally a bottom-up technique; i.e., 
it starts with ions or molecules and builds 
up into larger structures. These nanoparticle 
* On the other hand, it is also because of superparamagnetism that 
hard drives are expected to stop growing once they reach a density of 
150 gigabits per square inch.

[Page 146]
146   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
manufacturing techniques historically can 
be placed under the title of colloid chemistry 
and involve classic “sol-gel” processes or other 
aggregation processes.
 
4. Gas phase synthesis: These methods include 
plasma vaporization, chemical vapor synthe-
sis, and laser ablation.
Terminology one encounters frequently when dis-
cussing manufacture of nanoparticles includes:
 
◾Cluster: A collection of units (atoms or reactive 
molecules) of up to about fifty units
 
◾Colloids: A stable liquid phase containing par-
ticles in the 1–1000 nm range
 
◾Nanoparticle: A solid particle in the 1–100 nm 
range that could be noncrystalline, an aggre-
gate of crystals, or a single crystal
 
◾Nanocrystal: A solid particle that is a single 
crystal in the nanometer range 
In Situ Fabrication
Lithography Techniques
In a lithographic top-down approach, electron beam 
or ion beam lithography may be used to etch in situ 
a pattern of columns in a quantum well heterostruc-
ture [e.g., a GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well (Figure 
3.25)]. The quantum well heterostructure provides 
TABLE 3.4 Semiconductor, Metal, and Insulator Nanoparticle Properties
Semiconductor
Quantum confinement at dimensions ∼10–100 nm. Blue shift when the nanoparticle is of the size 
of the exciton’s Bohr radius.
Light absorption is determined by the band-edge transition, which is strongly size- and shape-
dependent, making the absorption highly tunable.
Density of states: electronic energy levels around the Fermi level are strongly affected for sizes in 
the 10–100-nm range.
Luminescence is very intense and can be tuned.
The I-V behavior is characterized by the Coulomb blockade.
Quantum efficiency (∼0.1–0.5), spectral range of emission (400–2000 nm), and cross-section ∼10–19 m2.
A very high S/V ratio leads to very high catalytic properties and lowers the melting temperature Tm.
Metal
Quantum confinement at smaller dimensions ∼2–3 nm. Electron motion is limited by the size of 
nanoparticle.
Light absorption is determined by the surface plasmon resonance, which is size- and shape-
dependent.
Density of states: electronic energy levels around the Fermi level are strongly affected for sizes in 
the 1–2-nm range.
Luminescence is very weak. 
The I-V behavior is characterized by the Coulomb blockade.
Quantum efficiency (∼10–4), spectral range of emission (500–9000 nm), and cross-section ∼10–13 m2.
A very high S/V ratio promotes very high catalytic properties and lowers melting temperature Tm.
Superparamagnetic nanoparticles feature a high saturation magnetization, high relative 
permeability, low coercivity, high resistivity, and low hysteresis loss, and all of this benefits 
ferrofluids.
Insulator
Improved sintering and hardness. Nanophase powder compacts more easily in the sintering 
process. Successful sintering enhances hardness of materials. Nanophase powders compact more 
easily than their analogous submicrometer particles.
Strength and hardness. Better for materials with smaller crystal grains, as dictated by the Hall-
Petch relation (Volume I, Equation 2.70).
The specific heat capacity (Cv) of nanocrystalline materials is higher than that of their bulk 
counterparts.
A very high S/V ratio promotes very high catalytic properties and lowers melting temperature Tm.

[Page 147]
Nanotechnology   147
1D electron confinement in a plane because of the 
mismatch of the bandgaps of the two composing 
materials resulting in the formation of a potential 
energy well at their interfaces (see also Volume I, 
Figures 3.122 and 3.128). In the example in Figure 
3.25, a positive resist is used as electron or ion beam 
mask and in the exposed areas the mask is removed. 
Next, the entire surface is covered with a thin metal 
layer. After a lift-off development, the polymer film 
and the protective metal layer are removed, and a 
clean surface of the sample is obtained, except for 
the previously exposed areas, where the metal layer 
remains (4). Next, by reactive ion etching, the areas 
not protected by the metal mask, slim pillars are cre-
ated, containing the cut-out fragments of quantum 
wells (5–6). In this way, the motion of electrons, 
which initially is confined in the plane of the quan-
tum well, is further restricted to a small pillar with 
a diameter of the order of 10–100 nm. Owing to 
the simplicity of the production of thin, homoge-
neous quantum wells, GaAs is the most commonly 
used material for creating dots by means of etching. 
Disadvantages of this technique are that it is slow, 
low density, and prone to defect formation.
As pointed out in Volume I, Chapter 3, con-
finement in lateral directions may also be imple-
mented using electrostatic confinement with metal 
electrodes, lithographically patterned on the surface 
of a quantum well structure (see Volume I, Figure 
3.138, for a quantum wire and Figure 3.144 for a 
quantum dot).
Self-Organized Epitaxial Growth
Self-organized epitaxial growth is another exam-
ple of in situ nanoparticle manufacture. Oriented 
growth is referred to as epitaxy and, as we saw in 
Volume II, Chapter 7, it is subdivided into homo-
epitaxy and heteroepitaxy. Homoepitaxy is epitaxy 
performed with only one material: a crystalline film 
is grown on a substrate or film of the same material. 
Heteroepitaxy is epitaxy performed with materials 
that are different from each other: a crystalline film 
grows on a crystalline substrate or film of another 
material. This technology may be applied for grow-
ing crystalline films of materials of which single 
crystals cannot be obtained and for the integration 
of crystalline layers of different materials. Examples 
include gallium nitride (GaN) on sapphire or alu-
minum gallium indium phosphide (AlGaInP) on 
gallium arsenide (GaAs). Here, we will use the het-
eroepitaxy technique to  form islands (quantum 
dots) of one material on the surface of another. To 
understand this method better, we first gather some 
Metal
Quantum dot
3
6
5
2
Quantum well
Polymer
mask
(a)
(b)
Electron beam
Active ions
1
4
FIGURE 3.25 Fabrication of small, laterally patterned multiple quantum dot columns by e-beam lithography in a GaAs/
AlGaAs. (a) Process of quantum dot etching. (b) Etched quantum dots in a Gas/AlGaAs well (scanning electron microscope 
picture).61

[Page 148]
148   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
background on nucleation and growth of particles 
in air and on a solid surface.
Consider a droplet of radius r in contact with a 
vapor (Figure 3.26). The Gibbs free energy change ΔG 
for this system is given by the following expression:
 
Δ
Δ
G
G
=
+
4
3
4
3
2
π
π
γ
r
r
V
 
(3.5)
where γ = surface tension, the first term on the right 
is the free energy change per unit volume, and the 
second term on the right is the free energy change 
per unit area of surface. The first term can be calcu-
lated as follows:
 
G
kT
P
P
kT
S
V
V
S
=
=
+
(
)
ln
ln 1
(
 
(3.6)
with S defined as supersatuation S
s
=
−
P
P
P
v
s , Ω  = 
the atomic volume (volume per atom), Pv the actual 
pressure in the gas phase, and Ps the saturated 
vapor pressure at equilibrium. When P > Ps, one 
defines supersaturation, P = Ps means equilibrium 
is attained, and at P < Ps the gas phase is undersatu-
rated. The presence of surface tension, as illustrated 
in Figure 3.27, always produces an activation barrier 
to the nucleation of condensed phases. This is true 
for solids and for liquids (see, for example, the case 
of etching a single crystal in a solution as illustrated 
in Volume II, Figure 4.60).
The critical nucleus size, marked rc in Figure 3.27, 
can be calculated from the following:
 
∂Δ
π
+ π γ
G
r
r
r
∂
= 4
8
2 ΔGv
 
(3.7)
The maximum of the curve is at ∂
∂
ΔG
r
so that
=
=
0,
 
γ
Δ
r
G
critical
v
=
−
2
 and, with Δ
= Ω
Gv
kT 
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟= Ω
+
P
P
v
s
In
kT
S
(
)
1
 
(Equation 3.6) we obtain:
 
r
kTln(1 S)
critical =
Ω
−γ
+
2
 
(3.8)
and also:
 
Δ
Δ
G
G
critical
*
v
= 16
3
3
2
πγ
(
)
 
(3.9)
From Equation 3.8, as supersaturation S increases, 
the critical nucleus size decreases, so that for very 
small particles one needs high super-saturation and 
rapid nucleation.
The deposition rate of atoms on the nanoparticle 
is then given as follows:
 
dN
dt
hn A
s
G
kT
critical
*
=
−
* exp
 
(3.10)
where h = the Arrhenius pre-exponential
ns =  the number density of atoms in the gas 
phase 
A* = the area of the critical nucleus
The Schwöbel barrier (ΔG*critical) determines the 
kinetics (dN/dt) of the system.
For condensation of atoms on a solid surface 
(Figure  3.28) instead of on a spherical particle, 
Equation 3.5 is modified to the following expression:
 
Δ
Δ
G
l l h G
l l
l
l
       
  Surface
Line
tension  
 
1 2
1 2
1
2
=
+
( ) +
+
V
γ
β
β
1
2
  
tension
 
(3.11)
r
E
rc = critical nucleus size
E* = activation barrier to nucleation
πr3∆GV
4
3
πr3∆GV + 4πr2γ
∆G = 4
3
FIGURE 3.27 The Gibbs free energy as a function of 
particle radius.
FIGURE 3.26 Nanoparticle growth in a vapor.

[Page 149]
Nanotechnology   149
To identify l1 and l2 see Figure 3.28. The product 
l1l2 corresponds to the area of the adsorbate coverage. 
Where γ is the surface tension and β1 and β2 are line 
tensions. A line tension represents an additional con-
tribution to the surface tension due to the presence 
of steps. The step line tension may be calculated as 
the difference between the surface tension of stepped 
and flat surfaces per step and step length. When an 
adsorbate coverage as shown in Figure 3.28 exceeds 
one monolayer, one speaks of thin-film growth. 
Thin-film growth is controlled by the interplay of 
thermodynamics and kinetics, and the following 
elementary processes take part: adsorption, surface 
diffusion, re-evaporation, capturing by defects, and 
combination with other adatoms to form clusters 
(nucleation). Small clusters are metastable, but they 
become stable at a critical island size, determined 
by the energy gain for condensation and the energy 
cost to form new surfaces. Depending on the surface 
diffusion of atoms, different growth modes result, 
governed by the bond strength between the atoms in 
the layer and the atom-substrate bonds. The occur-
rence of these different growth modes can be under-
stood qualitatively in terms of the surface tension, γ 
(surface energy) as depicted in Figure 3.29.
The surface tension, represented by the symbol γ 
(see Volume I, Equation 6.88), is the force along a 
line of unit length, where the force is parallel to the 
surface but perpendicular to the line. Surface ten-
sion is therefore measured in force per unit length. 
Its SI unit is Newton per meter, but the cgs unit of 
dynes per centimeter is most commonly used. The 
wetting angle φ of a drop-like island, illustrated in 
Figure 3.29, is determined by the surface tensions of 
substrate (γS), film (γF), and film-substrate interface 
(γFS). Balance of these forces changes during growth. 
Flat surfaces exhibit three canonical growth modes, 
depending on the surface and interface energies. 
Beyond that, one finds more exotic growth modes at 
stepped surfaces.
In the case of γS > γF + γFS, typically, the first layer 
wets the surface but subsequent layers do not. The 
first atomic layer tries to coat the whole surface to 
provide optimal free energy reduction but with sub-
sequent layers the situation changes: the first atomic 
layer reduces the surface energy of the substrate 
and new atoms do not experience the same inter-
face energy as the first atomic layer. In addition, 
the added layers have to absorb the misfit strain 
energy, which grows with increasing film thickness 
(see below). Therefore, one can have either a con-
tinued layer-by-layer growth mode (Frank-van der 
Merwe mode), which is relatively rare, or the forma-
tion of islands on top of a flat first layer (Stranski-
Krastanov growth mode). If the energy balance at 
the interface is tipped the opposite way, i.e., γS < γF + 
γFS, the overlayer has a tendency to nucleate three-
dimensional islands right away and leave the low-
energy substrate exposed (Volmer-Weber growth). 
This situation usually occurs when growing more 
reactive materials on top of an inert substrate, such 
as in the case of transition metals on a noble metal 
or an oxide.
The Stranski-Krastanov growth (SK growth; also 
spelled Stransky-Krastanov or Stranski-Krastanow) 
is  one of the three primary modes by which thin 
films  grow epitaxially at a crystal surface or 
interface. Also known as layer-plus-island growth, the 
SK growth mechanism was first noted by Ivan 
Stranski  and L.  Von Krastanov in 1939. It was not 
until 1958, however, in a seminal work by Ernst Bauer 
published in Zeitschrift für Kristallographie, that the 
l2
10 nm
l1
FIGURE 3.28 Island formation on flat solid surfaces.62
S
F
F/S
γ
γ
γ
ϕ
FIGURE 3.29 Surface tension of a film forming on a solid 
surface (see also Volume I, Figure 6.43).

[Page 150]
150   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
SK, Volmer-Weber, and Frank-van der Merwe mecha-
nisms were systematically classified as the primary 
thin-film growth processes. Since then, SK  growth 
has been the subject of intense investigation, not only 
to better understand the complex thermodynamics 
and kin etics at the core of thin-film formation, but 
also as a route to fabricating novel nanostructures for 
application in the microelectronics industry.
The range of possible growth modes becomes 
richer when going down in dimensionality. For 
example, when growing one-dimensional stripes on 
a two-dimensional, stepped surface. In addition to 
an extension of the three growth modes described 
above, one finds additional phenomena that are 
related to the interaction with the one- dimensional 
steps. As we saw in Equation 3.11 when stepped sur-
faces are involved line tensions due to the presence 
of steps contribute to the surface tension. Layer-by-
layer growth turns into row-by-row growth, which 
is often called step flow growth because the step edge 
propagates downhill. There are other modes as well, 
such as the reverse step flow, where the material 
accumulates at the top of the step edge and prop-
agates in the opposite direction. For manipulating 
these different growth modes, it is important to 
understand and control the surface and interface 
energies. Broadly speaking, one distinguishes three 
classes of solids where three different terms domi -
nate the surface energy. Metals try to achieve the 
highest possible number of neighbors. Therefore, 
the surface with the lowest free energy is close-
packed. Ionic solids, such as alkali halides, have the 
constraint that a stable surface needs to be charge 
neutral. Otherwise the Coulomb energy of a sheet 
of charge diverges. Covalent solids, such as semi-
conductors, have very directional bonds that rear-
range themselves extensively in order to minimize 
the density of broken bonds at the surface. Bond 
counting is a first approximation, but the intricate 
rearrangement of atoms at semiconductor surfaces 
often defies our expectations. The absolute values of 
the surface energy are typically highest for transition 
metals and rare earths (2–3 Jm–2); intermediate for 
covalent semiconductors, noble metals, and simple 
metals (1–2 Jm–2); and lowest for ionic insulators 
(0.3–1 Jm–2). The three growth modes are summa-
rized in Figure 3.30.
 
1. γS > γF + γFS. At the highest surface diffusion 
rates, layer-by-layer or Frank-van der Merwe 
growth mode is observed. The growing layer 
reduces the substrate surface very fast, i.e., it 
wets the surface.
 
2. γS < γF + γFS. High rate of incoming atoms and 
high Ehrlich-Schwöbel barrier, leads to island 
growth or Volmer-Weber growth. The growing 
layer wants to minimize interface energy and 
its own surface energy and the layer “balls up” 
on the surface.
 
3. γS > γF + γFS with misfit. Layer plus island or 
SK growth. SK growth is possible in a hetero-
epitaxial system (misfit). This is the case of 
most interest for nanomanufacturing.
If the crystal structure (lattice constants) is dif-
ferent for substrate and film, strain appears at the 
interface because of this misfit. The strain depends 
on the size of this misfit: ε = (b – a)/a, with a and b 
the lattice constants for substrate and film (see also 
Vegard’s law, Volume I, Equation 4.74). The elastic 
strain of a lattice mismatch can be accommodated 
either by a pseudomorphic growth or by misfit dis-
locations, as illustrated in Figure 3.31. 
In Figure 3.32, this is illustrated for the case of Ge 
on Si, where we see how the island structure forms 
(see also Volume I, Figure 4.59). In this case, since 
the Ge lattice is 4% bigger than Si, bonding of Ge 
to Si compresses the Ge lattice by 4%. As the depos-
ited film gets thicker, atoms continue to be forced 
to adapt to a different lattice constant, and the total 
strain energy increases linearly with the thickness of 
the growing film:
 
Estrain
a
a
At
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
λ Δ
2
 
(3.12)
Substrate
Film
If γs > γf + γsf 
γs > γf + γsf 
γs > γf + γsf
With misﬁt 
Layer-by-layer
(Frank van der Merwe)
3D islanding
(Volmer-Weber)
Layer-by-layer
followed by 3D islanding
(Stranski-Krastanov) 
FIGURE 3.30 Summary of the three film growth 
mechanisms.

[Page 151]
Nanotechnology   151
where 
λ = elastic modulus
Δa = forced change in lattice constant
a = “free” lattice constant
A = area
t = thickness
In lattice-mismatched systems, self-organized 
quantum dots can be achieved by utilizing the 
Stranski-Krastanov growth mode (in an MBE or 
MOCVD reactor). In this mode, isolated islands 
form spontaneously above a certain critical thick-
ness to relieve the mismatch strain energy. This is 
illustrated in Figure 3.33.
Depending on the growth conditions, one can get 
compact islands or ramified (fractal) islands. The 
compactness of the islands depends on the diffu-
sion probability along its edges: this in turn depends 
on the surface temperature. In the extreme case of 
hit-and-stick, at low temperatures, where surface 
diffusion is limited, a diffusion limited aggrega-
tion model holds, which predicts fractal islands. 
This is demonstrated for the example of Pt growth 
on Pt(111) in Figure 3.34a (left-most image). The 
equilibrium shapes are hexagons (at 700 K) (Figure 
3.34 panel c). The size distribution of the islands is 
affected by critical island size, coverage, and sub-
strate temperature. According to scaling theory, one 
can derive a scaling relation for the size distribution, 
which depends only on the critical size.63
Certain surfactants may change the growth 
modes. Adding surfactants, a modification of the 
kinetics takes place rather than a change of the ener-
getics. For example, the adatom diffusivity on the 
terraces might be influenced, the number of nucle-
ation centers can be changed, the Schwöbel bar-
rier may be changed, etc. The classic example is the 
growth of Ge on Si(111). On the bare surface there 
is a Stranski-Krastanov (SK) growth. With Sb as a 
surfactant, the film grows in a layer-by-layer fashion. 
Another example is the influence of H on Si(111) on 
the growth of Ag.
A successful method for quantum dot laser fab-
rication is based on the self-organized SK growth 
described here. SK growth occurs, we just saw, when 
a few monolayers of QD material (e.g., InGaAs) are 
deposited on a lattice mismatched material (e.g., 
GaAs). First, a quantum well-like wetting layer 
forms, from which quantum dots emerge. Strain, 
surface energy, and interaction with surrounding 
dots determine the dot shape, size, and distribu-
tion. Self-organized quantum dots are distributed 
on a semiconductor surface in a random way, and 
their size is subject to variations of a few percent (see 
Lattice-matched
a
a
b⊥ = a
b⊥ ≠ a
b⊥ ≠ a
a
a
a
a
Pseudomorphic
Dislocated
b    = a
b    = a
b    ≠ a
FIGURE 3.31 The deposited atoms try to adopt to the lattice constant. A lattice mismatch can be accommodated by 
pseudomorphic growth or by misfit dislocations.
FIGURE 3.32 As the germanium lattice is 4% bigger than 
that of Si, bonding of Ge to Si compresses the Ge lattice by 
4%. As the deposited film gets thicker, atoms continue to 
be forced to adapt to a different lattice constant, and the 
total strain energy increases linearly with the thickness of 
the growing film.

[Page 152]
152   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Figure 3.35 with InAs quantum dots on a GaAs sur-
face). While single quantum dots have sharp, atom-
like emission lines, ensembles of quantum dots 
show an inhomogeneously broadened spectrum. 
Size, distribution, composition, and shape of the 
quantum dots can be chosen by different growth 
conditions such as temperature and precursor pres-
sure. Larger quantum dots emit longer wavelengths, 
and smaller dots emit shorter wavelengths. The main 
advantages of self-organized growth are its integra-
tion into a single growth run, the low defect density, 
and the high dot density. The main limitations of 
this method are the cost of fabrication and the lack 
of control over positioning of individual dots. Some 
claim that Stranski-Krastanov methods for grow-
ing self-assembly quantum dots has rendered the 
(a)      (b)
(A)
GaAs
GaAs
InAs
During the GaAs 2D-growth
During the InAs 2D-growth
During the InAs 3D-growth
GaAs
InAs
(c)      (d)
(e)      (f)
(B)
FIGURE 3.35 InAs quantum dots on a GaAs surface. (A) Atomic force microscope (AFM) picture of InAs/GaAs quantum 
dots. (B) Reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns (a, c, e) during the two-dimensional (2D) deposi-
tion of GaAs (b) and the 2D deposition of InAs (d), and the 3D deposition of InAs (f) on a (100)GaAs buffer layer.64
}
}
}
}
Strained wetting layer
Relaxed
Strained
Relaxed (normal lattice constant)
Dislocation or other defect
Dislocation or other defect
Strained layer
Relaxed layer
FIGURE 3.33 Stranski-Krastanov growth mode (in an MBE growth or MOCVD reactor): isolated islands form 
spontaneously above a certain critical thickness to relieve the mismatch strain energy.
A
B
rB
rA
rA
rB
γA
γB
=
=0.87±0.02
(c)
T = 300 K
T = 300 K
T = 400 K
T = 400 K
Pt/Pt(111)
A
B
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 3.34 STM image of Pt growth on Pt(111). At 300 (a), 400 (b), and 700 K (c).

[Page 153]
Nanotechnology   153
lithographic approach to semiconductor quantum 
dot fabrication virtually obsolete.
Reflection 
high-energy 
electron 
diffraction 
(RHEED) is very sensitive to surface changes, 
because of either structural changes or adsorption, 
and is a good method by which to monitor island 
growth. In RHEED, a high-energy electron beam 
(3–100 keV) is directed at the sample surface at a 
grazing angle. The distance between the streaks in 
a RHEED pattern (see Figure 3.35) gives us the sur-
face lattice unit cell size. For an atomically flat sur-
face, sharp RHEED patterns result and with rougher 
surfaces one gets diffused RHEED patterns. In 
 layer-by-layer growth mode, RHEED oscillations are 
observed (Figure 3.35Ba). These are a direct measure 
of growth rates in MBE: the oscillation frequency cor-
responds to the monolayer growth rate. The incident 
angle dependence of the oscillations suggest that 
interference between electrons scattering from the 
 underlying layer and the partially grown layer con-
tribute to these oscillations. The magnitude of the 
RHEED oscillations damps out (see Figure 3.35Be) 
because as the growth progresses, islands nucleate 
before the previous layer is finished.
Epitaxial growth on patterned substrates can 
organize the quantum dots on a surface into a regu-
lar pattern, as illustrated in Figure 3.36 where the 
growth of AlGaAs in pyramid-shaped recesses is 
shown. The recesses are formed by selective ion etch-
ing. The main disadvantage of this technique is that 
the density of QDs is limited by the mask pattern.
Solid-State Processes
Solid-state processes, involving top-down grinding 
or milling to produce ceramic nanoparticles, are 
also referred to as mechanical attrition methods. In 
mechanical attrition, macro- or microscale particles 
are ground in a ball mill or in other size-reducing 
mechanisms. The resulting particles are air classified 
to recover the nanoparticles. Ball milling involves 
using fixed and moving elements to reduce larger 
particles into micron-sized and nanosized particles. 
The material to be ground is reduced in size because 
of the interaction of the fixed elements, the moving 
elements, and the material itself. The milling mate-
rials, the milling time, and the atmosphere all affect 
the nanoparticle properties. The kinetic energy 
transfer from balls to the powder in the milling 
bowl accomplishes the reduction in grain size. Since 
the kinetic energy of the balls is a function of their 
mass and velocity, dense materials such as steel or 
tungsten carbide are preferred. Other materials used 
as balls are agate, sintered corundum, zirconium 
dioxide, Teflon, chrome nickel, silicon nitride, etc. 
In order to prevent excessive abrasion, the hardness 
of the grinding bowl used and of the grinding balls 
must be higher than that of the materials that are 
being ground. Normally, grinding bowls and grind-
ing balls should be made of the same material.
In the initial stage of milling, a fast decrease of 
grain size occurs that slows down after extended 
milling. Initially the kinetic energy transfer leads to 
the production of a myriad of dislocations in the 
powder grains resulting in atomic level strains. At a 
certain strain level, the dislocations annihilate and 
recombine to form small-angle grain boundaries, 
separating the individual grains. This way, subgrains 
with reduced grain size are formed. During further 
milling, this process extends throughout the entire 
sample. To maintain this reduction in size, the 
material must experience very high stresses. However, 
extended traditional ball milling cannot maintain 
the required high stresses, and hence reduction of 
grain size is limited. The other two parameters also 
causing a limit to grain size reduction in traditional 
ball milling are the local temperature developed 
due to ball collisions and the overall temperature 
in the bowl. A rise in temperature also results from 
SiO2
(110)
(111) B GaAs substrate
GaAs
Al GaAs
Al GaAs
FIGURE 3.36 Growth of quantum dots in pyramid-shaped 
recesses on a GaAs substrate.65

[Page 154]
154   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
collisions between balls and balls, balls and powder, 
and balls and wall. Traditional ball milling thus 
produces only fine powders. In addition, traditional 
ball milling requires an increasing amount of energy 
and time to produce incrementally smaller particles. 
To produce nanomaterials, high-energy ball milling 
must be used (see Table 3.5).
High-energy ball milling uses steel balls to trans-
fer mechanical energy into materials and creates 
structure changes and chemical reactions at ambi-
ent temperature (mechanochemistry). The impact 
energy is considerably higher, longer milling times 
are employed, and the process is carried out at liq-
uid nitrogen temperatures in vacuum or in an inert 
atmosphere. High-energy ball milling can pro-
duce nanosized oxides and nitrides (<100 nm) via 
mechanical chemistry and has been recognized as 
one important synthesis method for nanomaterials, 
including nanoparticle, nanotube, nanocrystalline, 
nanoporous, and nanocomposite materials.
High-energy ball milling (see Figure 3.37 for a typi-
cal high-energy ball mill) is used for the commercial 
manufacture of magnetic, catalytic, and structural 
nanoparticles. Unfortunately, ball milling usually 
produces nanoparticles that are nonuniform in size 
and shape. The attrition approach is used to produce 
nanoparticles from materials that do not readily lend 
themselves to gas or liquid phase preparation.
Liquid Phase Synthesis
Several liquid phase nanoparticle synthesis methods 
were reviewed in Volumes I and II. Here, we briefly 
review the most salient points about those different 
liquid phase synthesis methods.
An important example of liquid phase nanopar-
ticle synthesis is colloidal processing as detailed in 
Volume I, Chapter 7, where the Derjaguin, Landau, 
Verwey, and Overbeek theory (the DLVO theory) 
was used to describe the stability of a colloid (see 
“Intermolecular Forces”). A colloidal system, we 
remember, consists of two separate phases: a dis-
persed phase (or internal phase) and a continuous 
phase (or dispersion medium) that can be a solid, 
a liquid, or a gas. The colloids of interest here are 
sols, in which solid particles are dispersed in a liq-
uid. Chemical reactions can be fine-tuned into 
forming dispersed nanoparticles, and capping the 
dispersed solid particles, formed by these chemi-
cal reactions with appropriate ligands, stabilizes 
them. This method is widely used for preparation of 
quantum dots (semiconductor nanoparticles) and 
was pioneered by Columbia University’s Louis Brus 
(Volume I, Figure 3.68) in the late 1970s when he was 
at Bell Labs and it was carried on by two of his post 
docs, Paul Alivisatos and Moungi Bawendi. As we 
learned in Volume I, Chapter 3, before 1993, quan-
tum dots (QDs) were often prepared from colloidal 
aqueous solutions with added stabilizing agents to 
avoid colloid precipitation. In 1993, Bawendi and 
coworkers synthesized the best luminescent CdSe 
quantum dots made up to that time by using a high-
temperature organometallic procedure instead.66,67 
FIGURE 3.37 High-energy ball milling in a rotating steel 
ball mill.
TABLE 3.5 Traditional Ball Milling Compared with High-Energy Ball Milling
Ball Milling
High-Energy Ball Milling
Milling time
<1 h
20–200 h
Impact energy (W/g per ball)
0.001
0.2
Particle size
µm
µm clusters
Structural changes
No
Yes
Chemical changes
No
Yes
Atmosphere
No control
Vacuum, inert gas
Temperature
No control
Liquid nitrogen, –700°C

[Page 155]
Nanotechnology   155
Crystallites from –12 Å to –115 Å in diameter with 
consistent crystal structure, surface derivatization, 
and a high degree of monodispersity were prepared 
in a single reaction based on the pyrolysis of organo-
metallic reagents by their injection into a hot coor-
dinating nonaqueous solvent (see Figure 3.38b and 
Volume I, Figures 7.102 and 7.103).
A schematic to explain the formation of uniform 
nanoparticles in solution is shown in Figure 3.38a. 
In homogeneous precipitation, a short single burst 
of nucleation occurs when the concentration of 
constituent species reaches critical supersaturation. 
LaMer and Dinegar (1950) applied classic nucleation 
theory to qualitatively describe the kinetics of this 
type of burst nucleation. They proposed that from 
a strong initial supersaturation, a rapid nucleation 
or burst of particles occurs, followed by the slower 
absorption of diffusing atomic matter onto these 
nucleated particles. Their key observation was that 
the reduction in supersaturation after the nucleation 
burst strongly depletes the local availability (con-
centration) of constituent species, thus decreasing 
the rate of further nucleation, leading ultimately to 
a narrow size distribution of the nucleated, diffu-
sively growing nanocrystals. Ostwald ripening may 
broaden the resulting distribution of nanocrystals. 
In Figure 3.38a this process starts at about 300s after 
injection. In Ostwald ripening, many small crystals 
initially form in a system, but they slowly disappear, 
except for a few that grow larger at the expense of 
the small crystals. The smaller crystals act as “nutri-
ents” for the bigger crystals. This is a spontaneous 
process that occurs because larger crystals are more 
energetically favored than smaller crystals. While 
the formation of many small crystals is kinetically 
favored (i.e., they nucleate more easily), large crys-
tals are thermodynamically favored. Thus, from a 
standpoint of kinetics, it is easier to nucleate many 
small crystals. However, small crystals have a larger 
ratio of surface area to volume than large crystals. 
Molecules on the surface are energetically less stable 
than the ones already well ordered and packed in the 
interior. Large crystals, with their greater volume to 
surface area ratio, represent a lower energy state.
Colloidal synthesis is by far the cheapest method 
and has the advantage of being carried out in bench-
top conditions. For an example of a typical set-up 
see the apparatus in Figure 3.38b. This method is 
simple and can fabricate large quantities of quan-
tum dots.
In Volume II, Chapter 8, we introduced sol-gel 
processing, which produces particles (typically 
metal oxides) by a series of hydrolysis and conden-
sation reactions to form a sol of particles suspended 
Monodisperse colloid growth
Concentration of precursors
Growth
from solution
Injection
Nucleation
Nucleation threshold
Ostwald ripening
0
200
400
600
Time
(seconds)
Coordinating solvent
stablizer at 150–350°C
Termometer
Syringe
metal-organics
800
1000
Saturation
(arbitrary units)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3.38 (a) Schematic depicting the stages of nucleation and growth for the preparation of monodisperse quantum 
dots (QDs) in the framework of the La Mer and Dinegar model. As nanocrystals grow over time, a size series of QDs may 
be isolated by periodically removing aliquots from the reaction vessel. (b) Representation of a typical apparatus used in 
monodisperse QD synthesis.68

[Page 156]
156   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
in a liquid phase (Volume II, Figure 8.2). The sol-gel 
technique constitutes a chemical forming process 
for making very small particles—say, 20–40 nm in 
diameter—a particle size that is virtually impos-
sible to make by conventional mechanical grind-
ing (Volume II, Figure 8.1). The method is used to 
synthesize glass, ceramic, and glass-ceramic nano-
particles. From Volume II, Figure 8.2, ultrafine and 
uniform ceramic powders may be formed either by 
grinding of a xerogel or by slowly drying the sol. The 
disadvantages of sol-gel processing include the toxic 
chemicals required for the reactions and the lengthy 
preparation time.
Additional liquid phase nanoparticle synthe-
sis techniques include sonochemical processing, 
cavitation processing, and microemulsion process-
ing. In sonochemistry, an acoustic cavitation pro-
cess generates a transient localized hot zone with 
extremely high temperature and pressure gradients. 
Such sudden changes in temperature and pressure 
assist the destruction of the sonochemical precur-
sor (e.g., an organometallic compound) and the for-
mation of nanoparticles. The technique can be used 
to produce large volumes of materials for industrial 
applications.
In hydrodynamic cavitation,  nanoparticles  are 
generated through creation and release of gas bub-
bles inside a sol-gel solution.69,70 The sol-gel solution 
is mixed by rapidly pressurizing it in a supercritical 
drying chamber and exposing it to cavitational dis-
turbance and high-temperature heating. The erupted 
hydrodynamic bubbles are responsible for nucle-
ation, growth, and quenching of the nanoparticles. 
Acoustic cavitation in liquids actually leads to two 
different types of major effects, i.e., physical phe-
nomena such as streaming, turbulence, microjet, 
shear, etc. and chemical phenomena such as radical 
production. The collapse of cavities can indeed gen-
erate highly reactive radicals, which may induce spe-
cific chemical reactions. One easily recognizes how 
in the case of gas-solid reactions, the dissolution 
of solids is enhanced due to the turbulent mixing 
generated by hydrodynamic cavitation. The vigor-
ous mixing enhances the transport of gas molecules 
to the solid surface resulting in an increase in the 
mass transfer and hence the overall reaction rate. 
The particle size can be controlled by adjusting the 
pressure and the solution retention time in the cavi-
tation chamber. Gedanken69 and Gogate70 reviewed 
the use of sonochemistry for the fabrication of inor-
ganic nanomaterials of various shapes, size, struc-
ture, and phases.
Microemulsions (liquid in a liquid) and micelles 
have been used for synthesis of metallic, semicon-
ductor, silica, barium sulfate, magnetic, and super-
conductor nanoparticles.71 In contrast to ordinary 
emulsions, microemulsions form upon simple mix-
ing of the components and do not require the high 
shear conditions generally used in the formation of 
ordinary emulsions. The two basic types of micro-
emulsions are direct [oil dispersed in water (o/w)] 
and reversed [water dispersed in oil (w/o)]. The tech-
nique is useful for large-scale production of nano-
particles using relatively simple and inexpensive 
hardware.
The diagram in Figure 3.39 explains the basic 
scheme for microemulsion nanoparticle synthe-
sis. Basically, each microemulsion type (A and B) 
contains a reactant of the synthesis, and when they 
are forced together (in a reactor) exchange occurs 
causing the reactants to combine. Because there 
is limited reactant in each droplet, the size of the 
nanoparticle is controllable. The ability to synthe-
size nanoparticles in a water/supercritical fluid 
microemulsion was also realized.72–75 This method 
promises to be a highly useful route to controlled 
nanoparticle synthesis because of the added control 
variables afforded by the tunability of the solvent 
quality (density) through pressure and temperature.
Liquid phase synthesis techniques in general are 
better than gas phase techniques (see next) for con-
trolling the final shape and size of the nanoparticles. 
The ultimate size is controlled, as in the case of gas 
A
B
+
A+B
Fusion
Exchange
Fission
+
C
FIGURE 3.39 Microemulsion nanoparticle synthesis.

[Page 157]
Nanotechnology   157
phase synthesis, by either stopping the process when 
the desired size is reached or by choosing chemicals 
that form particles that are stable, and stop growing 
at a certain size. These approaches are relatively low 
cost and high throughput, but contamination from 
precursor chemicals may be a problem.
Gas Phase Synthesis
Introduction
In gas phase nanoparticle synthesis a gas phase mix-
ture is rendered thermodynamically unstable rela-
tive to the formation of the desired nanoparticles. 
Supersaturation is achieved by vaporizing material 
into a background gas and condensation to form 
particles is induced by cooling, e.g., by mixing with 
a cool gas or expansion through a nozzle. Once 
nucleation occurs, the remaining supersaturation is 
relieved by additional condensation on virgin sub-
strate areas, or reaction of vapor phase molecules 
continues on deposited particles. This initiates the 
particle growth phase and rapid quenching after 
nucleation prevents particles that are too large.
In Table 3.6 we list several types of gas phase 
nanoparticle synthesis techniques grouped into 
those that use solid precursors and those that 
employ liquid or vapor precursors. The latter cat-
egory is called chemical vapor synthesis (CVS), a 
modified chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method 
where the process parameters are adjusted to form 
nanoparticles instead of a thin film.
Gas Phase Synthesis with 
Solid-State Precursors
Inert-gas aggregation frequently is used to make 
nanoparticles from solid metals with low melting 
points (e.g., Bi). The metal is vaporized in a vacuum 
chamber and then supercooled with an inert gas 
stream. The supercooled metal vapor condenses into 
nanometer-sized particles that can be entrained in 
the inert gas stream and deposited on a substrate or 
studied in situ. Inert gases are used to avoid oxida-
tion when creating metal nanoparticles, whereas a 
reactive oxygen atmosphere is used to produce metal 
oxide ceramic particles. The main advantage of this 
approach is the low contamination level. Final par-
ticle size is controlled by varying temperature, gas 
environment, and evaporation rate.
Pulsed laser ablation, like ion cluster beam 
deposition, is a nanoparticle gas phase synthesis 
method that uses solid precursors. Both techniques 
were reviewed in Volume II, Chapter 7. Pulsed 
laser ablation is used to vaporize a plume of mate-
rial. Generally, the method can only produce small 
amounts of nanoparticles, but it can vaporize mate-
rials that are not easily evaporated, e.g., in the syn-
thesis of Si, MgO, titania, and hydrogenated-silicon 
nanoparticles. There is a strong dependence of parti-
cle formation dynamics on the background gas. The 
use of pulsed laser ablation shortens the reaction 
time and allows for the preparation of very small 
particles. In 1995, at Rice University, it was reported 
that synthesis of carbon nanotubes could be accom-
plished by laser ablation.76 A pulsed or continuous 
laser was used to vaporize a graphite target placed in 
an oven at 1200°C (Volume II, Figure 7.18). Contact 
with a cooled copper substrate caused the carbon 
atoms to be deposited in the form of nanotubes. 
This method has a carbon nanotube yield of around 
70% and produces primarily single-walled carbon 
nanotubes with a controllable diameter determined 
by the reaction temperature. However, it is more 
TABLE 3.6 Gas Phase Synthesis Methods for Nanoparticles 
Methods Using Solid Precursors
Methods Using Liquid or Vapor Precursors
Inert and reactive gas condensation
Spray pyrolysis using different types of atomizers 
(e.g., pressure electrostatic, ultrasonic) and 
salt-assisted spray pyrolysis (SASP)
Pulsed laser ablation
Laser pyrolysis/photochemical synthesis
Ion cluster beam deposition
Low-temperature reactive synthesis
Spark discharge deposition
Thermal plasma synthesis
Flame decomposition
Flame spray pyrolysis

[Page 158]
158   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
expensive than either arc discharge or chemical 
vapor synthesis.
Ion cluster beam technology also qualifies as a 
gas  phase nanoparticle synthesis method. In ion 
cluster beam technology the cooling occurs when 
the vapor exits a special evaporation cell. As shown 
in Volume II, Figure 7.14, the heating of the evapo-
rant in an evaporation cell with a small opening 
causes an adiabatic expansion from more than 
100 to 10–5 or 10–7 mbar, upon exiting that cell. The 
expansion causes a sudden cooling, inducing the 
formation of atom clusters.
In spark discharge deposition, electrodes made of 
the metal to be vaporized in the presence of an inert 
background gas are polarized until the breakdown 
voltage is reached and an arc is formed across the 
electrodes that vaporizes a small amount of metal 
(e.g., Ni). This is the very technique that led to the 
discovery of carbon nanotubes in 1991 by NEC’s 
Sumio Iijima (Volume I, Figure 3.64). Carbon nano-
tubes were found in the carbon soot of graphite elec-
trodes during an arc discharge, by using a current of 
100 amps. During this  process, the carbon contained 
in the negative electrode sublimates because of the 
high temperatures caused by the discharge. Because 
nanotubes initially were discovered using this tech-
nique, it has been the most widely used method of 
nanotube synthesis. The yield for this method is 
up to 30% by weight, and it produces both single-
walled and multiwalled nanotubes with lengths of 
up to 50 µm.
Gas Phase Synthesis with Liquid 
and Vapor Precursors
The entire range of reaction regimes and corres-
ponding microstructures (epitaxial, polycrystalline, 
columnar, granular films, and aerogel coatings, as 
well as nanopowders) in going from chemical vapor 
deposition (CVD) to chemical vapor synthesis (CVS) 
of nanoparticles are illustrated in Figure 3.40.
In chemical vapor synthesis (CVS as opposed 
to CVD), vapor phase precursors are brought  into 
a hot-wall reactor under nucleating condition. In 
CVS, vapor phase nucleation of particles is favored 
over film deposition characteristic for CVD. CVS 
constitutes a very flexible technique that can produce 
a wide range of materials and takes advantage of the 
huge database of precursor chemistries developed for 
CVD processes (see Volume II, Chapter 7). Examples 
include oxide-coated Si nanoparticles for high-den-
sity nonvolatile memory devices and tungsten (W) 
nanoparticles by decomposition of tungsten hexac-
arbonyl. The method allows for the formation of 
doped or multicomponent nanoparticles by the use 
of multiple precursors. For example, nanocrystalline 
europium-doped yttria is synthesized from organo-
metallic yttrium and europium precursors. Other 
multicomponent particles that have been made by 
CVS include erbium in Si nanoparticles and zirconia 
particles doped with alumina.
Both in CVD and CVS, precursors are metalor-
ganics, carbonyls, hydrides, chlorides, and other 
volatile compounds. The energy for the conversion 
Transport of
growth species
CVD
Heterogeneous nucleation
CVS
Homogeneous nucleation
Gas
Precursor
Monomers
Particles
Granular ﬁlm
Aerogel
coating
Nanocrys-
talline
powder
Epitaxial or
polycrystal-
line or amor-
phous ﬁlm
Aerosol
Flow
Reactor
Substrate
Collecting
surface
Residence time, temperature, supersaturation
FIGURE 3.40 From chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to chemical vapor synthesis (CVS).

[Page 159]
Nanotechnology   159
of the reactants into nanoparticles is supplied in hot 
wall (external furnace), flame (reaction enthalpy), 
plasma (microwave or radiofrequency), and laser 
(photolysis or pyrolysis) reactors.
The most important process parameters deter-
mining the quality and usability of the nanopow-
ders are the total pressure (typical range from 100 
to 100,000 Pa), the precursor material (decomposi-
tion kinetics and ligands determining the impurity 
level), the partial pressure of the precursor (deter-
mining the production rate and particle size), the 
temperature or power of the energy source, the 
carrier gas (mass flow determining the residence 
time), and the reactor geometry. The nanoparticles 
are extracted from the aerosol by means of filters, 
thermophoretic collectors, electrostatic precipita-
tors, or scrubbing in a liquid. A typical laboratory 
reactor consists of a precursor delivery system, a 
reaction zone, a particle collector, and a pumping 
system. Modifications of the precursor delivery sys-
tem and the reaction zone allow the synthesis of 
pure oxides, doped oxides, coated nanoparticles, 
functionalized nanoparticles, and granular films. 
Several CVS methods, including spray pyrolysis, 
salt-assisted spray pyrolysis (SASP), flame spray 
and electrospray pyrolysis for nanoparticle syn-
thesis were detailed in Volume II, Chapter 9. For 
further reading on nanoparticle fabrication, a good 
resource is Jacak et al.77 You may also want to con-
sult Green and O’Brien.78
Carbon Nanostructures: Fullerenes
Introduction
Carbon, as we learn in Chapter 5, this volume, 
comes in an amazing number of varieties that may 
be grouped as crystalline, amorphous, nanoparticle, 
and engineered. The chemical genius of carbon is 
that it can combine with itself in different ways to 
create structures with entirely different properties. 
Two prominent examples of carbon structures are 
diamond and graphite. In pure sp3 hybridization, 
four valence electrons are equally shared between 
neighboring carbon atoms to yield hard diamond, 
whereas in pure sp2 hybridization, three in-plane 
covalent bonds leave a fourth delocalized elec-
tron to produce slippery graphite (see Figure 3.41 
and Chapter 5, this volume: the carbon phase dia-
gram in Table 5.9, Inset 2). In Volume I, Chapter 3, 
using the semiconductor band model, we explained 
how this same material acts as an insulator (dia-
mond), a metal (graphite), or a superconductor 
(buckminsterfullerenes).
In this section we only focus on fullerenes, car-
bon nanotubes, and graphene. Fullerenes are large, 
closed-cage, carbon atom clusters (Figure 3.42 and 
Volume I, Figure 1.29) and have several special prop-
erties that, until their discovery, were not found in 
any other material. Before the first synthesis and 
detection of the smaller fullerenes C60 and C70, 
it generally was assumed that these large spherical 
molecules were unstable. However, some Russian 
scientists already calculated that C60 in the gas 
phase should be stable and comes with a relatively 
large band gap. As is the case of many, important 
scientific breakthroughs, fullerenes were discov-
ered accidentally. In 1985, Curl, Kroto, Smalley, and 
coworkers found strange results in mass spectra of 
evaporated carbon samples.80 Herewith, the stability 
of C60 in the gas phase was proven, starting off the 
search for other fullerenes.
Since their discovery in 1991 by NEC’s Sumio 
Iijima (Volume I, Figure 3.64), multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes (MWNTs) (Figure 3.43 and Volume I, 
sp2
Graphite
Diamond
109.5°
sp3
FIGURE 3.41 From graphite to diamond with carbon.79
FIGURE 3.42 Sixty carbon atoms in the shape of a 
sphere—a buckyball. Every molecule combines twenty 
hexagons with twelve pentagons, resulting in a sphere 
shaped like the Buckminster Fuller geodesic sphere.

[Page 160]
160   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Figure 1.30) have been investigated by researchers 
all over the world.81 With their large length (up to 
several millimeters) and small diameter (a few nano-
meters), they may be regarded as nearly one-dimen-
sional fullerenes. Therefore, these materials possess 
additional interesting electronic, mechanical, and 
molecular properties. Carbon nanotubes, like fuller-
enes and graphene, profit from the intrusion of quan-
tum phenomena and can be formed into a cylinder 
one atom thick in so-called “single-walled carbon 
nanotubes” (SWNTs) to give a wire that is perfect 
and without defects, much like the single-crystal 
whiskers we discussed in Volume I, Chapter 2.
Graphene is a flat monolayer of carbon atoms 
in a 2D honeycomb lattice. It is the basic building 
block for graphite materials of all other dimen-
sionalities: 0D (buckyballs, C60), 1D (nanotubes), 
2D (graphene), and 3D (graphite) (see Figure 3.44). 
Graphene is the two-dimensional crystalline form 
of carbon: a single layer of carbon atoms arranged 
in hexagons, like a sheet of chicken wire with an 
atom at each nexus. The familiar pencil-lead form of 
carbon, graphite, consists of layers of carbon atoms 
tightly bonded in the plane but only loosely bonded 
between planes; because the  layers move easily over 
one another, graphite is a good lubricant. In fact, 
these graphite layers are graphene, although they 
had never been observed in isolation before 2004. 
As free-standing objects, such two-dimensional 
crystals were actually believed to be impossible to 
create—even to exist—until Russian-born physi-
cists Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselev at the 
University of Manchester actually made free-stand-
ing graphene sheets in 2004.82 Graphene sheets 
actually are easy to make but hard to see (Figure 
3.45). It is now presumed that tiny fragments of gra-
phene sheets are produced (along with quantities 
of other debris) whenever graphite is abraded, such 
as when a line is drawn with a pencil (Figure 3.45).
A summary of the many fullerene discoveries 
made since the discovery of C60 is presented in 
Table 3.7.
Buckyballs: 0D
A buckyball (short for buckminsterfullerene) is a 60- -
carbon atom molecule named for its resemblance 
to  the geodesic spheres of architect Buckminster 
Fuller (Figure 3.42). Electrons in such a structure are 
confined in 3 dimensions and such a zero dimen-
sional (0D) molecule or quantum dot comes with a 
de Broglie wavelength λDB > d (the diameter of the 
particle) (see also Volume I, Table 3.11).
5 µm
FIGURE 3.45 Easy-to-make, hard-to-see graphene sheets.79
FIGURE 3.43 Multiwalled carbon nanotubes produced by 
the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. (Courtesy 
of the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, 
University of Cambridge.)
FIGURE 3.44 Graphene as the building block for graphite 
materials of all other dimensionalities.94

[Page 161]
Nanotechnology   161
This soccer ball-shaped molecule measures just 
under a nanometer across and was discovered by 
Robert F. Curl, Jr. (Rice University), Harold W. Kroto 
(University of Sussex), the late Richard E. Smalley 
(Rice University), and some graduate students in 
August of 1985.80 The professors (but not the gradu-
ate students—surprise!) received the 1996 Nobel 
Prize in Chemistry for this discovery. Spherical mol-
ecules like the one depicted in Figure 3.42, called 
fullerenes, come in various sizes and are identified 
by the letter C followed by the number of carbon 
atoms, for example, C60, C70, and C80.
Smalley made his early C60 buckyballs by vapor-
izing carbon with a laser and allowing the carbon 
to condense in a cold zone (see laser ablation in 
Figure 3.56, and Volume II, Figure 7.18).
Until C60 could be created in somewhat larger 
quantities, scientists were stumped in their attempts 
to study the new material. In 1990, Dr. Donald R. 
Huffman, a physicist at the University of Arizona, 
and Dr. Wolfgang Kratschmer of the Max Planck 
Institute in Heidelberg, Germany, solved this pro-
duction problem with the development of the 
so-called “Huffman-Kratschmer reactor.”95,96 By 
adjusting the gas pressure in an apparatus basically 
consisting of an arc welder with carbon rods, they 
made large quantities of soot rich in buckyballs. The 
arc discharge technique in general was detailed in 
Volume II, Chapter 9 (see Volume II, Figure 9.25), 
and a carbon-arc discharge setup is shown in Figure 
3.51 below. A graduate student of Dr. Kroto, Jonathan 
Hare, succeeded in separating buckyballs from the 
soot produced in the carbon arc by dissolving it in 
benzene; ordinary graphite does not dissolve, but 
buckyballs form a red solution. After the benzene is 
evaporated, the orange-brown crystals that remain 
are pure fullerene carbon.
Ever since their discovery, expectations have been 
high that these hollow, pure carbon nanostructures 
could be used as drug delivery agents, as environ-
mental tracers, as antioxidants, in medical imaging, 
to make stronger polymers, for more efficient fuel cell 
membranes, as light detectors, in superconductors, 
and in diamond-hard coatings for hard disks. As an 
antioxidant in health and medicine, a buckyball can 
supply an electron from one of its carbon bonds and 
neutralize a radical’s unpaired electron. In the poly-
mer area, DuPont and Exxon Mobil are using bucky-
balls to develop stronger polymers. Sony is developing 
a more efficient fuel-cell membrane. German indus-
trial giant Siemens developed a buckyball-based light 
detector, and Seagate patented buckyballs to develop 
diamond-hard coatings for computer disc drives. Of 
the many tantalizing applications involving bucky-
balls, imagine buckyballs filled with a specific atom 
or a molecule, analogous to the ferretin liver protein 
caging iron oxide molecules. Because of the extreme 
stability of these molecules, it was difficult at first to 
open and close buckyballs. However, by rendering 
one of the thirty double bonds making up a C60 cage 
more reactive, Wudl at the University of California, 
Santa Barbara, succeeded in opening and closing the 
TABLE 3.7 Short History of Fullerenes
1985:  Finding of evidence for C60 in a mass spectrometry analysis of evaporated carbon 
samples by Kroto et al.80 
1991: Discovery of multiwalled carbon nanotubes by Iijima81 
1992: Conductivity of carbon nanotubes established by Mintmire et al.83
1993: Structural rigidity of carbon nanotubes measured by Overney et al.84 
1993: Synthesis of single-walled nanotubes by Iijima and Ichihashi85
1995: Nanotubes used as field emitters by Rinzler et al.86 
1997: Hydrogen storage in nanotubes demonstrated by Dillon et al.87 
1998: Demonstration of the first carbon nanotube transistor by Dekker et al.88
1998: Synthesis of nanotube peapods by Smith et al.89,90
2000: Thermal conductivity of nanotubes measured by Tománek et al.91
2001: Integration of carbon nanotubes for logic circuits by Collins et al.92
2001: Intrinsic superconductivity of carbon nanotubes demonstrated by Kociak et al.93
2004: Discovery of stable graphene sheets by Novoselov et al.82

[Page 162]
162   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
cage, contributing to a widening class of container 
molecules (endohedrals) tailored to fit a variety of 
target molecules.97-99
At MIT a fullerene mass production method 
was developed (together with a startup company, 
Nano-C, Inc.) in which hydrocarbons and oxygen 
are mixed and the  hydrocarbons are burned at a 
low pressure. Nano-C has a prototype burner in its 
headquarters that can produce 1 ton of fullerenes a 
year. The standard atmosphere in the burner is a low- 
pressure mixture of oxygen and benzene, heated to 
over 3140°F. By manipulating conditions inside the 
reactor, different types of fullerenes can be produced. 
Nano-C claims that they obtain a yield in fullerenes 
of 95% obviating the usual separation step of bucky-
balls from soot (http://www.nano-c.com/fullerenes.
html). C60 fullerenes are the least expensive fuller-
ene and used to fetch $25 per gram. Larger fullerenes 
can cost thousands of dollars per gram. Nano-C says 
they can now make C60 fullerenes for about $4 or 
$5 per gram. They expect the cost to tumble below 
$1 with larger-scale equipment. The Frontier Carbon 
Corporation (FCC), headquartered in Tokyo, Japan, is 
the first company in the world to mass-produce fuller-
enes at a commercial scale, and it increased its fuller-
ene production capacity to 40 tons/yr in April 2003 
(http://www.f-carbon.com). FCC now sells fullerenes 
at a price one-tenth that of the existing market and 
has plans to decrease its price even further.
Because of the decrease in price and unique 
characteristics of fullerenes, some face creams 
and antiaging creams based on them have already 
entered  the market (http://www.buckyusa.com). 
Other  near-term projected industrial applications 
include batteries, lubricants, grinding and polishing 
material, polymer additives, and rubber additives.
Very few buckyball applications are financially 
lucrative yet. There also might be an increase in 
environmental concerns as, although fullerenes are 
found to be bactericidal, they also seem to cause 
brain damage in fish.100
Nanotubes: 1D
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) had been observed 
before their “invention” in 1991. Carbon nanofi-
bers (diameter range, 3–100 nm; length range, 0.1–
1000 mm) were known for a long time as a nuisance 
often emerging during catalytic conversion of car-
bon-containing gases. In 1959, Roger Bacon pro-
duced images of carbon nanotubes,101 and in the 
1980s, Howard Tennant even applied for a patent 
on a method to produce them. But it was only in 
1991 that Sumio Iijima, at NEC’s Fundamental 
Research Lab, found that through carbon self-orga-
nization it is possible to deliberately fabricate those 
tiny graphite tubes, perhaps the smallest electrical 
wires ever made.81,85 These nanotubes are called 
buckytubes, because they are structurally similar 
to the carbon buckyballs. CNTs can be described 
as a sheet of graphite, i.e., graphene rolled into a 
cylinder, constructed from hexagonal rings of car-
bon and with caps at the ends, making the shorter 
ones look like pills. It is possible to open those caps 
through oxidation: the pentagons in the end caps 
of nanotubes are more reactive than the sidewall, 
so during oxidation, the caps easily are removed 
while the sidewall stays intact. The first buckytubes 
discovered consisted of several nested, concentric 
cylinders with nanometer-scale diameters, called 
multiwalled nanotubes (MWNTs) (Figure 3.46). In 
the nested configuration MWNTs, inner and outer 
tubes slide and rotate easily against each other. Like 
Russian nested dolls, these type of structures typi-
cally feature about ten nested tubes. By 1993, Iijima 
and Donald Bethune at IBM independently created 
single-walled nanotubes consisting of just one layer 
of carbon atoms (SWNT) (Figure 3.47).102 A typical 
FIGURE 3.46 Artistic rendition of multiwalled nanotubes. 
(From A. Rochefort, Nano-CERCA, University of Montreal.)

[Page 163]
Nanotechnology   163
SWNT diameter is 1–1.5 nm, and tube lengths of 
several millimeters have been achieved.
Although carbon nanotubes are well ordered, STM 
images rarely show the sixfold symmetry of their gra-
phene lattice. The images instead reveal the backscat-
tering of electron waves from defects on the walls.
Nanotubes are very stiff and very stable and can 
be built with their length exceeding their thickness 
thousands of times. They fold and buckle but do not 
snap, and their hollow interior enables one to put 
materials inside.
Linear nanotubes may behave as metals or as 
semiconductors, depending on their diameter and 
the exact details of the 2D lattice orientation. 
 Three types of lattice orientations can be identified. 
In  armchair nanotubes, there is a line of hexagons 
 parallel to the axis of the nanotube; in zigzag nano-
tubes, there is a line of carbon bonds down the center; 
and chiral nanotubes exhibit a twist or spiral around 
the nanotube (see Figure 3.47). It is the amount of 
twist of the lattice that determines whether a nano-
tube is metallic or semiconducting. Armchair nano-
tubes are all metallic, whereas about two-thirds of 
zigzag and chiral nanotubes are semiconducting 
(the remaining one-third are, again, metallic).
A bit more quantitative the geometry of a CNT is 
determined by its chiral vector (c) defined as follows 
(see Figure 3.48):
 
c = n1a1 + n2a2 
(3.13)
where a1 and a2 are primitive lattice vectors of gra-
phene and n1 and n2 are integers (chiral numbers). 
The basis of this 2D lattice contains two atoms and 
the side length d of a hexagon in the lattice is 0.14 
nm long. The chiral angle is the angle θ between the 
chiral vector c and the unit vector a1. If the chiral 
angle is 0°, n2 = 0, and the nanotube is classified 
as zigzag. If the chiral angle is 30°, n1 = n2, and the 
nanotube is classified as armchair. If c is not along 
a mirror line (see Figure 3.48) the structure is chiral 
and these tubes, with angles between 0° and 30°, 
are referred to as chiral nanotubes. Chiral struc-
tures have no mirror symmetry and sort out into 
“left-handed” and “right-handed” versions. Due to 
the symmetry and unique electronic properties of 
graphene layers, the structure and dimensions of a 
nanotube strongly determines its electrical proper-
ties. For a given (n1, n2) nanotube, if 2n1 + n2 = 3q 
(where q is an integer), then the nanotube is metallic, 
otherwise the nanotube is a semiconductor. Thus all 
armchair (n1 = n2) nanotubes are metallic, and nano-
tubes such as (5,0), (6,4), (9,1), are all semiconduct-
ing. An alternative representation of this condition 
is that if (n1 – n2)/3 = q, then the SWNT is metallic. 
In theory, metallic nanotubes can have an electrical 
current density more than 1,000 times stronger than 
metals such as copper. The energy gap for the semi-
conducting fibers decreases with increasing fiber 
diameter d and in the limit of d∞, we obtain the 2D 
case of a zero-gap semiconductor. The chirality of a 
SWNT can be determined by Raman spectroscopy 
and STM  and transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM); STM and AFM can determine its diameter.
Also from Figure 3.48, if n is the greatest com-
mon divisor (4) of the chiral numbers n1 (8) and n2 
(4), then the number of lattice points (open circles) 
Zigzag
Armchair
Chiral
~1.5 nm
FIGURE 3.47 A single-walled carbon nanotube diameter 
is ∼1.5 nm. Three types of lattice orientations can be iden-
tified: zigzag, armchair, and chiral nanotubes.
(–4, 5)
(0, 4)
(8, 4)
(8, 0)
a2
Armchair
θ
Zigzag
Circumference
a1
FIGURE 3.48 Graphene sheet and chiral vector.

[Page 164]
164   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
along the chiral vector is n + 1 (there are five open 
circles in Figure 3.48).
In an ordinary wire, the charge transport is dif-
fusive, and the diffusive length of the electrons, l, 
is  much smaller than the wire length (l << L) (see 
Figure 3.49a). The unique electronic properties of car-
bon nanotubes are due to the quantum con fine ment 
of electrons perpendicular to the axis of the tube. In 
that direction, the monolayer thick graphene sheet 
confines electrons. Around the circum ference of the 
nanotube, periodic  boundary conditions hold. For 
example, if a nanotube has twelve hexagons around its 
circumference, the thirteenth hexagonal will coincide 
with the first. In other words, going around the cylin-
drical tube just once introduces a phase difference of 
2π. Because of this quantum confinement, electrons 
propagate along the nanotube axis, and their wave 
vectors point in that direction. The actual number of 
one-dimensional conduction and valence bands of a 
nanotube depends on the number of standing waves 
that are set up around the circumference of the nano-
tube. The electrons in an ideal nanotube then behave 
like waves traveling down a smooth channel with no 
atoms to bump into, and they do not undergo scatter-
ing. This allows the nanotube to pass current without 
resistance along its length and  permits very high cur-
rent densities. This type of quantum movement of an 
electron within a nanotube is called ballistic transport 
(l >>> L) (see Figure 3.49b). The contacts are part of 
the device and all the scattering occurs at the con-
tacts; hence, all the voltage drops also at the contacts. 
The resistance, as we saw in Volume I, Chapter 3, is 
quantized in amounts of R = 25.8 kΩ (see also the 
Landauer  equation: Volume I, Equation 3.274).
In metallic nanotubes, electrons can easily move 
from the valence to the conduction band. There is 
no gap between the valence and conduction band 
in armchair nanotubes, but as we just saw, an 
energy gap exists between the valence and conduc-
tion bands in about two-thirds of zigzag and chiral 
nanotubes. The bandgap of the semiconducting car-
bon nanotubes can be “tuned” from 0.5 to 1.5 eV 
by adjusting the diameter of the nanotube; as the 
nanotube diameter increases, more wave vectors 
are allowed in the circumferential direction and 
the band gap narrows. The carbon nanotube band 
gap is inversely proportional to the tube diameter 
and approaches zero at large diameters, just as for 
a graphene sheet (at a nanotube diameter of about 
3 nm, the band gap becomes comparable to ther-
mal energies at room temperature). The fact that the 
electronic structure of a carbon nanotube depends 
only on its physical geometry, without any doping, 
is unique to solid-state physics and is the basis for 
many of its proposed applications in electronics.
Nanotubes, we explained earlier, are made up of 
graphene sheets, and the unusual electronic prop-
erties of graphene arise from the fact that the car-
bon atom has four electrons, three of which are tied 
up in bonding with its neighbors. But the unbound 
fourth electrons are in orbitals extending vertically 
above and below the plane, and the hybridization of 
these spreads across the whole graphene sheet (see 
also the section below on graphene). The energy vs 
wavevector (E-k) surfaces and band diagrams of a 
metallic and a semiconducting carbon nanotube are 
compared in Figure 3.50A.
As we saw above carbon nanotubes can be viewed 
as a rolled up graphene sheet (Figure 3.50Aa and b). 
The periodic boundary condition only allows quan-
tized wave vectors around the circumferential direc-
tion, which generates one-dimensional bands for 
carbon nanotubes. The nanotube can be either metal-
lic (Figure 3.50Ac) or semiconducting (Figure 3.50Ad). 
If (n1 – n2)/3 = q (with q an integer), then the SWNT is 
metallic. So with n1 – n2 = 0 we are dealing with a 
metallic tube and the bandgap is zero. And if n1 – n2/3 
is not an integer we have a  semiconducting tube that 
exhibits a forbidden band gap in the E-k diagram.
As we learned in Volume I, Chapter 3, carbon 
nanotubes have peaks in their density of states (DOS) 
function that are called criticalities or Van Hove singu-
larities. These singularities in the DOS function lead 
to sharp peaks in optical spectra (see Figure 3.50B) 
and can be observed directly with scanning tunneling 
Power = 1*∆V
L
I
V1
V2
V1
l << L
(a)
(b)
l >> L
V2
V2
V1
I
L
I = 2e2∆V
h
h
e2
Note
= R = 25.8 kΩ
FIGURE 3.49 (a) Diffusive transport in an ordinary wire. 
(b) Ballistic transport in a quantum wire.

[Page 165]
Nanotechnology   165
microscopy (STM) (see Volume I, Figure 3.135). At low 
temperatures, the derivative of the STM current with 
respect to voltage (dI/dV) is proportional to the den-
sity of states at the tunneling electron energy, weighted 
by the density of those states at the STM tip position. 
Since dI/dV  ∼ local density of states (LDOS), the 
LDOS is directly observed from an STM scan. In prac-
tice, during scanning tunneling spectroscopy mea-
surements, a constant tip-sample separation is first 
established by fixing the set-point current at a given 
bias voltage. Next, the feedback of the STM is turned 
off and a small sinusoidal modulation is added to the 
DC bias voltage. The resulting current modulation 
(dI/dV) is then read off from a lock-in amplifier, into 
which the tunneling current signal from the current 
preamplifier is fed. The output signal from the lock-
in amplifier is plotted as a function of the DC bias 
voltage and the tip position to generate a tunneling 
spectrum dI/dV (V, r), and hence the LDOS. By tak-
ing dI/dV along a line or by taking a two-dimensional 
dI/dV map, changes in LDOS around a impurity, or 
among nanotubes with different crystalline orienta-
tions can be revealed and compared with theoretical 
predictions. The density of states (DOS) functions for 
a metallic and a semiconducting carbon nanotube are 
illustrated in Figure 3.50B. The peaks in these DOS 
functions are the Van Hove singularities. In Volume I, 
Figure 3.135, the same DOS functions are shown in 
the top two plates, and the differential conductance is 
illustrated in the bottom two plates. Metallic carbon 
tubes have a constant DOS around E = 0, whereas for 
semiconducting ones, there is a gap at E = 0 (DOS = 0).
Carbon Nanotube Manufacture
Like fullerenes, nanotubes may be formed in mac-
roscopic quantities in an arc discharge apparatus as 
described in Volume II, Chapter 9 (see Figure 9.25). 
In the case of a carbon arc, one refers to such a setup 
as a Huffman-Kratschmer reactor.95 In a carbon arc as 
illustrated in Figure 3.51, two carbon rods are placed 
end to end with a separation distance of about 1 mm 
and are used as electrodes. In an enclosed volume 
of an inert gas (He, Ar) at a low pressure (50–70 
mbar), a current of 50–100 A, driven by 20 V, creates 
a high-temperature arc between the electrodes. The 
discharge vaporizes one rod forming a deposit on the 
other. Producing nanotubes in high yield depends 
upon the uniformity in the plasma arc and also upon 
(B)
c1
E11
v1
Conduction
Valence
Density of states
Energy
c1
c2
E22
E11
v1
v2
Conduction
Valence
Density of states
Energy
Metallic SWNT
c1 corresponds to the
“first van Hove” optical transition
v1
Semiconducting SWNT
c2 corresponds to the
“second van Hove”
optical transition
v2
a
x
y
c
d
BZ boundary
BZ boundary
Metallic
Semiconducting
(A)
E
E
x
x
y
y
kx
Ef
Ef
b
E
ky
kx
FIGURE 3.50 The E-k surfaces and band diagrams of metallic and semiconducting carbon nanotubes compared. (A) 
Energy vs wave vector plot. Carbon nanotubes can be viewed as rolled up graphene sheets (a,b). The periodic boundary 
condition only allows quantized wave vectors around the circumferential direction, which generates one-dimensional bands 
for carbon nanotubes. The nanotube can be either metallic (c) or semiconducting (d), depending on whether (n1 − n2) is 
the multiple of 3. (B) Sharp optical transitions due to Van Hove singularities. Optical transitions between the v1 − c1, v2 − c2, 
etc., states of semiconducting or metallic nanotubes are traditionally labeled as S11, S22, M11, etc.  The energies between the 
Van Hove singularities depend on the nanotube structure. Thus by varying this structure, one can tune the optoelectronic 
properties of carbon nanotubes. Optical transitions are sharp (~10 meV) and strong. Consequently, it is relatively easy to 
selectively excite nanotubes having certain (n1, n2) indices, as well as to detect optical signals from individual nanotubes.

[Page 166]
166   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the temperature of the deposit on the second carbon 
electrode. At the extremely high temperatures of 
the arc plasma, a wide range of carbon materials is 
formed. This may include amorphous carbon, fuller-
enes, nanotubes, endohedrals (carbon structures with 
enclosures), nanocrystallites, and graphite crystals. A 
typical yield for nanotubes is around 30% by weight. 
It is the most common and arguably the easiest way 
to produce carbon nanotubes;  however, as pointed 
out, it produces a mixture of items such as “soot” and 
catalytic metals in the end product, and the tubes are 
deposited in random sizes and directions.
There are a few ways of improving the process of 
arc discharge for producing either SWNT or MWNT 
(see Figure 3.52). In order to favor the production of 
SWNT, the anode in the apparatus is doped with a 
metal catalyst. The most important metals to cata-
lyze the growth of graphitic carbon nanofibers are 
iron, cobalt, and nickel; chromium, vanadium, and 
molybdenum have also been studied. The metals 
have been used both as bulk particles (size typically 
100 nm) and as supported particles (10–50 nm). 
MWNTs do not need any catalysts to grow.
By controlling the mixture of helium and argon 
gas, one can also control the diameter distribution 
of the produced nanotubes. Supposedly, this is due 
to the fact that the different mixtures have different 
diffusion coefficients and thermal conductivities.
Metal-filled carbon nanotubes (endohedrals) also 
have been produced with the arc-discharge method, 
for example, by doping a 99.4% graphite anode with 
a transition metal such as Cr or Ni, a rare earth such 
as Yb or Dy, or a covalent element such as S or Ge. 
A growth mechanism based on a catalytic process 
involving three elements, i.e., carbon, a metal, and 
sulfur has been proposed. The excellent protective 
nature of the outer graphitic cages against oxidation 
of the inner materials was demonstrated.103 These 
carbon-coated nanoparticles are of potential impor-
tance in the study of nanowire protection against 
oxidation, magnetic data storage, magnetic toner 
xerography, magnetic inks, and ferrofluids.
To favor multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWNT) 
production, both electrodes in the arc discharge 
apparatus should be graphite (Figure 3.52). Synthesis 
Gas
Vacuum
pump
DC arc
discharge
power
source
Deposit
Graphite
rod
Graphite
rod
C-soot
+
–
–
+
FIGURE 3.51 In the case of a carbon arc, one refers to 
such a setup as a Huffman-Kratschmer reactor.95
Helium atmosphere,
400 mbar
Graphite anode
Graphite cathode
10 pumps
DC current source
Single-walled nanotubes
Anode doped with Ni, Co, ...
Pure graphite electrodes
Multiwalled nanotubes
10 nm
10 nm
Plasma
Deposit
FIGURE 3.52 A carbon arc can be used to obtain single-walled and multiwalled nanotubes.

[Page 167]
Nanotechnology   167
in a magnetic field and with a rotating arc discharge 
also improves the MWNT yield. Magnets are placed 
around electrodes and help align nanotubes during 
formation. Purification is needed in this case, which 
may lead to loss of structure and can cause disorder in 
the nanotube walls. Purification of carbon nano tubes 
is quite difficult because they are insoluble in organic 
solvents and metals are often encased in a carbon 
coating. Possible solutions entail acid oxidation, gas 
or water oxidation, filtration, and chromatography.
Besides carbon plasma arcing, other established 
methods to produce nanotubes are chemical vapor 
deposition (CVD) and laser ablation. Morinubo 
Endo of Shinshu University was the first to make 
nanotubes using CVD.104 Pushing the field one step 
further, Hongjie Dai et al. at Stanford University 
devised a novel method for growing vertical single-
walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) on a large scale. 
This group modified a plasma-enhanced chemical 
vapor deposition station and achieved ultrahigh-
yield growth of SWNTs, thus increasing their appli-
cation into commercial products.105 By patterning a 
catalyst on a planar substrate they were able to con-
trol where the tubes form, for example, to make car-
bon nanotube arrays on a silicon wafer.106 Typically, 
methane, carbon monoxide, synthesis gas (H2/CO), 
ethyne, and ethene in the temperature range 700–
1200 K are employed to provide the carbon atoms in 
the process. Dai and his colleagues discovered that 
the key to attaining SWNTs is to add oxygen to the 
CVD reaction. While carbon atoms try to form the 
nanotube’s planar structure, hydrogen radicals are 
eating away at the carbon tube. Adding oxygen rem-
edies the problem by scavenging the hydrogen radi-
cals, creating a carbon-rich and hydrogen- deficient 
environment. These conditions jumpstart growth 
and spawn a vertical forest of nanotubes. (Dai 
and his colleagues were able to create 4-in. wafers 
blanketed with SWNTs. In addition, they devised 
a method for lifting the nanotubes off the original 
growth substrate and transferring them onto a vari-
ety of more desirable substrates such as plastics and 
metals—materials incompatible with the high tem-
peratures required for nanotube growth.)
A typical CVD setup, we saw in Volume II, Chapter 
7, consists of a target substrate held in a quartz tube 
placed inside a furnace (see Figure 3.53). The yield of 
this process ranges from 20% to 100%, the process 
is easy to scale up, and nanotubes of great length 
can be produced. For example, with fast-heating 
CVD, CNTs that are millimeters long can be grown 
while maintaining control over their orientation. 
Fast heating minimizes interaction of the growing 
tubes with the substrate. Using this process, Huang 
et al. grew a square 2D network of SWNTs guided by 
flow of carrier gas (Fe/Mo catalyst and CO2 gas) (see 
Volume II, Figure 7.41).108 The longest carbon nano-
tubes, as long as 18.5 cm, were reported in 2009. 
They were grown on Si substrates using an improved 
chemical vapor deposition (CVD).109
The general picture that has emerged for nano-
fiber formation is shown in Figure 3.54, where we 
contrast base growth and tip growth. In base growth, 
the catalyst particle can be found at the base of the 
nanotube, whereas in tip growth the nanoparticle is 
seen at the very tip of the tube. The latter seems to be 
the most frequent growth mode.
It is not exactly known yet how the carbon atoms 
in any of the manufacturingtechniques detailed 
here condense into tubes. Hoogenraad has proposed 
the following model for nucleation and growth in 
the case of carbon nanowires grown on Ni catalyst 
particles (Figure 3.55).107 The process starts when 
methane decomposes into carbon and hydrogen 
atoms at the nickel catalyst surface (1–2). Next, H2 
molecules desorb, and carbon dissolves and forms 
a (substoichiometric) nickel carbide (3). This nickel 
carbide is  metastable with respect to nickel metal 
and graphite so that after a short time (e.g., 10 min), 
the carbide phase decomposes into metallic nickel 
FIGURE 3.53 Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition 
setup for nanotubes: Firstnano EasyTube 3000.

[Page 168]
168   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
and graphite with the graphite encapsulating the 
nickel particle in question (4). Hoogenraad now 
speculates that the metal particle is squeezed out of 
its encapsulation because of pressure buildup due 
to the formation of graphite layers at the internal 
surface of the graphite envelope, on the one hand, 
and liquid-like behavior of the metal under these 
conditions, on the other (5). As soon as the metal 
is pushed out, a fresh Ni surface is exposed to the 
methane and growth continues. Finally, a steady-
state process occurs with either pulsed growth (6a) 
or smooth growth of a straight fiber (6b). This model 
explains why, more often than not, metal particles 
are found at the tip of the carbon fiber: the graphite 
fiber pushes the metal particle from the support and 
continues to grow at the back of the particle.
This type of mechanism corresponds to the 
vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) model as originally pro-
posed in 1964 by R.S. Wagner and W.C. Ellis110,140 
Support
C
C
CH
Tip growth
Metal
Support
C
CH
C + H
Metal
Extrusion or root growth
20 nm
FIGURE 3.54 Base and tip growth of carbon nanotubes. Arrows point to the catalyst particle. (Hoogenraad, M.S. 1995. 
Utrecht University, PhD thesis. Utrecht, the Netherlands.107)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6a)
(6b)
CH4 H2
CH4
H2
FIGURE 3.55 Mechanism for the nucleation and growth 
of a carbon nanofiber from methane catalyzed by a sup-
ported metal particle. (Based on the work of Hoogenraad, 
M.S. 1995. Utrecht University, PhD thesis. Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.107)

[Page 169]
Nanotechnology   169
for the Au-catalyzed Si whisker growth (see Figures 
3.60 and 3.61).
Smalley made his early buckyballs by laser abla-
tion in a furnace, as shown in Figure 3.56 (see also 
Volume II, Figure 7.18). The same setup can be uti-
lized to make carbon nanotubes.
Smalley and coworkers at Rice University pio-
neered the use of intense laser pulses to bombard 
graphite rods to generate the hot carbon gas from 
which nanotubes settle on a copper collector. Typical 
yield is 70%, and the method tends to produce sin-
gle-walled nanotubes. The method is quite expen-
sive because of the use of the lasers.
In Table 3.8 we compare the pros and cons of 
 carbon-arc discharge with chemical vapor deposi-
tion and pulse laser vaporization for the fabrication 
of carbon nanotubes.
Carbon Nanotube Applications
Electronic Properties
Some of the amazing properties of nanotubes are 
summarized in Table 3.9 below. These properties 
could well make carbon nanotubes (CNTs) the “Si” 
of this century.
It is possible for the carbon nanotube to supply 
the basic building blocks for an integrated circuit, as 
TABLE 3.8 Comparison of the Pros and Cons of Carbon Nanotube Synthesis by Carbon-Arc Discharge with 
Chemical Vapor Deposition and Pulse Laser Vaporization
Method:
Carbon-arc discharge
Chemical vapor deposition
Pulse laser vaporization
Who:
Ebbesen and Ajayan, NEC, 
Japan 1992113
Endo, Shinshu University, 
Nagano, Japan114
Smalley, Rice, 199576
How:
Connect two graphite rods to a 
power supply, place them a few 
millimeters apart, and throw 
the switch; at 100 amps, carbon 
vaporizes and forms a hot 
plasma
Place substrate in oven, heat to 
600°C, and slowly add a 
carbon-bearing gas such as 
methane; as gas decomposes it 
frees up carbon atoms, which 
recombine in the form of NTs
Blast graphite with intense laser 
pulses; use the laser pulses rather 
than electricity to generate carbon 
gas from which the NTs form try 
various conditions until hitting 
upon one that produces prodigious 
amounts of SWNTs
Yield: 
30–90%
20–100%
Up to 70%
SWNT:
Short tubes with diameters of 
0.6–1.4 nm
Long tubes with diameters 
ranging from 0.6–4 nm
Long bundles of tubes  
(5–20 µm), with individual diameter 
from 1–2 nm
MWNT:
Short tubes with inner diameter 
of 1–3 nm and outer diameter 
of approximately 10 nm
Long tubes with diameters 
ranging from 10–240 nm
Not very much interest in this 
technique because it is too 
expensive, but MWNT synthesis is 
possible
Pros:
Can easily produce SWNT and 
MWNTs; SWNTs have few 
structural defects; MWNTs 
without catalyst, not too 
expensive, open-air synthesis 
possible
Easiest to scale up to industrial 
production; long length, 
simple process; SWNT diameter 
controllable, quite pure
Primarily SWNTs, with good 
diameter control and few defects; 
reaction product quite pure
Cons:
Tubes tend to be short with 
random sizes and directions; 
often needs a lot of purification
NTs are usually MWNTs and 
often riddled with defects
Costly technique because it requires 
expensive lasers and high-power 
equipment, but improving
Target rod
Furnace
Flow
controller
Ar
Lens
Laser
Window
Pump
Pressure
controller
Water
SWNTs
Trap
Quartz
glass tube
FIGURE 3.56 Laser ablation station for carbon nanotube 
production.112 (With kind permission from Elsevier.)

[Page 170]
170   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 3.9 Some Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes
Property
Remark/Comparison
Applications
Size
The average diameter of an 
SWNT is 1.2–1.4 nm 
E-beam lithography produces 
lines 30 nm wide
Nanotube-tipped AFMs can trace 
an individual strand of DNA. 
The hollow structures may store 
hydrogen, lithium ions, or even 
drug molecules for slow release 
devices
High specific 
surface
>1000 m2/g
For comparison carbon aerosol 
gels have a specific surface 
area (200–350 m2/g)
Materials with large specific 
surface areas are used for energy 
storage as in capacitors, batteries, 
and fuel cells. They are also used 
for storage, purification, and 
separation of chemicals
Density
1.33–1.40 gcm–3
Lowest for armchair, highest 
for chiral
Al is 2.7 g cm–3
The applications for low density 
materials are far ranging from 
consumer products such as food 
containers, to packaging 
materials, to crash protection 
energy absorbers
Tensile strength
Estimated to be 150 GPa
High-strength carbon steel 
alloys, 1 GPa. Carbon 
nanotubes have the greatest 
tensile strength of any 
material. It is also the stiffest 
known material, with a 
tremendously high elastic  
modulus (see Young’s 
modulus)
More rugged tips for AFM and 
STM, superstrong composites
Resilience
Can be bent at large angle 
without damage
Metals and carbon fibers 
fracture at grain boundaries
Mechanical memory switches and 
nanotweezers, superstrong 
materials
Young’s modulus
1–6 TPa (SWNT)
0.27–0.95 Tpa (MWNT)
The Young’s modulus of the 
best nanotubes can be  
higher than 1000 GPa which 
is approximately 5x higher 
than steel. Reported numbers 
vary widely
This high Young’s modulus 
combined with an excellent  
tensile strength and the 
lightness of carbon nanotubes, 
gives them great potential in 
applications such as aerospace 
(see “space elevator” in the 
heading of this chapter)
Current carrying 
capacity
Estimated at 1 × 1013 Am–2
Cu wires will carry no more 
than 1 × 10 6 A cm–2
Potential for terahertz FETs
Thermal 
conductivity and 
phonon mean free 
path
Thermal conductivity for 
SWNT is as high as 
3000 W/mK along the 
nanotube axis. The phonon 
mean free path length is 
∼100 nm
Compare this to copper, a 
metal well-known for its 
good thermal conductivity, 
which transmits 385 W/mK. 
The thermal conductivity of 
carbon nanotubes is 
dependent on the 
temperature and the large 
phonon mean free paths
Efficient heat sinking in 
electronics and optoelectronics
Electrical resistivity
10–4 ohm.cm for ropes of 
SWNTs at room temperature
Wiring in electronic circuitry
Field emission
Activates phosphors at 1–2 V 
with electrodes spaced 1 µm 
apart
Mo tips (Spindt cathodes, see 
Volume II, Figure 2.42) 
require fields of 50–100 V/µm
Flat-panel displays, nanovacuum 
tubes
Temperature 
stability
In vacuum up to 2800°C and 
750°C in air
Metal in ICs melts between 
600°C and 1000°C
High-temperature environments

[Page 171]
Nanotechnology   171
the metallic nanotubes can act as highly conductive 
wires and the semiconducting nanotubes can be 
fabricated into transistors. Cees Dekker in Delft,88 
Paul McEuen at Cornell,112 Phaedron Avouris at 
IBM,115 and Charles Lieber at Harvard116 all have 
demonstrated that single nanotubes can act as 
transistors. A field-effect transistor—a three-termi-
nal switching device—can be constructed of only 
one semiconducting SWNT. By applying a voltage to 
a gate electrode, the nanotube can be switched from 
a conducting to an insulating state. In Volume  I, 
Figure 1.30b, we show a single semiconducting nan-
otube contacted by two electrodes. The Si substrate, 
which is covered by a layer of SiO2 300 nm thick, acts 
as a back gate. In 2002, researchers built the world’s 
first array of transistors out of carbon nanotubes.117 
Another carbon nanotube electronic application 
involves field emission. When a solid is subjected 
to a sufficiently high electric field, electrons near 
the Fermi level can be extracted from the solid by 
tunneling through the surface potential barrier 
(see Volume II, Figure 2.17). This emission current 
depends on both the strength of the local electric 
field at the surface and the material’s work func-
tion (which denotes the energy necessary to extract 
an electron from its highest bounded state to the 
vacuum level). The applied electric field must be 
very high in order to extract an electron, a condi-
tion easily fulfilled for carbon nanotubes, because 
their elongated shape ensures a very large electric 
field concentration. For technological applica-
tions, the emissive material should also have a low 
threshold emission field and remain stable at very 
high current densities. Furthermore, an ideal emit-
ter should be nanometer size, have high structural 
integrity and high electrical conductivity, exhibit 
a small energy spread, and demonstrate excellent 
chemical stability. Carbon nanotubes possess all 
these properties. The growth of aligned arrays of 
CNTs inside the pores of self-organized nanopo-
rous alumina templates is an especially intriguing 
application in this regard (see Chapter 5, this vol-
ume). Govyadinov et al.118 synthesized arrays of 
CNTs (deposited with catalytic CVD) in alumina 
pores with diameters in the  sub-100-nm range and 
densities from 108 to 1011 tips per cm2. These pro-
totype CNT arrays have been used as field emitters 
(carbon has a low work function) and shown to ex -
hibit field emission at a low threshold of 3–5 V/µm 
and emission current densities up to 100 mA/cm2 
in low-vacuum conditions.
However, a bottleneck in the use of nanotubes 
for field emitter application is the dependence of the 
conductivity and emission stability of the nanotubes 
TABLE 3.9 Some Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes (Continued)
Property
Remark/Comparison
Applications
Quantum effects
For every nanotube 
circumference there is a 
unique band gap
Easy to manipulate electronic 
properties
New generation of quantum 
devices
Chemical sensitivity
Oxygen, halogens, and alkalis 
cause a drastic resistance 
change at room temperature
Most solid-state gas sensors 
only work at higher 
temperatures (e.g., >350°C)
Supersensitive, room 
temperature chemical sensors 
(selectivity might be an issue)
High aspect ratio
Easily 1000 : 1
The high aspect ratio of CNTs  
imparts electrical conductivity 
to polymers at lower loadings, 
compared to conventional 
additive materials, such as 
carbon black, chopped carbon 
fiber, or stainless steel fiber
Cost
∼$100/g
Au, ∼$10/g
High cost will make many of the 
above applications impossible  
until prices come down
Band gap
0 for metallic and 0.5 eV for 
semiconductors
Semiconductive type can be used 
as a transistor and metallic as an 
interconnect
For a good introductory reading on fullerenes, we suggest The Chemistry of the Fullerenes by Hirsch.119 For a good introduction to nano-
tubes, we refer to the book Carbon Nanotubes by Dresselhaus et al.120 and the special section “Carbon Nanotubes” in Physics World.121

[Page 172]
172   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
on the fabrication process and synthesis conditions. 
Examples of applications for nanotubes as field emit-
ting devices are flat-panel displays (see Volume  II, 
Figure 7.90), gas-discharge tubes in telecom net-
works, electron guns for electron microscopes, AFM 
tips, and microwave amplifiers.
Mechanical Properties
Estimates vary as to precisely how strong a sin-
gle-carbon nanotube can be, but experimental 
results have shown their tensile strength to be in 
excess of 60 times stronger than high-grade steel. 
Depending  upon the specific paper at hand, the 
reported numerical values for the Young’s modu-
lus range from 1–6 TPa. This scatter is known as 
“Yakobson’s Paradox” after Boris Yakobson (Rice 
University) who first discussed this.122 In a recent 
paper, Young Huang and  co-workers address this 
issue and provide a resolution.123 According to 
Huang et al. the errors originate in the wide scat-
ter of assumptions about “h” the thickness of the 
single-walled nanotube or the graphene sheet. 
Theoretically, SWNTs could have a Young’s modu-
lus of between 1 and 6 TPa. MWNTs are less strong 
because the individual cylinders slide with respect 
to each other. Ropes of SWNTs are also less strong. 
The individual tubes can pull out by shearing, and 
eventually the whole rope will break. This happens 
at stresses far below the tensile strength of indi-
vidual nanotubes. Nanotubes sustain large strains 
in tension without showing signs of fracture, and 
in other directions, nanotubes are highly flexible. 
Because of their flexibility, nanotubes are used, for 
example, in scanning probe instruments. CNTs are 
not nearly as strong under compression than under 
tension. Because of their hollow structure and high 
aspect ratio, they tend to undergo bucking when 
placed under compressive, torsional, or bending 
stress. Since MWNT tips are conducting, they can 
be used in STM and AFM instruments (Volume II, 
Figure 2.40). Advantages are the improved resolu-
tion in comparison with conventional Si or metal 
tips, while the tips do not suffer from crashes 
with the surfaces because of their high elastic-
ity. However, nanotube vibration due to the large 
length remains an important issue, until shorter 
nanotubes can be grown controllably. Because of 
the stiffness of carbon nanotubes, they should be 
ideal candidates for structural applications. For 
example, they may be used as reinforcements in 
high-strength, low-weight, and high-performance 
composites (see below).
Energy Storage and Conversion
See Chapter 9, this volume.
Chemical Sensors and Nanoreactors
Nanotube tips can be modified chemically through 
attachment of functional groups. Because of this, 
nanotubes can be used as molecular probes, with 
potential applications in chemistry and biology. 
Because of the small channels, strong capillary 
forces exist in nanotubes. These forces are strong 
enough to hold gases and fluids in nanotubes. In 
this way, it may be possible to fill the cavities of the 
nanotubes to create nano wires. The critical issue 
here is the wetting characteristic of nanotubes. 
Because of their smaller pore sizes, filling SWNTs 
is more difficult than filling MWNTs. If it becomes 
possible to keep fluids inside nanotubes, it could 
also be possible to perform chemical reactions 
inside their cavities. In particular, organic solvents 
wet nanotubes easily. In this case we could speak of 
a nanoreactor. Table 3.10 summarizes some chemi-
cal and biological sensor applications of carbon 
nanotubes.
Carbon Nanotubes in Composites
One of the most important applications of car-
bon nanotubes is projected to be as reinforcement 
in composite materials. However, there have not 
been many successful experiments that show that 
nanotubes are better fillers than the traditionally 
used carbon fibers. The main problem is to create 
a good interface between the nanotubes and the 
polymer matrix, as nanotubes are very smooth and 
have a small diameter that is nearly the same as 
that of a polymer chain. Secondly, nanotube aggre-
gates, which are very common, behave differently 
in response to loads than individual nanotubes 
do. Limiting factors for good load transfer could 
be sliding of cylinders in MWNTs and shearing of 
tubes in SWNT ropes. To solve this problem, the 

[Page 173]
Nanotechnology   173
aggregates need to be broken up and dispersed or 
cross-linked to prevent slippage. A main advantage 
of using nanotubes for structural polymer compos-
ites is that nanotube reinforcements will increase 
the toughness of the composites by absorbing 
energy during their highly flexible elastic behavior. 
Other advantages are the low density of the nano-
tubes, an increased electrical conduction, and bet-
ter performance during compressive load. Another 
possibility, which is an example of a nonstructural 
application, is filling of photoactive polymers with 
nanotubes. Poly-p-phenylenevinylene filled with 
MWNTs and SWNTs is a composite that has been 
used for several experiments. These composites 
show a large increase in conductivity with only a 
small loss in photoluminescence and electrolumi-
nescence yields. Another benefit is that the com-
posite is more robust than the pure polymer. Of 
course, nanotube-polymer composites could be 
used also in other areas. For instance, they could 
be used in the biochemical field as membranes 
for molecular separations or for osteointegration 
(growth of bone cells). However, these areas are 
less well explored. The most important thing we 
have to know about nanotubes for efficient use of 
nanotubes as reinforcing fibers is knowledge of how 
to manipulate the surfaces chemically to enhance 
interfacial behavior between the individual nano-
tubes and the matrix material.
Conclusion
Carbon nanotubes continue to hold a tremendous 
promise as a structural and electronic material. 
Some types of nanotubes might present a danger 
similar to that posed by asbestos, which has tiny 
fibers that can get into lung tissues and cause can-
cerous lesions.131 Researchers are suggesting more 
study and caution in handling the material.
The Rise of Graphene:*138 2D
Graphene is the name given to a monolayer of car-
bon atoms arranged into benzene rings; it is used 
to describe properties of many carbon-based 
* Based on the paper of the same title by Geim and Novoselov119 
(Nature Materials 2007;6:183–91).
TABLE 3.10 Chemical and Biological Applications of Carbon Nanotubes 
System
Target Species
Salient Feature
SWNT
NH3 and NO2
Sensitive to 200 ppm of NO2 
and 1% of NH3.124
SWNT
N2, He, O2, and Ar
Gas concentrations as low as 
100 ppm can be detected.125
MWCNT
NH3
Gas concentrations as low as 
10 ppm can be detected. The 
sensor showed a reversible 
response of few minutes.126
Poly(o-anisidine)-coated CNT
HCl
Nine times increase in 
sensitivity compared with 
uncoated CNT.127
MWNT-SiO2
CO2, O2, and NH3
Sensor response times are 
approximately 45 s, 4 min, 
and 2 min for CO2, O2, and 
NH3, respectively. The sensor 
response is reversible for O2 
and CO2 but irreversible for 
NH3.128
SWNT
D-Glucose
Senses D-glucose in solution 
phase by two distinct 
mechanisms of signal 
transduction: fluorescence 
and charge transfer.129
Poly(vinylferrocene)-
derivatized MWCNT
Glucose
Glucose concentration in real 
blood sample can be 
determined.130

[Page 174]
174   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 materials, including graphite, fullerenes, and nano-
tubes (see Figures 3.44 and 3.45). The graphene the-
ory was first developed by Philip Wallace in 1947 
as an approximation to help understand the elec-
tronic properties of more complex, three-dimen-
sional graphite.132 Landau and Peierls, 70 years 
ago, claimed that 2D crystals are thermodynami-
cally unstable and that divergent contribution of 
thermal fluctuations in 2D crystals lattices would 
lead to displacements of atoms comparable to the 
interatomic distances and thus destroy the 2D layer. 
They also concluded that the melting temperature 
of these thin films would rap idly decrease with 
decreasing thickness. Furthermore, in quantum 
field theory and statistical mechanics, the Mermin-
Wagner theorem (also known as Mermin-Wagner-
Hohenberg theorem or Coleman theorem) says that 
crystalline order is impossible in two-dimensional 
structures at non non-zero temperatures, and this 
has been interpreted as saying that a freestanding, 
two-dimensional crystal would be disrupted by 
thermodynamic forces (hence “2D materials were 
presumed not to exist”).133 It was believed that 
because of instabilities, a 2D graphene structure 
would fold up, or crumple, to form a more stable 3D 
structure. In summary, planar graphene was pre-
sumed not to exist in the free state, being unstable 
with respect to the formation of curved structures 
such as soot, fullerenes, and nanotubes.
However, in 2004, Novoselov et al. obtained rela-
tively large graphene sheets (eventually, up to 100 
µm in size) by mechanical exfoliation (repeated 
peeling) of 3D graphite crystals.82 Their motivation 
allegedly was to study the electrical properties of 
thin graphite films. As purely two-dimensional crys-
tals were unknown before and presumed not to exist, 
their discovery of individual planes of graphite may 
be viewed as accidental. The Manchester experimen-
tal discovery of 2D crystal matter was at first put in 
doubt until 2005, when the groups of Andre Geim 
and Philip Kim of Columbia University proved that 
the obtained graphitic layers exhibited the expected 
theoretical electronic properties of graphene.134,135 
On October 5, 2010, the Royal Swedish Academy 
of Sciences awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics to 
Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov University of 
Manchester, UK, “for groundbreaking experiments 
regarding the two-dimensional material graphene,” 
(http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laure-
ates/2010/press.html). Single layers of graphite were 
previously (starting from the 1970s) grown epitaxi-
ally on top of other materials. Epitaxial graphene 
also consists of a single-atom-thick hexagonal lattice 
of sp2-bonded carbon atoms, as in free-standing gra-
phene, but there is significant charge transfer from 
the substrate to the epitaxial graphene, and, in some 
cases, hybridization between the d orbitals of the 
substrate atoms and π orbitals of the graphene layer. 
This interaction significantly alters the electronic 
structure of the epitaxial graphene. The Manchester 
free-standing graphene on the other hand is a single-
atom-thick crystal of a macroscopic size that is either 
suspended or interacting only very weakly with a 
substrate.
The electronic structure of graphene approaches 
the 3D limit of graphite at ten layers of graphene. 
Today, graphene sheets are prepared by chemi-
cal exfoliation (solution-based), epitaxial growth 
by CVD (same as nanotubes), epitaxy on catalytic 
surfaces (Ni, Pt), and mechanical cleavage. Single 
graphene layers are not that difficult to make (see 
pencil in Figure 3.45), but they are more difficult to 
identify. With AFM it is possible, but the throughput 
is very low on large areas, and SEM does not reveal 
the number of atomic layers. A solution involves the 
placement of graphene on top of a Si wafer with a 
carefully chosen thickness of SiO2; in this way gra-
phene becomes visible even in an optical micro-
scope. An interference-like contrast appears with an 
SiO2 thickness of 300 or 90 nm (see Figure 3.57).
FIGURE 3.57 Graphene on SiO2 observed in an optical 
microscope.117

[Page 175]
Nanotechnology   175
The atomic structure of isolated, single-layer gra-
phene has been studied by transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) on sheets of graphene suspended 
between bars of a metallic grid.136 These electron 
diffraction patterns showed the expected hexago-
nal lattice of graphene but also revealed “rippling” 
of the flat sheet, with an amplitude of about 1 nm 
(see Figure 3.58). These ripples may be intrinsic to 
graphene as a result of the instability of two-di-
mensional crystals referred to above, or they may 
be extrinsic, originating perhaps from the ubiqui-
tous dirt seen in all TEM images of graphene. While 
an infinitely large single layer of graphene would 
be in direct contradiction to the Mermin-Wagner 
theorem (see above), a finite-size 2D crystal of gra-
phene could be stable. The observed ripples in sus-
pended layers of graphene, it has been proposed, 
are caused by thermal fluctuations in the material; 
graphene adjusts to the thermal fluctuations, which 
could threaten to destroy the structure, by adjusting 
its bond length to accommodate the fluctuations. 
Within this context, it is actually debatable whether 
graphene is truly 2D or not, because of this natural 
tendency to ripple.137
Because graphene is somewhat tricky to make 
and even trickier to see and handle, most experi-
ments have been performed not on free-standing 
monolayers but on two types of graphene samples: 
exfoliated graphene, deposited on a silicon-oxide/
silicon substrate (see Figure 3.57), and epitaxial 
graphene, a layer of carbon atoms chemically depos-
ited on (and chemically bonded to) a substrate of 
silicon carbide.
The surge of interest in the electronic proper-
ties of graphene has largely been motivated by the 
discovery that electron mobility in graphene is ten 
times higher than in commercial-grade silicon (up 
to 100,000 cm2 V–1 s–1, limited by impurity scatter-
ing, and weakly dependent on temperature), ballis-
tic transport is observed on the submicron scale (up 
to 0.3 µm at 300 K), and the quantum Hall effect 
can be observed at room temperature (extending 
the previous temperature range by a factor of 10). 
All these properties raise the possibility of high-
efficiency, low-power, carbon-based electronics. 
The surprising electronic properties of graphene 
are ascribed to the presence of charge carriers that 
behave as if they are massless, “relativistic” quasi-
particles called Dirac fermions.
A 2D graphene crystal is very different from a 3D 
silicon single crystal such as Si. In a semiconduc-
tor such as Si, electrons and holes interact with the 
periodic field of the atomic lattice to form quasipar-
ticles. For example, in Volume I, Chapters 3 and 4, 
we saw how an electron moving through a conven-
tional solid is described as having an effective mass 
(me*) that takes into account the drag on its momen-
tum from the surrounding crystal lattice as well as 
from interactions with other particles. The energy of 
quasiparticles in a solid depends on their momen-
tum, a relationship described by the energy bands. 
In a typical 3D semiconductor, the energy bands are 
“parabolic.”
Between them is the forbidden band gap, repre-
senting the amount of energy it takes to promote an 
electron from the valence band to the conduction 
band. The energy (E) of an electron in such a crys-
tal depends quadratically on its momentum (p), as 
given by the following equation.
 
E
m
p
m
e
e
=
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
ℏ2
2
2
2
2
k
*
*
 
(Volume I, Equation 3.213) 
While electron transport in most solids is accu-
rately described by the nonrelativistic Schrödinger 
FIGURE 3.58 Graphene sheet with ripples.119

[Page 176]
176   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
equation, graphene is quite different from most 
conventional three-dimensional materials. Unlike 
in ordinary semiconductors, graphs of the valence 
band and the conduction band in an E-k diagram 
for graphene are smooth-sided cones that meet at six 
points, called the Dirac points (see Figure 3.59). One 
interesting consequence of this unique band struc-
ture is that the electrons in graphene are “sort of 
free.” The E-k relation near the Dirac points is linear 
for low energies, leading to zero effective mass for 
electrons and holes. Charge carriers in this energy 
range thus behave like relativistic particles (they 
behave like photons) described by the Dirac equa-
tion for spin 1/2 particles. The linear dispersion rela-
tionship in the low energy region is simply given by 
the following equation:
 
E = vFk  
(3.14)
where the wave number (k) represents momentum 
and the Fermi velocity (vF) stands in for the speed of 
light. Dirac fermions* travel at a constant speed—a 
small fraction of the speed of light.138 Graphene has 
all the ideal properties to become an almost ideal 
component for integrated circuits. It has a high car-
rier mobility, as well as low noise, allowing it to be 
utilized as the channel in a FET. In 2008, the small-
est transistor so far, one atom thick, ten atoms wide, 
was made of graphene.139 IBM researchers are report-
ing progress in circuits based on narrow ribbons of 
* Dirac fermions have also been invoked to explain the quantum Hall 
effect in graphene, the magnetic-field-driven metal–insulator-like 
transition in graphite, superfluidity in 3He, and the exotic pseudogap 
phase of high-temperature superconductors.
planar graphene. The narrow graphene ribbons con-
fine electrons in the narrow, single-planed graphene 
ribbons, which open up the possibility of building 
quantum wires and quantum wells. Narrow ribbons 
of graphene behave much like nanotubes and may 
be more amenable to manufacturing techniques 
such as etching. The current technology limits how 
thin graphene ribbons can be made. It does not 
allow them to be made thin enough to push to room 
temperature, so the work is carried out at lower 
temperatures.
Besides its electronic properties, graphene also is 
researched for its mechanical, thermal, and optical 
properties.
Despite all the excitement, don’t expect “graphe-
nium” microprocessors just yet. Think about carbon 
nanotubes, observed in 1991: they have created tre-
mendous excitement, but today, there are no com-
mercial CNT-based breakthrough products on the 
market—although they supposedly make your golf 
balls go straighter (a breakthrough for some golfers 
at least). Moreover, graphene currently is one of the 
most expensive materials on Earth, with a sample 
that can be placed on the cross-section of a human 
hair costing more than $1000 (as of April 2008). The 
price may fall dramatically, though, if and when 
commercial production methods are developed in 
the future.
Noncarbon Nanotubes and Nanowires
A nanotube, strictly speaking, is any tube with 
nanoscale dimensions, but generally the term is 
used to refer to carbon nanotubes. With a thin 
shell that is only one atom wide, nanotubes are 
hollow, giving them characteristics significantly 
different from those of solid nanowires made 
of silicon or other materials. Nanowires can be 
defined as structures that have a lateral size con-
strained to tens of nanometers or less and an 
unconstrained longitudinal size. At these scales, 
quantum mechanical effects are important. Such 
wires are also known as quantum wires. Many dif-
ferent types of nanowires exist, including metal-
lic (e.g., Ni, Pt, Au), semiconducting (e.g., Si, 
InP, GaN, etc.), and insulating (e.g., SiO2, TiO2). 
Molecular nanowires are composed of repeating 
E
ky
kx
FIGURE 3.59 E-k surface of graphene. Intrinsic graphene 
is a semimetal or zero-gap semiconductor.

[Page 177]
Nanotechnology   177
molecular units either organic (e.g., DNA and pro-
tein) or inorganic (e.g., Mo6S9-x Ix).
A major drawback to the utility of carbon nan-
otubes is the limited control over their chirality, 
which we saw above directly affects their electronic 
properties. At present no synthesis methods capable 
of controlling this feature are available, and selec-
tive synthesis of carbon nanotubes having only 
semiconducting characteristics remains elusive. A 
commonly studied noncarbon nanotube variety is 
made of boron nitride (BN). BN is the III-V homolog 
to graphene, and in this 2D lattice B and N occupy 
different sublattices—this lowers the symmetry and 
leads to new physical effects. BN nanotubes are all 
insulating, with a band gap of about 5 eV. Unlike 
carbon nanotubes, the conductive properties of BN 
nanotubes are more or less independent of chirality, 
diameter, and even the number of walls in the tube. 
Theoretically, the existence of silicon nanotubes 
with an sp2 atomic arrangement is also predicted: 
creation of this type of nanotube is considered an 
important challenge for the future.
By making clever choices of seed crystals and 
growing conditions, it is possible to cause crystals 
to assume unusual shapes. As originally proposed 
by R.S. Wagner and W.C. Ellis, from Bell Labs, 
for the Au-catalyzed Si whisker growth, a vapor-
 liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism still is mostly used 
(Figure 3.60).140
As illustrated in Figure 3.61, (111)-oriented Si 
“whiskers” grow from a small Au particle island on 
a Si(111) surface when heated at 950°C and exposed 
to a flow of SiCl4 and H2 in a CVD reactor. Similar 
results are obtained with Pt, Ag, Pd, Cu, and Ni. 
When the substrate is heated up, a gold monolayer 
de-wets (unbinds) from the substrate in liquid form. 
From there, the liquid gold coalesces into nanoclus-
ters and naturally self-assembles into gold nanoclus-
ters. The gold acts as the catalyst in the VLS model. 
The liquid droplet is the preferred site for CVD 
deposition, and once the percentage of source mate-
rial has supersaturated the nanoclusters, it begins to 
solidify and grow outward in a perfect single-crystal 
nanowire. In this growth mechanism the “impurity” 
is essential and remains in evidence from a small 
“globule” that is present at the tip of the whiskers 
during the growth (see Figure 3.61). The role of the 
impurity is to form a liquid alloy droplet at relatively 
low T. The selection of the impurity is important, as 
the diameter of the nanowire roughly is controlled 
by the diameter of the nanoclusters. The length of 
a nanowire is controlled by the amount of time the 
source is left on.
The VLS model corresponds to the model for 
the nucleation and growth of a carbon nanofiber 
from methane catalyzed by a supported metal par-
ticle shown in Figure 3.55 (based on the work of 
Hoogenraad107).
Nanoscale catalysts have been used to seed long, 
wire-like single crystals of compounds such as indium 
phosphide or gallium arsenide. The nanowire field 
got a shot in the arm (a rebirth, so to speak) with 
efforts by Charles Lieber (Harvard) (Volume I, Figure 
3.65), Peidong Yang (http://www.cchem.berkeley.
0.3µ
0.5 MM
FIGURE 3.60 Si whisker growth: Au-catalyzed Si whisker 
growth based on a vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism.
Vapor
Au-Si liquid
alloy
Silicon substrate
Silicon
crystal
Vapor
〈111〉
FIGURE 3.61 The vapor-liquid-solid mechanism for single-
crystal Si growth.

[Page 178]
178   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
edu/pdygrp/main.html), 
James 
Heath 
(http://
www.its.caltech.edu/∼heathgrp), 
and 
Hongkun 
Park 
(http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/∼hpark). 
Lieber’s group at Harvard (http://cmliris.harvard.
edu) reported arranging indium phosphide semicon-
ducting nanowires into a simple configuration that 
resembled the lines in a tic-tac-toe board. The team 
used electron beam lithography to  place electrical 
contacts at the ends of the nanowires in order to 
show that the array was electronically active.
Saif Islam et al. came up with the idea of connect-
ing vertical Si(111) walls by growing Si nanowires 
laterally. Starting with a good catalyst on one wall, if 
there is another vertical surface in its close vicinity, 
the nanowire hits that surface and makes a bridge.141 
This is illustrated in Figure 3.62.
Electrochemical deposition of nanowires into a 
porous medium is another popular technique for 
making metallic nanowires. The porous medium may 
be porous silica, alumina, polycarbonate membranes, 
and even polyaniline nanotubules. Nanowire diam-
eters as low as ∼10 nm have been reported, and wire 
length may range from ∼1 µm to >20 µm depending 
on the wire’s diameter. Using nanoporous alumina 
as a template for the deposition of nanostructures of 
a material of choice, such as metals, semiconductors, 
and polymers, will be explained in Chapter 5, this 
volume (in Figure 5.10, the electrochemical deposi-
tion of the nanowire thermoelectric material Bi2Te3 
is illustrated). Dresselhaus et al. show that lower-
dimensional structures, such as nanowires based on 
Bi, BiSb, Bi2Te3, and SiGe nanotechnology, give addi-
tional controls that could lead to a higher ZT (see 
Chapter 8, this volume).54
500 nm
Direction of growth
FIGURE 3.62 Lateral growth of nanowires between 
Si(111) surfaces. (From M. Saif Islam, S. Sharma, T.I. Kamins, 
and R.S. Williams, Nanotechnology 15;L5–L8, 2004. With 
permission.141)
TABLE 3.11 Nanowires and Their Applications 
Material
Application
Si
Electronics, sensors
Cobalt
Magnetic
Germanium
Electronics, infrared detectors
Tin oxide
Chemical sensors
Indium oxide
Chemical sensors, biosensors
Indium tin oxide
Transparent conductive film in display electrodes, solar 
cells, organic light-emitting diodes
ZnO
UV lasers, field emission devices, chemical sensors
Copper oxide
Field emission device
Wide bandgap nitrides (GaN)
High temperature electronics, UV detectors and lasers, 
automotive electronics and sensors
Boron nitride
Insulator
Indium phosphide
Electronics, optoelectronics
Zinc selenide
Photonics (Q-switch, blue-green laser diode, blue UV 
photodetector)
Bi2Te3
Thermoelectric
Copper, tungsten
Electrical interconnects

[Page 179]
Nanotechnology   179
Advanced lithographic techniques (electron beam) 
are also used to pattern catalyst seeds for nanowire 
growth. In Table 3.11 we list some typical nanowires 
and their applications, and in Table 3.12, we review 
nanowire chemical sensor applications.
Questions
Questions by Dr. Marc Madou assisted by Mr. George 
O’Quinn, UC Berkeley
 3.1:  Explain the “fat fingers” and “sticky fingers” 
controversy, and suggest some possible ways 
that the problems associated with fat fingers 
and sticky fingers may be overcome.
 3.2:  Explain the difference between self-assembly, 
self-organization, and self-replication.
 3.3:  Why are fractal structures used consistently in 
nature? What benefits do these structures entail?
 3.4:  Make a listing of material properties that change 
in the nanoscale and explain why they change. 
 3.5:  Explain the process of Stransky-Krastanov 
(SK) growth and how it can be used.
 3.6:  What effects do the chiral, zigzag, and arm-
chair structures have on the properties of car-
bon nanotubes?
 3.7:  What are some important distinctions between 
top-down and bottom-up manufacturing 
(nanochemistry)?
 3.8:  Give some examples of bottom-up manu-
facturing methods.
 3.9:  Characterize the guiding principles involved 
in the growth of living organisms.
3.10:  What does irreversible thermodynamics have 
to do with self-organization?
3.11:  In the last few years, applications of quantum 
dots have become increasingly popular among 
analytical chemists. Quantum dots are now 
commercially available for a variety of applica-
tions, and many examples of their uses can be 
found in the literature. Briefly describe what 
quantum dots are and describe some of their 
applications.
3.12:  Nanotechnology: hype or reality? Write one 
page.
TABLE 3.12 Nanowire Chemical Sensor Applications
Metal Oxide
Target Species
Salient Features
V2O5 nanofibers
1-Butylamine, toluene, propanol
Extremely high sensitivity was 
measured for 1-butylamine (below 30 
ppb) and moderate sensitivity for 
ammonia. In contrast, only very little 
sensitivity was observed for toluene 
and 1-propanol vapors.142
SnO2 nanobelts
CO, NO2, ethanol
Sensitivity at the level of a few parts 
per billion.143
In2O3 nanowires
NH3, NO2
The response times have been 
determined to be 5 s for 100-ppm NO2 
and 10 s for 1% NH3, and the lowest 
detectable concentrations are 0.5 
ppm for NO2 and 0.02% for NH3.144
ZnO nanowires
Ethanol
Sensitive to ethanol concentration is in 
the range of 1–100 ppm. Sensitivity 
increases sharply as the temperature 
is raised from 200 to 300°C.145
MoO3 nanorods
Ethanol and CO
The detection limit for ethanol and CO 
is lower than 30 ppm.146
Cd-doped ZnO nanowire
Relative humidity
Cd-doped ZnO nanowires show a clear 
positive temperature coefficient of 
resistance effect, which is quite 
abnormal compared with pure ZnO 
nanowires.147
SnO2
Dimethyl methylphosphonate 
(DMMP)
Sensitive to 53 ppb DMMP; can be 
improved via doping nanobelts with 
catalytic additives.148

[Page 180]
180   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
References
 
1. Hall, J. S. 2005. Nanofuture: What’s next for nanotechnology. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
 
2. Royal Society. 2004. The Royal Society and The Royal 
Academy of Engineering.
 
3. Maasden, S. 2006. The assembled self of nanotechnology: 
the career of self-assembly as a metaphor. EASST Conference. 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
 
4. Rothemund, P. 2006. Folding DNA to create nanoscale 
shapes and patterns. Nature 440:297–302.
 
5. Prigogine, I. 1961. Thermodynamics of irreversible processes. 
New York: Wiley.
 
6. John, K., and M. Bar. 2005. Alternative mechanisms of 
structuring biomembranes: self-assembly versus self-orga-
nization. Phys Rev Lett 95:198101.
 
7. Ball, P. 1997. Made to measure. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
 
8. Jones, R. 2007. Soft machines: Nanotechnology and life. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
 
9. Sellinger, A., P. M. Weiss, A. Nguygen, Y. Lu, R. A. Assink, W. 
Gong, and C. J. Brinker. 1998. Continuous self-assembly 
of organic-inorganic nanocomposite coatings that mimic 
nacre. Nature 394:256–59.
 10. Achilles, T., and G. Von Kiedrowski. 1993. A self-replicating 
system from three starting materials. Agnew Chem Int Ed 
Engl 32:1198–201.
 11. Lipson, H. 2005. Robotics: Self-reproducing machines. 
Nature 435:163–64.
 12. Lehn, J. M. 1988. Supramolecular chemistry: Scope and 
perspectives (Nobel lecture). Agnew Chem Int Ed Engl 
27:89–112.
 13. Lehn, J. M. 1993. Supramolecular chemistry. Nature 
260:1762–63.
 14. Ringsdorf, H., B. Schlarb, and J. Venzmer. 1988. 
Molecular architecture and function of polymeric ori-
ented systems: Models for the study of organization, sur-
face recognition, and dynamics. Agnew Chem Int Ed Engl 
27:113–58.
 15. Whitesides, G. M., J. P. Mathias, and C. T. Seto. 1991. 
Molecular self-assembly and nanochemistry: A chemi-
cal strategy for the synthesis of nanostructures. Science 
254:1312–18.
 16. Whitesides, G. M. 1995. Self-assembling materials. Sci Am 
146–49.
 17. Pederson, C. J. 1988. The discovery of crown ethers. Science 
241:536–40.
 18. Stoddart, J. F., and D. B. Amabilimo. 1995. Interlocked 
and intertwined structures and superstructures. Chem Rev 
95:2725–28.
 19. Willner, I., and S. Rubin. 1996. Control of the structure and 
functions of biomaterials by light. Agnew Chem Int Ed Engl 
35:367–385.
 20. Stoddart, J. F., and S. A. Nepogodiev. 1998. Cyclodextrin-
based catenanes and rotaxanes. Chem Rev 98:1959–76.
 21. Stoddart, J. F., D. S. Hecht, R. J. A. Ramirez, M. Briman, E. 
Artukovic, K. S. Chichak, and G. Gruner. 2006. Bioinspired 
detection of light using a porphyrin-sensitized single-wall 
nanotube field effect transistor. Nano Lett 6:2031–36.
 22. Saha, S., L. E. Johansson, A. H. Flood,  H.-R. Tseng, J. I.  Zink, 
and J. F.  Stoddart. 2005. Powering a supramolecular machine 
with a photoactive molecular triad. Small 1:87–90.
 23. Tomalia, D. A., H. Baker, J. Dewald, M. Hall, G. Kallos, S. 
Martin, J. Roeck, J. Ryder, and P. Smith. 1985. A new class 
of polymers: starburst-dendritic macromolecules. Polym J 
17:117–32.
 24. Newkome, G. R., Z. Yao, H. Baker, and V. K. Gupta. 1985. 
Cascade molecules: A new approach to micelles. J Org 
Chem 50:2003–04.
 25. Newkome, G. R., C. N. Moorefield, and F. Vögtle. 1996. 
Dentric molecules: Concepts, syntheses, perspectives. Weinheim, 
Germany: VCH.
 26. Fréchet, J. M. J., and Donald A. Tomalia. 2001. Dendrimers 
and other dendritic polymers. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-
VCH.
 27. Grayson, S. M., and J. M. J. Fréchet. 2001. Convergent den-
drons and dendrimers: From synthesis to applications. 
Chem Rev 101:3819–68.
 28. Zeng, F., and S. C. Zimmerman. 1997. Dendrimers in 
supramolecular chemistry: From molecular recognition to 
self-assembly. Chem Rev 97:1681–712.
 29. Zimmerman, S. C., F. W. Zeng, D. E. Reichert, and S. V. 
Kolotuchin. 1996. Self-assembling dendrimers. Science 
271:1095–98.
 30. Ward, M. D. 2000. Supramolecular coordination chemis-
try. R Soc Chem Annu Rep A 96:345–85.
 31. Denti, S., S. Campagna, S. Serroni, M. Ciano, and V. Balzani. 
1992. Decanuclear homo- and heterometallic polypyridine 
complexes. Synthesis, absorption spectra, luminescence, 
electrochemical oxidation, intercomponent energy trans-
fer. J Am Chem Soc 114:2944–50.
 32. Balzani, V., A. Juris, M. Venturi, S. Campagna, and S. 
Serroni. 1996. Luminescent and redox-active polynuclear 
transition-metal complexes. Chem Rev 96:759–833.
 33. Percec, V., W. D. Cho, P. E. Mosier, G. Ungar, and D. J. P. 
Yeardley. 1998. Structural analysis of cylindrical and spher-
ical supramolecular dendrimers quantifies the concept of 
monodendritic shape control by generation number. J Am 
Chem Soc 120:11061–70.
 34. Hudson, S. D., H.-T. Jung, V. Percec, W.-D. Cho, G. 
Johansson, G. Ungar, and V. S. K. Balagurusamy. 1997. 
Direct visualization of individual cylindrical and spherical 
supramolecular dendrimers. Science 278:449–52.
 35. Enomoto, M., A. Kishimura, and T. Aida. 2001. Coordination 
metallacycles of an achiral dendron self-assemble via 
metal-metal interaction to form luminescent superhelical 
fibers. J Am Chem Soc 123:5608–09.
 36. Fréchet, J. M. J. 2002. Supramolecular chemistry and self-
assembly special feature dendrimers and supramolecular 
chemistry. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99(8):4782–87.
 37. Cagin, T., G. Wang, R. Martin, and W. A. Goddard, III. 
1999. Molecular modeling of dendrimers for nanoscale 
applications. Seventh Foresight Conference on Molecular 
Nanotechnology. Santa Clara, CA.
 38. Tully, D. C., K. Wilder, J. M. J. Fréchet, A. R. Trimble, and 
C. F. Quate. 1999. Dendrimer-based self assembled mono-
layers as resists for scanning probe lithography. Adv Mater 
11:314–18.
 39. Hawker, C. J., K. L. Wooley, and J. M. J. Fréchet. 1993. 
Unimolecular 
micelles 
and 
globular 
amphiphiles: 
Dendritic macromolecules as novel recyclable solubiliza-
tion agents. J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1:1287–97.
 40. Kono, K., M. Liu, and J. M. J. Fréchet. 1999. Design of den-
dritic macromolecules containing folate or methotrexate 
residues. Bioconjugate Chem 10:1115–21.

[Page 181]
Nanotechnology   181
 41. Wells, M., and R. M. Crooks. 1996. Interactions between 
organized, surface-confined monolayers and vapor-
phase probe molecules. 10. Preparation and properties of 
chemically sensitive dendrimer surfaces. J Am Chem Soc 
118:3988–89.
 42. Crooks, R. M., and A. J. Ricco. 1998. New organic materi-
als suitable for use in chemical sensor arrays. Acc Chem Res 
31:219–27.
 43. Yoon, H. C., M. Y. Hong, and H. S. Kim. 2000. Affinity bio-
sensor for avidin using a double-functionalized dendrimer 
monolayer on gold electrode. Anal Biochem 282:121–28.
 44. Yoon, H. C., M. Y. Hong, and H. S. Kim. 2001. Reversible 
association/dissociation reaction of avidin on the den-
drimer monolayer functionalized with a biotin-analog for a 
reagentless affinity-sensing surface. Langmuir 17:1234–39.
 45. Tully, D. C., A. R. Trimble, J. M. J. Fréchet, K. Wilder, and 
C. F. Quate. 1999. Synthesis and preparation of ionically 
bound dendrimer monolayers and application towards 
scanning probe lithography. Chem Mater 11:2892–98.
 46. Drexler, K. E. 1981. Molecular engineering: An approach 
to the development of general capabilities for molecular 
manipulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 78:5275–78.
 47. Drexler, K. E. 1986. Engines of creation: The coming era of 
nanotechnology. New York: Doubleday.
 48. Smalley, R. E. 2001. Of chemistry, love and nanobots. Sci 
Am 285:76–77.
 49. Drexler, K. E., D. Forrest, R. A. Freitas, J. S. Hall, N. Jacobstein, 
T. McKendree, R. Merkle, and C. Peterson. 2001. On physics, 
fundamentals, and nanorobots: a rebuttal to Smalley’s assertion 
that self-replicating mechanical nanorobots are simply not pos-
sible. Palo Alto, CA: Institute for Molecular Manufacturing.
 50. Ho, W., and H. Lee. 1999. Single bond formation and char-
acterization with a scanning tunneling microscope. Science 
286:1719–22.
 51. Klabunde, K. J. 2001. Nanoscale materials in chemistry. New 
York: Wiley-Interscience.
 52. Asheghi, M., Y. S. Ju, and K. E. Goodson. 1997. Thermal 
conductivity of SOI device layers. Proceed ings of the IEEE 
International SOI conference, Tenaya Lodge at Yosemite. Fish 
Camp, CA.
 53. Dresselhaus, M. S., X. Sun, and Y. Lin. 2000. Theoretical 
investigation of thermoelectric transport properties of 
cylindrical bi nanowires. Phys Rev B 62:4610–23.
 54. Yang, P., A. I. Hochbaum, R. Chen, R. D. Delgado, W. 
Liang, E. C. Garnett, M. Najarian, and A. Majumdar. 2008. 
Rough silicon nanowires as high performance thermoelec-
tric materials. Nature 451:163–67.
 55. Heath, J. R., A. Boukai, Y. Bunimovich, J. Tahir-Kheli, J. Yu, 
and W. A. Goddard. 2008. Silicon nano wires as efficient 
thermoelectric materials. Nature 451:168–71.
 56. Arakawa, Y., and H. Sakaki. 1982. Multidimensional quan-
tum well laser and temperature dependence of its thresh-
old current. Appl Phys Lett 40:939.
 57. Barthlott, W., and C. Neinhuis. 1997. The purity of sacred 
lotus or escape from contamination in biological surfaces. 
Planta 202:1–8.
 58. Guo, Z., F. Zhou, J. Hao, and W. Liu. 2005. Stable bio-
mimetic super-hydrophobic engineering materials. J Am 
Chem Soc 127:15670–15671.
 59. Herzer, G. 1997. Nanocrystalline soft magnetic alloys. 
Handbook of magnetic materials, ed. K. H. J. Buschow, 
417–61. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.
 60. Herzer, G., and H. Warlimont. 1992. Nanostruct Mater 1:292.
 61. Jacak, L. 2000. Semiconductor quantum dots: Towards 
a new generation of semiconductor devices. Eur J Phys 
21:487–97.
 62. Hashizume, T., R. J. Hamers, J. E. Demuth, and K. Markert. 
1990. Initial stage deposition of Ag on the Si(001)-(2X1) 
surface studied by STM/STS. J Vac Sci Tech A 8:249.
 63. Blackman, J. A., and A. Wilding. 1991. Scaling theory of 
island growth in thin films. Europhys Lett 16:115–20.
 64. Franchi, S., G. Trevisi, L. Seravalli, and P. Frigeri. 2003. 
Quantum dot nanostructures and molecular beam epi-
taxy. progress in crystal growth and characterization of 
materials. Progress in Crystal Growth and Characterization of 
Materials 47:166.
 65. Fukui, T. E. A. 1991. GaAs tetrahedral quantum dot struc-
tures fabricated using selective area metalorganic chemical 
vapor deposition. Appl Phys Lett 58:2018–20.
 66. Murray, C. B., C. R. Kagan, and M. G. Bawendi. 1995. Self-
organization of CdSe nanocrystallites into three-dimen-
sional quantum dot superlattices. Science 270:1335–38.
 67. Murray, C. B., D. J. Norris, and M. G. Bawendi. 1993. 
Synthesis and characterization of nearly monodisperse 
CdE (E=S, Se, Te) semiconductor nanocrystallites. J Am 
Chem Soc 115:8706–15.
 68. Murray, C. B., C. R. Kagan, and M. G. Bawendi. 2000. 
Synthesis and characterization of monodisperse nanocrys-
tals and close-packed nanocrystal assemblies. Annu Rev 
Mater 30:545–610.
 69. Gedanken, A. 2004. Using sonochemistry for the fabrica-
tion of nanomaterials. Ultrason Sonochem 11(2):47–55.
 70. Gogate, P. R. 2008. Cavitational reactors for process inten-
sification of chemical processing applications: A critical 
review. Chem Eng Process 47(4):515–27.
 71. Arturo Lopez-Quintela, M. 2003. Synthesis of nanomateri-
als in microemulsions: Formation mechanisms and growth 
control. Curr Opin Coll Int Sci 8:137–44.
 72. Eckert, C. A., B. L. Knutson, and P. G. Debenedetti. 1996. 
Supercritical fluids as solvents for chemical and materials 
processing. Nature 383:313.
 73. Reverchon, E., and R. Adami. 2006. Nanomaterials and 
supercritical fluids. J Supercrit Fluids 37:1.
 74. Liu, J. C., Y. Ikushima, and Z. Shervani. 2003.  Environ-
mentally benign preparation of metal nano-particles by 
using water-in-CO2 microemulsions technology. Curr Opin 
Solid State Mater 7:255.
 75. Eastoe, J., A. Dupont, and D. C. Steytler. 2003. Fluorinated 
surfactants in supercritical CO2. Curr Opin Coll Int Sci 
8:267.
 76. Smalley, R. E., D. T. Colbert, A. Thess, P. Nikolaev, and T. 
Guo. 1995. Catalytic growth of single-walled nanotubes by 
laser vaporization. Chem Phys Lett 243:49–54.
 77. Jacak, L., A. Wojs, and P. Hawrylak. 1998. Quantum dots. 
Berlin: Springer Verlag.
 78. Green, M., and P. O’Brien. 1999. Recent advances in the 
preparation of semiconductors as isolated nanomet-
ric particles: New routes to quantum dots. Chem Comm 
22:2235–41.
 79. Castro Neto, A. H., and E. A. Kim. 2008. Graphene as an 
electronic membrane. Europhys Lett 84:57 007.
 80. Kroto, H. W., R. E. Smalley, R. F. Curl, J. R. Heath, and 
S. C. O’Brien. 1985. C60: Buckminsterfullerene. Nature 
318:162–63.
 81. Iijima, S. 1991. Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon. 
Nature 354:56–58.

[Page 182]
182   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 82. Novoselov, K. S., A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. 
Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov. 
2004. Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films. 
Science 306:666–69.
 83. Mintmire, J. W., B. I. Dunlap, and C. T. White. 1992. Are 
fullerene tubules metallic? Phys Rev Lett 68:631–34.
 84. Overney, G., W. Zhong, and D. Tomanek. 1993. Structural 
rigidity and low frequency vibrational modes of long car-
bon tubules. Zeitschrift für Physik D Atoms, Molecules and 
Clusters 27:93–96.
 85. Iijima, S., and T. Ichihashi. 1993. Single-shell carbon nano-
tubes of 1-nm diameter. Nature 363:603–05.
 86. Rinzler, A. G., J. H. Hafner, P. Nikolaev, P. Nordlander, D. T. 
Colbert, R. E. Smalley, L. Lou, S. G. Kim, and D. Tománek. 
1995. Unraveling nanotubes: Field emission from an 
atomic wire. Science 269:1550–53.
 87. Dillon, A. C., K. M. Jones, T. A. Bekkedahl, C. H. Kiang, D. 
S. Bethune, and M. J. Heben. 1997. Storage of hydrogen 
in single-walled carbon nanotubes. Nature 386: 377–79.
 88. Dekker, C., S. J. Tans, and A. R. M. Verschueren. 1998. 
Room-temperature transistor based on a single carbon 
nanotube. Nature 393:49–52.
 89. Smith, B. W., M. Monthioux, and D. E. Luzzi. 1998. 
Encapsulated C60 in carbon nanotubes. Nature 396:323–24.
 90. Smith, B. W., D. E. Luzzi, M. Monthioux, B. Burteaux, A. Claye, 
and J. E. Fischer. 1999. Abundance of encapsulated C60 in 
single-wall carbon nanotubes. Chem Phys Lett 310:21–24.
 91. Tománek, D., S. Berber, and Y. Kwon. 2000. Unusually high 
thermal conductivity of carbon nanotubes. Phys Rev Lett 
84:4613–16.
 92. Collins, P. G., M. S. Arnold, and P. Avouris. 2001. 
Engineering carbon nanotubes and nanotube circuits using 
electrical breakdown. Science 292:706–09.
 93. Kociak, M., A. Y. Kasumov, S. Guéron, B. Reulet, I. I. Khodos, 
Y. B. Gorbatov, V. T. Volkov, L. Vaccarini, and H. Bouchiat. 
2001. Superconductivity in ropes of single-walled carbon 
nanotubes. Phys Rev Lett 86:2416–19.
 94. Schedin, F., A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, 
M. I. Katsnelson, and K. S. Novoselov. 2007. Detection of 
individual gas molecules adsorbed on graphene. Nat Mater 
6:183–91.
 95. Saito, Y. 1994. Synthesis and characterization of carbon 
nanocapsules encaging metal and carbide crystallites. San 
Francisco: Fullerenes.
 96. Kratschmer, W., L. D. Lamb, K. Fostiropoulos, and D. R. 
Huffman. 1990. Solid C60: A new form of carbon. Nature 
347:354.
 97. Hummelen, J. C., M. Prato, and F. Wudl. 1995. There is a 
hole in my Bucky. J Am Chem Soc 117:7003.
 98. Nemecek, S. 1995. A tight fit. Sci Am 34–36.
 99. Akasaka, T., F. Wudl, and S. Nagase. 2010. Chemistry of 
Nanocarbons. Chichester: Wiley.
 100. Holmes, B. 2004. Buckyballs cause brain damage in fish. 
New Scientist, March 29. http://www.newscientist.com/
news/news.jsp?id=ns99994825.
 101. Bacon, R. 1960. Growth, structure, and properties of graph-
ite whiskers. J Appl Phys 31:283–90.
 102. Bethune, D. S., C. H. Klang, M. S. D. Vries, G. Gorman, 
R. Savoy, J. Vazquez, and R. Beyers. 1993. Cobalt-catalysed 
growth of carbon nanotubes with single-atomic-layer walls. 
Nature 363:605–07.
 103. Seraphin, S. 1995. Single-walled tubes and encapsula-
tion of nanocrystals into carbon clusters. Electrochem Soc 
142:290–97.
 104. Endo, M., K. Takeuchi, S. Igarashi, K. Kobori, M. Shiraishi, 
and H. W. Kroto. 1993. The production and structure of 
pyrolytic carbon nanotubes (PCNTs). J Phys Chem Solids 
54:1841–48.
 105. Dai, H., Y. Li, D. Mann, M. Rolandi, W. Kim, A. Ural, S. 
Hung, A. Javey, J. Cao, D. Wang, E. Yenilmez, Q. Wang, J. F. 
Gibbons, and Y. Nishi. 2004. Preferential growth of semi-
conducting single-walled carbon nanotubes by a plasma 
enhanced CVD method. Nano Lett 4:317–21.
 106. Dai, H., J. Kong, H. T. Soh, A. M. Cassell, and C. F. 
Quate. 1998. Synthesis of individual single-walled car-
bon nanotubes on patterned silicon wafers. Nature 395: 
878–81.
 107. Hoogenraad, M. S. 1995. Growth and utilization of car-
bon fibrils. PhD thesis, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
 108. Huang, S., M. Woodson, R. E. Smalley, and J. Liu. 2004. 
Growth mechanism of oriented long single walled carbon 
nanotubes using “fast-heating” chemical vapor deposition 
process. Nano Lett 4:1025–28.
 109. Wang, X., Q. Li, J. Xie, Z. Jin, J. Wang, Y. Li, K. Jiang, and 
S. Fan. 2009. Fabrication of ultralong and electrically uni-
form single-walled carbon nanotubes on clean substrates. 
Nano Lett 9(9):3137–41.
 110. Wagner, R. S. 1970. VLS mechanisms of crystal growth. In 
Whisker technology, ed. A. P. Levitt, 47–119. New York: Wiley.
 111. Ando, Y., X. Zhao, T. Sugai, and M. Kumar. 2004. Growing 
carbon nanotubes. Materials Today 7:22–29.
 112. McEuen, P. L., A. Zettl, J. Hone, M. Bockrath, A. G. Rinzler, 
and R. E. Smalley. 2000. Chemical doping of individual 
semiconducting carbon-nanotube ropes. Phys Rev B 61, 
R10606–08.
 113. Ebbesen, T. W., and P. M. Ajayan. 1992. Large-scale synthe-
sis of carbon nanotubes. Nature 358:220.
 114. Endo, M., K. Takeuchi, S. Igarashi, K. Kobori, M. Shiraishi, 
and H. W. Kroto. 1993. The production and structure of 
pyrolytic carbon nanotubes (PCNTs). J Phys Chem Solids 
54:1841–48.
 115. Avouris, P., T. Hertel, R. Martel, T. Schmidt, and H. R. Shea. 
1998. Single- and multi-wall carbon nanotube field-effect 
transistors. Appl Phys Lett 73:2447–49.
 116. Lieber, C. M., P. Yang, M. Ouyang, and J. Hu. 1999. 
Controlled growth and electrical properties of heterojunc-
tions of carbon nanotubes and silicon nanowires. Nature 
399:48–51.
 117. Dai, H., A. Ural, Y. Li, A. Javey, and Q. Wang. 2002. Carbon 
nanotube transistor arrays for multistage complementary 
logic and ring oscillators. Nano Lett 2:929–32.
 118. Govyadinov, A., P. Mardilovich, and D. Routkevitch. 
2000. Field emission cathode from aligned arrays of 
carbon nanotubes. Electrochemical Society Abstracts 553: 
2000–28.
 119. Hirsch, A. 1994. The chemistry of fullerenes. Stuttgart, 
Germany: George Thieme Verlag.
 120. Dresselhaus, M. S., G. Dresselhaus, and P. Avouris. 2000. 
Carbon nanotubes. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
 121. Special section: Carbon nanotubes. 2000. Phys World 
13:29–53.
 122. Yakobson, B. I., C. J. Brabec, and J. Bernholc. 1996. 
Nanomechanics of carbon tubes: Instabilities beyond lin-
ear response, Phys Rev Lett 76:2511–14.
 123. Peng, J., J. Wu, K. C. Hwang, J. Song, and Y. Huang. 2008. 
Can a single-wall carbon nanotube be modeled as a thin 
shell? J Mech Phys Solids 56(6):2213–24.

[Page 183]
Nanotechnology   183
 124. Zettl, A., P. G. Collins, K. Bradley, and M. Ishigami. 2000. 
Extreme oxygen sensitivity of electronic properties of car-
bon nanotubes. Science 287:1801–04.
 125. Rao, A. M., N. Gothard, K. McGuire, S. Chopra, and A. 
Pham. 2003. Selective gas detection using a carbon nano-
tube sensor. Appl Phys Lett 83:2280–82.
 126. Hara, M., G. Zhou, and J. Suehiro. 2003. Fabrication of a 
carbon nanotube-based gas sensor using dielectrophoresis 
and its application for ammonia detection by impedance 
spectroscopy. J Phys D Appl Phys 36, L109–14.
 127. Kenny, J. M., L. Valentini, V. Bavastrello, E. Stura, I. 
Amentano, and C. Nicolini. 2004. Sensors for inorganic 
vapor detection based on carbon nanotubes and poly(o-
anisidine) nanocomposite material. Chem Phys Lett 
383:617–22.
 128. Grimes, C. A., K. G. Ong, and K. Zeng. 2002. A wire-
less, passive carbon nanotube-based gas sensor. Sensors J 
2:82–88.
 129. Strano, M. S., D. A. Heller, S. Baik, and P. W. Barone. 2005. 
Near-infrared optical sensors based on single-walled car-
bon nanotubes. Nat Mater 4:86–92.
 130. Compton, R. G., B. Ljuki, C. E. Banks, C. Salter, and A. 
Crossley. 2006. Electrochemically polymerised composites 
of multi-walled carbon nanotubes and poly(vinylferrocene) 
and their use as modified electrodes: Application to glu-
cose sensing. Analyst 131:670–77.
 131. Lison, D., J. Mullera, F. Huauxa, N. Moreaub, P. Missona, J. 
Heiliera, M. Delosc, M. Arrasa, A. Fonsecab, and J. B. Nagyb. 
2005. Respiratory toxicity of multi-wall carbon nanotubes. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 207:221–31.
 132. Wallace, P. R. 1947. The band theory of graphite. Phys Rev 
71:622–34.
 133. Wagner, H., and N. D. Mermin. 1966. Absence of ferro-
magnetism or antiferromagnetism in one- or two-dimen-
sional isotropic Heisenberg models. Phys Rev Lett 17: 
1133–36.
 134. Novoselov, K. S., A. K. Geim, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. 
Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, and S. V. Morozov. 2005. Two-
dimensional atomic crystals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
105:10451–53.
 135. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2010/
press.html
 136. Geim, A. K., and A. H. MacDonald. 2007. Graphene: 
Exploring carbon flatland. Phys Today 60:35–41.
 137. Novoselov, K. S., A. K. Geim, J. C. Meyer, M. I. Katsnelson, 
T. J. Booth, and S. Roth. 2007. The structure of suspended 
graphene sheets. Nature 446:60–63.
 138. Geim, A. K., and K. S. Novoselov. 2007. The rise of gra-
phene. Nat Mater 6:183–91.
 139. Novoselov, K. S., A. K. Geim, A. Das, S. Pisana, B. 
Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. Waghmare, H. 
R. Krishnamurthy, A. C. Ferrari, and A. K. Sood. 2008. 
Monitoring dopants by raman scattering in an electro-
chemically top-gated graphene transistor. Nat Nanotechnol 
3:210–15.
 140. Wagner, R. S., and W. C. Ellis. 1964. Vapor-liquid-
solid mechanism of single crystal growth. Appl Phys Lett 
4:89–90.
 141. Saif Islam, M., S. Sharma, T. I. Kamins, and R. S. Williams. 
2004. Ultrahigh-density silicon nanobridges formed 
between two vertical silicon surfaces. Nanotechnology 
15:L5–L8.
 142. Raible, I., M. Burghard, U. Schlecht, A. Yasuda, and T. 
Vossmeyer. 2005. V2O5 nanofibres: Novel gas sensors with 
extremely high sensitivity and selectivity to amines. Sensors 
Actuators B Chem 106:730–35.
 143. Comini, E., G. Faglia, G. Sberveglieri, Z. Pan, and Z. 
L. Wang. 2002. Stable and highly sensitive gas sensors 
based on semiconducting oxide nanobelts. Appl Phys Lett 
81:1869–71.
 144. Li, C., D. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Han, T. Tang, J. Han, and C. 
Zhou. 2003. In2O3 nanowires as chemical sensors. Appl 
Phys Lett 82:1613–15.
 145. Wan, Q., Q. H. Li, Y. J. Chen, T. H. Wang, X. L. He, J. P. 
Li, and C. L. Lin. 2004. Fabrication and ethanol sensing 
characteristics of ZnO nanowire gas sensors. Appl Phys Lett 
84:3654–56.
 146. Comini, E., L. Yubao, Y. Brando, and G. Sberveglieri. 2005. 
Gas sensing properties of MoO3 nanorods to CO and 
CH3OH. Chem Phys Lett 407:368–71.
 147. Wan, Q., Q. H. Li, Y. J. Chen, T. H. Wang, X. L. He, X. G. 
Gao, and J. P. Li. 2004. Positive temperature coefficient 
resistance and humidity sensing properties of Cd-doped 
ZnO nanowires. Appl Phys Lett 84:3085–87.
 148. Yu, C., Q. Hao, S. Saha, L. Shi, X. Kong, and Z. L. Wang. 
2005. Integration of metal oxide nanobelts with microsys-
tems for nerve agent detection. Appl Phys Lett 86:063101.

[Page 184]
[empty page]

[Page 185]
185
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Packaging
Level 1 Packaging (L1) and Level 2 
Packaging (L2)
Electrical Connection Methods
Bonding of Layers in MEMS
Examples of MEMS Packages
Next-Generation Cap-on-Chip 
Cavity Sealing
Assembly and Self-Assembly
Self-Assembly Examples
Questions
References
4
Packaging, Assembly, 
and Self-Assembly
Once the components were expensive and the wires cheap.
Now the components are cheap and the wires expensive.
Len Schaper
Arkansas University
The aboriginal people of Australia believed that the world began only 
when their Ancestor sang it into existence.
Bruce Chatwin
The Songlines
In the end the supremacy of organic biomaterials is tied in with the ques-
tion of scale. Organic machinery can be made much smaller. Such clever 
The quad flat pack (QFP) is a package for chips with 100 and more leads.
Chip
Glue
Gold wire
Over molding
Leadframe
Programmable self-assembly: constructing global shapes using biologically 
inspired local interactions and origami mathematics. (Courtesy of Radhika 
Nagpal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)

[Page 186]
186   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
things become possible as sockets, which can rec-
ognize, hold and manipulate other molecules. In 
any competition to do with molecular control the 
system with the smallest fingers will win.
Graham Cairns-Smith
1985
What is the Heart, but a Spring; and the Nerves, 
but so many Springs; and the Joynts, but so many 
Wheeles, given motion to the whole Body, such as 
was intended by the Artificer.
Thomas Hobbes
Introduction
This chapter addresses packaging, assembly, and 
self-assembly. Under packaging of micromachines, 
we consider issues that differ the most from inte-
grated circuit (IC) packaging; with micromachines 
one faces the paradox of needing hermetic isolation 
from the environment that must be sensed. This has 
proven to be a challenge for mechanical sensors, 
such as for pressure and, to a lesser extent, for accel-
erometers, but it is the Achilles’ heel of chemical and 
biological sensors. We distinguish between wafer-
level (batch) packaging steps and serial packaging 
processes and learn that micromachining itself plays 
an important role in transforming costly serial pack-
aging steps into less costly, wafer-level processes.
During packaging, miniature components are put 
together into a housing structure in a microassem-
bly step. This task becomes more cumbersome with 
smaller building blocks and will increasingly neces-
sitate the use of parallel self-assembly techniques. 
Self-assembly is imperative when components are 
nanoscale.
Packaging
Introduction
In electronic device and mechanical micromachine 
fabrication, processes can be divided into three 
major groups.
 
1. First, fabrication with additive and subtractive 
processes, as described in Volume II. These also 
are called front-end processes.
 
2. Packaging, involving processes such as bond-
ing, wafer scribing, lead attachment, and 
encapsulation in a protective body.
 
3. Testing, including package leak tests, electrical 
integrity, and sensor functionality. 
The last two process groups incorporate the most 
costly steps and are called back-end processes. In the 
case of a micromachine, which often interfaces 
with a hostile environment and where testing might 
involve chemical and/or mechanical parameters, 
packaging and testing are yet more difficult and 
expensive than in the case of ICs. More than 70% 
of the sensor cost may be determined by its pack-
age, and the physical size of a micromachined sen-
sor often is dwarfed by the size of its package. Most 
conventional packaging approaches are space inef-
ficient, with volumetric efficiencies, even in the case 
of ICs, often less than 1%.1
Contrasting the inefficiency of human packag-
ing methods with nature’s excellence at packaging 
is striking. As an example, consider how DNA is 
packed in the nucleus of a cell. Biomolecules in a 
solution coil up with a gyration radius rg given by 
the de Gennes formula, r = (Lb)1/2, where L is the 
molecule’s contour length and b is determined by 
the degree to which the molecule resists thermal 
motion.2 The total length of all DNA in a human 
cell is 2 m, which is a million times the cell nucleus 
diameter. For b of DNA, a value of 100 nm has been 
determined. The resulting radius of the 2-m DNA 
molecule is calculated at 0.45 mm, 1000 times the 
nucleus diameter. How does nature pack all this into 
the nucleus of a cell? The answer is efficient packag-
ing. Like a thread on a spool, DNA is wound around 
a set of nuclear proteins—the histones. The molecule 
is wound twice around one “spool” and then passes 
onto the next, and so on. A necklace of histones 
is neatly packed into a chromosome. This packag-
ing scenario is illustrated in Figure 4.1. This way, a 
0.45-mm polymer coil is squeezed into a nucleus of 
less than a micrometer.3
Packaging issues of ICs and mechanical micro-
machines are somewhat similar, whereas packaging 
of devices that are used in fluids (e.g., level sensor) 
or that contain liquids (e.g., some electrochemical 
sensors) are totally different. The latter require very 

[Page 187]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   187
different partitioning solutions and often must face 
biocompatibility issues as well.
Packaging in ICs and MEMS
Packaging is an essential bridge between compo-
nents and their environment. In ICs, packaging pro-
vides at least four functions:
 
1. Signal redistribution
 
2. Mechanical support
 
3. Power distribution
 
4. Thermal management
In chemical and biological MEMS, the package might 
have several additional functions, for example:
 
1. Biocompatibility for in vivo devices
 
2. Fluidic manifold to guide liquids to different 
parts of the MEMS structure
 
3. Window/opening for analyte to interact with 
the chemical sensitive part of the MEMS 
structure
The signal redistribution is easy to understand: 
the electrical contacts of an IC are too closely spaced 
to accommodate the interconnection capacity of a 
traditional printed wiring board (PWB). Packaging 
redistributes contacts over a larger, more manage-
able surface—it fans out the electrical path. The 
mechanical support provides rigidity, stress release, 
and protection from the environment (e.g., against 
electromagnetic interference). Power distribution 
is similar to signal distribution except that power 
delivery systems are more robust than signal deliv-
ery systems, and the thermal management function 
is there to provide adequate thermal transport to 
sustain operation for the product lifetime.1
The various levels of packaging and their 
interconnections in the IC industry that we adapt 
here also for micromachines are summarized in 
Table 4.11 and illustrated in Figure 4.2a.4,5 The lowest 
level in the IC electronics (L0 in the hierarchy) is 
single IC features interconnected on a single die with 
IC metallization lines into a level 1 IC or discrete 
component. Single-chip packages and multichip 
modules are at level 2. Levels 3 and 4 are the PWB 
(L3) and chassis or box (L4), respectively. Level 5 
is the system itself. The hierarchy for packaging a 
micromachine such as a pressure sensor is illustrated 
in Figure 4.2b and 4.2c. For more information on 
advanced packaging schemes in ICs, we refer to the 
excellent reviews by Lyke,1 Jensen,4 and Lau.6 
Packages for microelectronic systems have evolved 
over five decades to accommodate devices that 
largely have no need to interact with the environ-
ment. Packages for micromachines have all the same 
functions as listed for ICs but are considerably more 
complex, as they serve to protect from the environ-
ment while, somewhat in contradiction, enabling 
interaction with that environment so as to measure 
or affect the desired physical or chemical parameters. 
With the advent of integrated sensors, the protection 
problem became more complicated. Silicon circuitry 
is sensitive to temperature, moisture, magnetic field, 
2 nm
Short region of
DNA double helix
“Beads-on-a-string”
form of chromatin
Section of
chromosome in an
extended form
Condensed section
of metaphase
chromosome
Entire
metaphase
chromosome
11 nm
30 nm
300 nm
700 nm
1400 nm
30-nm chromatin
ﬁber of
packed nucleosomes
FIGURE 4.1 DNA is packaged very compactly in the cell. In 
eukaryotic cells, it is assembled into chromosomes, which 
have a hierarchical structure. The double-stranded DNA 
is wound twice around disc-like protein “beads” made 
from eight separate protein units called histones. The 
DNA-histone assembly is a nucleosome. The DNA chain, 
with nucleosomes all along its length, is then wound into 
a helix, which is itself packaged into a compact bundle in 
the chromosome. 

[Page 188]
188   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
electromagnetic interference, and light, to name just 
a few items. The package must protect the onboard 
circuitry while simultaneously exposing the sensor 
to the effect it measures. For example, in an in vivo 
integrated sensor, a true hermetic seal is necessary 
to protect the circuitry from the effects of blood, 
and the housing needs to be biocompatible as well. 
The housing also might be equipped with a fluidic 
manifold, for example, to guide the analyte to the 
sensor surface. Sometimes the circuit itself can be 
used to reduce packaging concerns, for example, to 
transmit data about effects which cannot be screened 
out, as in the removal of a temperature effect from 
a pressure signal. But more frequently, integration 
of electronics with MEMS, especially when deal-
ing with measuring chemical or biological signals, 
TABLE 4.1 Connection between Packaging Elements at Various Levels in the Hierarchy for ICs and Micromachines
Level 
Element
Interconnected by
Level 0
Transistor within IC or resonator in MEMS
IC metallization
Level 1
ICs or discrete components such as a MEMS silicon/glass 
pressure sensor 
Package leadframes (single-chip) or 
multichip module interconnection system 
Level 2
Single- and multichip IC packages or a pressure sensor in a 
TO header in MEMS
Printed wiring boards
Level 3
Printed wiring boards
Connectors/backplanes (busses)
Level 4
Chassis or box
Connectors/cable harnesses
Level 5
System itself, e.g., a computer (IC-based) or a gas alarm 
system (MEMS-based) 
Source: Adapted from Lyke, J. C. 1995. In Microengineering technologies for space systems, ed. H. Helvajian, 131–80. El Segundo, 
CA: Aerospace Corporation.1
Chip
Chip
carrier
Card
Cable
Board
(a)
Al
P-well
Glass
Package
Pressure
inlet
hole
Polysilicon gate
Diaphragm
R1
R2
RG(T)
N-type
silicon
Anodic
bonding
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 4.2 The packaging hierarchy in the integrated circuit (IC) world and in micromachining. (a) A large electronic 
unit with ICs. Transistors on the IC are level L0. The IC itself is level L1. The chip carrier is level L2, and the printed wiring 
board (card) is level L3. The chassis (or box) is level L4. Level 5 (L5), not shown, is the system itself, e.g., a computer. (From 
Jensen, J. R. 1989. In Microelectronics processing, ed. D. W. Hess and K. F. Jensen, 441–504. Washington, DC: American 
Chemical Society. With permission.4) (b) and (c) A micromachined unit: piezoresistive pressure sensor from NEC. L0, 
diaphragm on die; L1, Si/glass piece; L2, sensor mounted in TO header.

[Page 189]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   189
causes more problems than it solves. A package must 
also provide communication links, remove heat, and 
enable handling and testing. The material used must 
be one that will afford physical protection against 
normal process handling during and after assembly, 
testing, and prescribed mechanical shock. Chemical 
protection is also required during assembly and in 
practical usage. For example, during the process of 
installing dice on substrates, the package undergoes 
a series of cleanings and, under normal usage, the 
package may be exposed to oxygen, moisture, oil, 
gasoline, and salt water. The package must also be 
capable of providing an interior environment com-
patible with device performance and reliability; for 
example, a high-Q* resonator might need a good 
vacuum. Physical sensors usually have a physical 
barrier layer or fluid; for example, a pressure trans-
mission fluid interposed between the sensing Si ele-
ments and the environment outside, making the 
encapsulation problem less severe.
The sensor community is still searching for the 
perfect way to protect sensors from their environ-
ment while at the same time probing that environ-
ment. The packaging problem is the least severe for a 
physical sensor such as an accelerometer, which can 
be sealed and protected from all chemical environ-
ment effects while probing the inertial effects it mea-
sures. The problem is most severe for chemical and 
biological sensors, which must be exposed directly 
to an unfriendly world. Generalizing, chemical 
and biological sensors have been orders of magni-
tude more difficult to commercialize than physi-
cal sensors, in no small part because of packaging 
problems. In the latter case, problems are especially 
severe with electronic components and sensors inte-
grated on the same side of a single Si substrate. For 
that reason, chemical and biological sensors are 
better made with hybrid MEMS. In hybrid MEMS, 
* As we will learn in Chapter 8, this volume, there are two different 
common definitions of the Q factor of a resonator (see “Quality 
Factor” in Chapter 8). One is via the energy storage where the Q fac-
tor is given as 2π times the ratio of the stored energy to the energy 
dissipated per oscillation cycle, or equivalently the ratio of the stored 
energy to the energy dissipated per radian of the oscillation. The 
other definition is via the resonance bandwidth in which the Q factor 
is the ratio of the resonance frequency f0 and the full width at half-
maximum (FWHM) bandwidth ∆f of the resonance. Both definitions 
are equivalent only in the limit of weakly damped oscillations, i.e., 
for high Q values.
MEMS and electronics are fabricated in separate 
processes and put together afterward within a com-
mon package. Making a hybrid device or putting the 
electronics on the other side of the wafer often pro-
vides better protection of the electronics from the 
environment. The challenges in packaging chemical 
and biological MEMS are further compounded by 
the fact that these devices usually are less expensive 
than ICs or physical MEMS sensors and that they are 
often disposable.
Front-End and Back-End Processes
During the front-end processing phase, an IC or 
MEMS is created on a silicon substrate (referred to 
as a wafer). During the back-end processing phase, 
the IC chips created during the front-end processing 
phase are encapsulated into packages and thoroughly 
inspected before becoming completed products. The 
front-end and back-end processes are preceded by 
a design phase and by the mask creation in which 
the function of the IC is defined, the electric circuit 
is designed, and a mask for IC manufacturing is 
created on the basis of the design.
In this chapter we are primarily concerned with 
the more expensive, serial back-end processes. The 
back-end process used to start after the last of the 
IC fabrication steps, i.e., to make the interconnec-
tions within an underlying IC (from level 0 to level 
1 in Table 4.1). Unfortunately, things are not that 
simple anymore; lately making internal IC connec-
tions has become so complicated that even within 
that process one talks about front end and back end 
of the line steps. As advanced ICs contain more than 
a 100 million transistors, the importance of internal 
IC connections is steadily increasing. As shown in 
Figure 4.3a, eight metal layers already are quite com-
mon. The old standard for making these metal lines 
was using insulating layers made of silicon dioxide, 
via formation by plasma etching of holes, covering 
the whole surface with tungsten (W), polishing the 
tungsten down to the silicon dioxide, leaving the vias 
filled with tungsten plugs, and finally sputtering an 
aluminum layer and selective etching it to leave the 
connecting Al lines. As we saw in Volume II, Chapter 
8, the more advanced process for constructing inter-
connections in ICs uses the “dual damascene” tech-
nique (see Figure 4.3b). This process, as we glean 

[Page 190]
190   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
from Figure 4.3b, is itself split up in a back-end and 
a front end of the line. In the dual damascene pro-
cess, the last step in the front end of the line is a first 
interconnecting layer made up of poly-Si for the gate 
contacts. The back end of the IC interconnection 
process then starts with an insulating layer, either 
again made of silicon dioxide or from inorganic or 
organic materials with lower dielectric constants 
(so-called low-k materials). Next comes the creation 
of beds for lines and vias in two subsequent pho-
toimaging process steps followed by plasma etching 
of the insulating layer. In a subsequent process step, 
the whole surface is covered with copper, and chem-
ical mechanical polishing (CMP) removes the cop-
per down to the top side of the insulating layer (see 
Figure 4.3b and Volume II, Figure 8.41).
CMP has developed into a very important step in 
the process chain of wafer fabrication (see Volume II, 
Chapter 1, Figure 1.66 for a CMP setup). The CMP 
slurry contains 1) chemistry to modify, e.g., oxidize, 
the top layer, and 2) abrasive particles to remove 
the modified material. CMP serves to planarize 
www. semiconductorblog.com
Metal 8
Metal 7
Via
7
Via 6
Via 5
Sic
Metal 6
Metal 4
Metal 5
Metal 3
Metal 2
Metal 1
Poly Gate
W Contact
AC
EHT = 5.00 kv
2µm
General SEM cross-section of Intel ‘yonah’ die.
SI-14046
Date 24 Mar 2006
4124450
(a)
Protective passivation layer
Back
end
of
line
Front
end
of
line
Upper interconnecting layers, with
SiO2 insulation, Cu columns, and
Cu lines; lines in “dual damascene”
technique or low k material
Lower interconnecting layer(s), with
SiO2 insulation, tungsten columns,
and aluminum lines
Gate-contact made of polysilicon,
(ﬁrst interconnecting layer)
Silicon wafer with transistors,
resistors, capacitors, insulating
trenches, etc.
Exploded view
(b)
FIGURE 4.3 The back-end process usually takes of at the back end of the integrated circuit (IC) line, which makes the 
interconnections within an IC (from level L0 to L1). In the case of very complex interconnecting schemes such as the dual 
damascene, one also talks about back-end and front-end processes with the interconnecting scheme. (a) Eight-metal 
complementary metal-oxide-silicon chip. (b) Dual damascene technique is used to connect upper interconnecting layers 
with lower  connecting layers (back end of line) and transistors on the wafer (front end of line).

[Page 191]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   191
insulating layers, to remove tungsten or copper, to 
define vias and lines, and to back grind the wafer to 
make thin flexible chips.
The resulting flat chip surface now features input/
output (I/O) pads that are of rectangular shape and 
made from the metal of the top layer, i.e., from alu-
minum or copper (in GaAs chips, gold is used for 
contacts). These exposed metal surfaces are slightly 
alloyed to increase hardness and longtime stability. 
The chip surface, except the I/O pads and the dicing 
lines, are covered by a passivation made from silicon 
oxide and silicon nitride. Historically, this passiva-
tion was a crucial step in the development of plastic 
packages. Plastic packaged chips are not as well pro-
tected from humidity as chips in hermetically sealed 
housings.
Testing the outcome of a wafer process depends 
on hundreds of parameters that all have to be 
tightly controlled during production. All materials 
and parameter settings are recorded to allow the 
back tracing of deviations. Processed chips still on 
a wafer are difficult to test, because measurements 
at high frequencies with hundreds of contacts are 
difficult and expensive. Therefore, only a so-called 
static test at low frequencies is performed to do a 
first wafer screening, perhaps in a manual probe sta-
tion with needle tips and a microscope, as shown in 
Figure 4.4.
The packaged chip—with its built-in (shielded) 
fan out of the contacts—is the best location in the 
fabrication chain to do a full testing of the device 
(L2; see below). But before we can mount the chip in 
its package we need to dice it.
Dicing
One of the final steps in front-end processing of an 
IC or three-dimensional (3D) microstructure fab-
ri cation and the first in back-end packaging is 
sawing the finished Si wafer into individual “dice.” 
After the wafer is probed (see above; Figure 4.4), 
it is mounted onto sticky tape and put onto the 
dicing saw (Figure 4.5). A typical saw blade consists 
of a thick hub with a thin rim impregnated with 
diamond or carbide grit. Rotating at a speed of sev-
eral thousand revolutions per minute, the blade 
encounters the Si wafer at a feed rate on the order of 
a centimeter per second, sawing partially or com-
pletely through the wafer. After dicing, the elastic 
plastic sheet can be stretched to distance the chips 
in case the saw kerf went all the way through the 
Si wafer.
Except when cutting a silicon-glass bonded wafer 
combination, standard IC cutting practices regard-
ing surfactants, cleanliness, and blade width/depth 
ratio apply to MEMS wafers as well. Typical kerf 
widths are 50–200 µm, while typical roughness 
along the kerf edge is 10–50 µm. The restrictions of 
mechanical sawing include this roughness, which 
precludes the fabrication of smooth structures along 
the outside edge of the die. In addition, the vibra-
tion inherent in the sawing process makes it difficult 
to securely hold down dice during sawing if these 
dice are less than 0.5 mm on a side. For smaller dice, 
micromachining is necessary for edge definition and 
separation of individual devices. In the latter case, 
anisotropically etched V-grooves extending almost 
through the depth of the wafer separate the indi-
vidual dice, which might be broken apart by apply-
ing a small mechanical force. Alternatively, the dice 
FIGURE 4.4 Optical microscope with needle-tip 
manipulators.
Wafer on a plastic sheet
Singulated
chip
Diamond
dicing saw
Water jet
FIGURE 4.5 Dicing operation.

[Page 192]
192   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
are etched completely free at the moment critical 
components (e.g., a pressure-sensitive membrane) 
have reached the specified thickness (see V-groove 
Thickness Control in Volume II, Figure 4.44).
Most mechanical sensors and actuators are 
equipped with a bonded cap or cover (Si, glass, etc.), 
protecting them during dicing. In the case of surface 
micromachined devices, a final sacrificial release 
etch (see Volume II, Chapter 7) is performed after 
the dicing is complete. This procedure ensures that 
there are no free mechanical structures during the 
dicing, but it implies also that the microstructures 
must be freed on individual dice, making for a more 
costly device. The TI DMDTM arrays described in 
Volume II, Example 7.2 are handled this way: they 
are diced first, and then the organic sacrificial layer 
is etched in an oxygen plasma. The cap approach 
is not applicable in the case of flow sensors, and 
chemical and biological sensors or other devices 
that require direct contact with their surrounding 
environments.
Level 1 Packaging (L1) and 
Level 2 Packaging (L2)
Introduction
Level 1 devices are packaged with leadframes (single-
chip), transistor outline (TO)-headers, or multichip 
module interconnection systems, and the resulting 
devices are then packed onto printed wiring boards 
(see Table 4.1). Micromachining deviates most dra-
matically from ICs in the nonstandard nature of 
packages from level 2 up. In the case of some sensors, 
standard TO-5 and TO-8 headers still might be use-
ful, but in most cases the package dictated by the spe-
cific application is of a much more complex nature.
Single-Device Packaging
A typical package for single chips with 100 and 
more leads is the quad flat pack (QFP) illustrated in 
Figure 4.6. The process steps necessary to build such 
a QFP are the stamping or etching of a leadframe, 
gluing the chip to the leadframe (also named die 
bonding), wire bonding the chip to the leadframe, 
overmolding everything except the outer leads and 
cutting and bending the leads to gull-wing shape. 
In the cross-section of the QFP, in Figure 4.6b, the 
different elements of a QFP are visible: the chip, the 
leadframe and the glue, the gold wires, the over-
molding, and the final form of the leads. This pack-
age is now ready to be soldered to a printed wiring 
board.
Leadframes are stamped or etched strips of metal 
sheets (Figure 4.7). Chips can be mounted in one or 
several rows on the large central pads. The outside 
dimensions of the strips—width, length, and the 
holes at the edge—are standardized. The basic mate-
rial is an iron-nickel-alloy. The inner leads, the lands 
for the gold wire, have to be gold or silver plated. The 
outer leads are pretinned for the later soldering to 
the printed wiring board. An auxiliary rectangular 
line circumventing the main package is needed to 
seal the overmolding form. This line is stamped out 
after overmolding. 
The die is glued to the large central pad of the 
lead frame with a conductive epoxy resin. Precise 
mounting of the chips is required to facilitate the 
subsequent wire bonding. The glue has to be cured 
before wire bonding starts. Because standard glues 
cure in tens of minutes, rather than in seconds, the 
curing is quite a disturbing factor in a production 
line. Batches of leadframes have to be placed in a 
curing oven.
Supertex
PG
Chip
Glue
Gold wire
Leadframe
Over molding
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.6 (a) An eighty-lead plastic quad flat pack (QFP) ready for soldering to a printed wiring board (PWB). (b) A QFP 
in cross-section.

[Page 193]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   193
The QFP shown in Figure 4.6 is a relatively old 
packaging scheme introduced in the 1980s. The 
dual inline package (DIP), what most people envi-
sion when they think of an IC “chip,” was devel-
oped even earlier (in the 1960s) (Figure 4.8a). In a 
DIP, the leads are perpendicular to the body of the 
package, making them ideally suited for insertion 
mounting onto printed wiring boards (PWBs) using 
plated through-holes.
A QFP is an example of surface mount technology 
(SMT). In SMT, the leads do not penetrate the PWB 
surface, and ICs are mounted, by reflow solder tech-
nology, on both sides of the PWB, resulting in higher-
density electronics. In the industry, SMT has largely 
replaced the through-hole technology construction 
method of fitting components with wire leads into 
holes in the circuit board. An SMT component usually 
FIGURE 4.7 Leadframes are stamped or etched strips of 
metal sheets.
Supertex
PG
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
BGA
Semiconductor chip
Semiconductor chip
BGA (CSP)
Au wire
Die attach paste
Encapsulation
Solder ball
Solder resist
PCB
FIGURE 4.8 Packaging options. (a) The dual inline package (DIP), developed in the sixties. (b) The quad flat pack (QFP) 
was developed in the 1980s. It is a first example of surface mount technology. (c) Pin grid arrays (PGAs) were also devel-
oped in the 1980s. (d) Ball grid array (BGA), developed in the early 1990s as a replacement for QFPs, including a BGA 
implemented as chip scale packaging (CSP). (e) Detail of chip scale package (CSP).

[Page 194]
194   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
is smaller than its through-hole counterpart because 
it has either smaller leads or no leads at all. The 
QFPs (see above and Figure 4.8b) and pin grid arrays 
(PGAs; Figure 4.8c) were developed in the 1980s. 
There are leadless or leaded ones and come in plastic 
or ceramic bodies. With contacts on all four sides, 
up to ∼200 I/Os are possible with QFPs, and PGAs 
can have up to ∼600 I/Os. Ball grid arrays (BGAs) 
(Figure 4.8d) were developed in the early 1990s as a 
replacement for QFPs. They feature solder bumps in 
a matrix on the bottom of the package. They have a 
higher density, smaller footprint, and shorter electri-
cal paths (i.e., faster signal propagation) but are more 
expensive than QFPs. BGAs are the natural choice 
for multichip module (MCM) packaging (see below). 
Chip scale packaging (CSP) was developed in the late 
1990s (see bottom drawing labeled “BGA (CSP)” in 
Figure 4.8d and Figure 4.8e). CSP is a general term 
for all semiconductor packaging schemes that aim to 
be almost the same size as the chip itself (typically 
about 1.2 times the bare chip). In CSP, the package is 
an extension of the bare IC and permits easier han-
dling, testing, and assembly. In one version of CSP, 
the BGA packaging scheme is modified with elec-
trodes that are directly installed on the bottom of 
the IC. [See bottom drawing labeled “BGA (CSP)” in 
Figure 4.8d and Figure 4.8e.]
A simple single die mounting method, often used 
in MEMS, is in a header, as shown in Figure  4.9, 
where we show the bulk silicon micromachined 
piezoresistive accelerometer manufactured by TRW 
NovaSensor (Fremont, CA) in a TO-5 header.
After dicing a MEMS sensor die, the die attach-
ment step to the header follows. In a typical header, 
gold-plated pins are hermetically sealed to the header 
base with glass eyelets, which provide a   hermetic 
feed through with both high electrical and mechan-
ical integrity. To protect the mounted sensor, a metal 
can is hermetically resistance-welded to the header. 
Since the thermal expansion coefficient of the pack-
age material to which the die is attached typically 
differs substantially from that of Si and glass, the die 
attachment must compensate for this. The three 
methods used the most for die attach are eutectic 
(Au-Si alloy), epoxy, and silicone rubber, in order 
of highest to lowest stress.1,4 The next step in the 
pro cess consists of the electrical connection to the 
Si sensor. Gold or aluminum wire is bonded by 
thermosonic, thermocompression, or wedge-wedge 
ultrasonic wire bonding (see “Wire Bonding”, this 
chapter). The fine gold wires in the TO-5  package 
 illustrated in Figure 4.9 are barely visible. Wire bond-
ing  occasionally damages MEMS components dur-
ing packaging, as the applied ultrasonic energy, 
typically at a frequency between 50 and 100 kHz, 
may start the oscillation of suspended mechanical 
microstructures. Coincidentally, many microma-
chined structures have resonant frequencies in the 
50–100 kHz range, increasing the risk of structural 
failure during wire bonding.
The TO-5 packaged accelerometer in Figure 4.9 
is an example of a relatively simple packaging solu-
tion; typically MEMS packaging is a lot more chal-
lenging. Indeed, an accelerometer can be completely 
shielded from its environment, whereas many other 
MEMS sensors must be exposed directly to the envi-
ronment they are sensing.
It is imperative that sensor elements are not sub-
ject to undesirable mechanical stresses originating 
from their packaging structure. Slow creep in the 
adhesive or epoxy that bonds the silicon die to the 
package housing, for example, may lead to long-
term drift. Corrugated structural members, as used 
by Jerman,7 decouple the sensor from its encapsula-
tion, reducing the influence of temperature changes 
and packaging stress. Corrugated members have 
been implemented, for example, in single-crystal 
silicon, polysilicon, and polyimide. The technique 
was described in Volume II, Chapter 7, as one of the 
FIGURE 4.9 Commercially available Si accelerometer 
based on hybrid technology; bulk-micromachined 50-g 
accelerometer bonded into a TO-5 header. Signal condi-
tioning electronics are on a separate chip. (Courtesy of 
TRW NovaSensor.)

[Page 195]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   195
methods to control stress in micromachined struc-
tures. The stress-decoupling, corrugated bellows 
either surround the sensor structure itself 8,9 or the 
sensor chip is mounted via an intermediate with a 
bellow structure to the housing.10 The latter imple-
mentation is sketched in Figure 4.10.
Thermal management in MEMS involves cooling 
heat-dissipating devices, especially thermal actua-
tors, but also includes understanding and control-
ling the sources of temperature fluctuations that 
may adversely affect the performance of the device. 
Thermal modeling must include both the die and its 
package. To facilitate heat flow from die to package, 
a die-attach scheme must be used that exhibits high 
thermal conductivity.
The last assembly step, after die attachment 
and electrical contacting, involves the protection 
of the silicon die and electrical leads. This is espe-
cially important for sensors and actuators that are 
to be used in intimate contact with harsh environ-
ments. Various methods are available, including the 
following:1,4
 
1. Vapor-deposited organics for mildly aggres-
sive environments {e.g., 2–3-µm thick low-
pressure chemical vapor-deposited [LPCVD] 
parylene [poly(p-xylene)]}. A negative aspect of 
this form of passivation is that the added layer 
often makes the die too stiff for accurate sens-
ing or actuating functions. 
 
2. Silicone oil over the die for medium-isolated 
pressure sensors.
 
3. Coating of the die surface with soft substances 
such as silicone gel. Hardening of the gel over 
time is a major problem. Silicones do not form 
a moisture barrier, and the exact mechanism 
by which they protect the die as a surface coat 
is not understood.11 
 
4. SiC (e.g., deposited with plasma-enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition) for harsh environ-
ments.12
 
5. A plastic or ceramic cap for particle and han-
dling protection.
 
6. A welded-on nickel cap with pressure port.
Multichip Packaging
A multichip module (MCM) is a chip package that 
contains two or more bare chips mounted close 
together on a common substrate. Shorter tracks 
between the individual chips increase performance 
and eliminate much of the noise that external tracks 
between individual chip packages pick up. There are 
four main categories of MCMs based on the sub-
strate used:
 
1. Laminated (MCM-L): Constructed of plastic 
laminate-based dielectrics and copper conduc-
tors using PWB technology. These are the low-
est cost MCMs.
 
2. Ceramic (MCM-C): Constructed on cofired 
ceramic or glass-ceramic substrates using thick-
film (screen printing) technologies. 
 
3. Deposited (MCM-D): Uses a dielectric layer over 
a ceramic, glass, or metal substrate, and thin 
film interconnects are created on the dielec-
tric layer. These are the highest-performance 
MCMs.
 
4. Si-based (MCM-Si): Uses a silicon substrate 
with tracks created in the silicon like regu-
lar ICs. Transistors can also be formed in the 
substrate.
ICs and micromachined chips may be packed lat-
erally or they may be stacked on top of one another. 
In the latter case, individual dice, blocks of dice, and 
entire wafers may be stacked with electrical inter-
connections either made by wires (see Figure 4.11) 
Center boss
Contact area of chip
Bellow structure
Contact area of housing
Reference pressure part
Intermediate
Sensor chip
Plate area
FIGURE 4.10 Stress release bellows. A corrugated inter-
mediate Si piece decouples the sensor from its hous-
ing. (From Offereins, H. L., H. Sandmaier, B. Folkmer, U. 
Steger, and W. Lang. 1991. In 6th International Conference 
on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators [Transducers ’91], 
986–89. San Francisco. With permission.10)

[Page 196]
196   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
or interconnects running vertically from plane to 
plane.13 A commercial example of a four-chip MCM 
is shown in Figure 4.12.
MCMs increase the interconnect density on 
printed circuit boards and speed up the processing 
time. Multichip modules are an important support-
ing technology for MEMS, as most MEMS are bet-
ter partitioned into separate sensing and electronic 
parts rather than being built monolithically in Si. 
MCM also allows complementary metal-oxide-
 silicon (CMOS) and bipolar technologies to be used 
in the same package.
Instead of the wire bonds shown in the MCMs 
in Figure 4.11, flip-chip bonding often is used to 
make contact to the chip. In flip-chip bonding, as 
its name implies, the die is bonded, facedown, on its 
substrate without the use of connecting wires (see 
“Electrical Connection Methods” and Figure 4.13). 
Electrical contacts are made directly between plated 
solder bumps on bond pads on the die and metal 
pads on the packaging substrate. The intimate spac-
ing between the die and the substrate (<200  µm) 
presents two major advantages. With wire bonding, 
the pads on the die must always be positioned on 
the periphery to avoid crossing wires, but with flip-
chip bonding, the bond pads may be placed over 
the entire die. This results in a significant increase 
in density of possible I/O connections (up to 700 
simultaneously I/Os). Second, the effective induc-
tance of each interconnect is minuscule because of 
the short height of the solder bump compared with 
that of a gold wire. These are the reasons why the 
integrated circuit industry has adopted flip chip 
for high- density, fast electronic circuits. Flip-chip 
mounting is equally attractive to the MEMS indus-
try. Again, the ability to closely package a number 
of distinct dice on a single-package substrate with 
multiple levels of embedded electrical connections 
represents a major advantage. This approach may be 
used, for example, for bonding to electrically con-
nect and package three dice, including an acceler-
ometer die, a yaw-rate sensing die, and an electronic 
application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) onto 
one ceramic substrate to build a fully self-contained 
navigation system. A similar unit could be built with 
wire bonding, but it would be significantly larger 
and its reliability would be questionable given the 
large number of “loose” gold wires within the pack-
age.14 In the next section we explain how a typical 
flip-chip process works.
Vertical MCM
Laterally packed MCM
IC chip 1
IC chip 2
IC chip 2
IC chip 1
FIGURE 4.11 Schematic of a two-chip MCM.
ASIC
Flash EEPROM
SDRAM
MCM
Microprocessor
FIGURE 4.12 A 2-mm-thick MCM holding four ICs used in 
Casio’s Exilim digital camera.
Solder ball
Rigid laminate
substrate
Mold compound
Mold cap
Die
Die
Epoxy underﬁll
Flip chip
Wire bond
Die attach
Wire bond
FIGURE 4.13 Flip-chip versus wiring bonding.

[Page 197]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   197
Electrical Connection Methods
Introduction
The three most used electrical connection methods 
between a chip and a substrate are illustrated in 
Figure 4.14. They are wire bonding, tape automated 
bonding (TAB), and flip-chip bonding.
Wire Bonding
The pads on a chip and the pads on a substrate (e.g., a 
leadframe, but also a printed wiring board or ceramic 
substrate) often are interconnected by wire bonding. 
A gold, copper, or aluminum wire is bonded between 
each bonding pad of the chip and the corresponding 
pad on the substrate. There are two major types of 
wire bonding: ball-wedge and wedge-wedge bond-
ing. In gold ball-wedge bonding, a gold wire is fed 
through a ceramic capillary, as shown in Figure 4.15. 
The protruding wire end is melted by an electrical 
spark to form a ball, which is bonded to the first pad. 
This operation requires both ultrasonic excitation of 
the capillary and heat application to the substrate 
(200°C). The capillary guides the gold wire now to 
the second pad, where it forms a wedge and cuts the 
wire in a single step. The wire has to be clamped to 
cut it, and ultrasound action and heat application 
also are necessary to achieve good adhesion of the 
wedge to the second pad. Copper ball-wedge bond-
ing is also possible when the copper wire is flushed 
by an inert gas during ball formation. Copper wires 
can be used instead of gold wires. They fit well to the 
copper pads of the most recent ICs, and their elec-
trical conductivity is higher. Copper wires also are 
stiffer than gold wires and exhibit less wire sweep 
during overmolding. After the mounting and bond-
ing, process steps to establish corrosion protection 
and mechanical protection of the chip are needed, 
either by hermetic sealing of the assembled board or 
locally by “glob top” sealing with a droplet of seal-
ing material, e.g., epoxy. Wire bonding of bare chips 
is used in hybrids, most often with a ceramic sub-
strate. Chip on board is also used with glass/epoxy 
laminates in some consumer applications (pocket 
calculators, watches, smart cards, etc.), and occa-
sionally in professional applications.
An aluminum ball cannot be formed as easily in 
air as it can with gold because aluminum oxidizes 
immediately in air (much faster even than copper). 
Another technique, wedge-wedge bonding, has to 
be used as illustrated in Figure 4.16. Aluminum is 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Unprotected
Al
Passivation
Au wire
25 µmΦ
Al
Au
All Al protected
Soldering
Soldering,
Sn/Pb
Cu foil conductor
25 × 100 µm
Si
Bonding
FIGURE 4.14 The three most used electrical connection 
methods between a chip and a substrate: (a) wire bonding; 
(b) tape automated bonding (TAB); (c) flip-chip bonding.
Ultrasound
Capillary
Ball
Heat (200ºC)
Gold wire
Clamp
Wedge
FIGURE 4.15 Gold ball-wedge bonding.
Ultrasound
Al wire
Tool
Clamp
Wedges
FIGURE 4.16 Wedge-wedge bonding of aluminum wire. 

[Page 198]
198   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
a soft metal, but its oxide at the surface is very hard 
and has to be broken by the ultrasound action of 
the wedging tool. Aluminum bonding can be per-
formed with the substrate at room temperature. This 
is a huge advantage when bonding to a standard 
PWB substrate with a low glass transition, i.e., soft-
ening temperature (Tg) of around 150°C. The wedg-
ing tool used for aluminum bonding is directional, 
and it has to be rotated for different bonds in differ-
ent directions. It is also larger than the capillary in 
ball-wedge bonding, so it needs more room on its 
back side and cannot reach into deep holes between 
components.
Tape automated bonding (TAB) is illustrated in 
Figures 4.14b and 4.17. It uses a leadframe made 
from a fine film of copper conductor on a dielectric 
film such as polyimide for interconnections between 
chip and substrate. The conductor patterns in the 
leadframe are imaged using a photolithography pro-
cess from a continuous copper layer on the dielectric 
carrier film. The TAB leads connecting the die and 
the tape are the inner lead bonds, while those that 
connect the tape to the package or to external circuits 
are known as the outer lead bonds (see Figure 4.17). 
The mounting is done such that the bonding sites on 
the die, usually in the form of bumps or balls made 
of gold or solder, are connected to fine conductors 
on the tape, which provide the means of connect-
ing the die to the package or directly to external 
circuits (Figure 4.17). To facilitate the connection of 
the die bumps or balls to their corresponding leads 
on the TAB circuit, holes are punched on the tape 
where the die bumps will be positioned. The con-
ductor traces of the tape are then cantilevered over 
the punched holes to meet the bumps of the die. 
The leads are soldered to the substrate with a spe-
cialized tool called thermode (“impulse soldering”). 
Finally, the bare chip is encapsulated with epoxy or 
plastic (glob topped). The main advantage of TAB is 
the tight pitch of the circuit. Line pitches of 45 µm 
are achievable (22.5-µm lines/spaces). This allows 
for high-density circuits. TAB is in widespread use in 
liquid crystal displays, electronic watches, and other 
high-volume consumer products. Other TAB appli-
cations are VLSI circuits with a high lead count and 
other high-end needs.
Flip-Chip Bonding
The concept of the flip-chip bonding process, with 
the semiconductor chip assembled facedown onto 
a substrate, is ideal for limited size applications 
because there is no extra area needed for contact-
ing on the sides of the component (see Figure 4.13). 
Flip chip is carried out by mounting the chip upside 
down on the substrate, after having deposited sol-
der bumps on all interconnection pads of the chip. 
The chip is then soldered directly onto the substrate, 
which requires close thermal matching of the chip 
and substrate. To make solder bumps on the die, a 
typical process involves sputter deposition of a thin 
titanium adhesion layer over the aluminum bond 
pad metal, followed by sputtering of a copper seed 
layer. The titanium and copper are patterned with 
photoresist to form a pedestal for the solder bump. 
Before the solder bump itself is formed, a thicker 
layer of copper is first electroplated on the patterned 
pedestal. The solder bump, typically a tin-lead alloy, 
is electroplated over the electroplated copper. On 
the substrate side, solder paste is screen-printed in 
patterns matching the landing sites of the solder 
bumps on the die. Pick-and-place robots position 
the die, facedown, and align the solder bumps to the 
solder-paste pattern on the substrate. Heating in an 
oven or under infrared radiation melts the solder, 
and the bond is created. Often an underfill step is 
required to fill the void space between the die and 
Cut line
Sprocketed
polyimide ﬁlm
Bumped IC chip
Inner bond leads
(to chip)
Outer bond leads
(to PCB)
Bumped, ﬂip-mounted, and
underﬁlled IC chips
Back-bared openings to accept solder balls
FIGURE 4.17 Tape automated bonding (TAB) takes advan-
tage of flexible base films to make interconnections from 
the chip to a printed wiring board.

[Page 199]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   199
the package substrate with epoxy. The underfill not 
only adds mechanical strength to the assembly but 
also protects the connections from environmental 
hazards. Underfill adhesive may be dispensed along 
one or more edges of the die and is drawn into the 
space under the die through capillary action. Heat-
curing the underfill adhesive completes the assem-
bly process.
Conductive adhesives are a viable alternative to 
tin-lead solders for flip chip joining. Conductive or 
nonconductive adhesives may attach a gold stud 
bumped chip to a substrate. The conductive adhe-
sives used are either isotropic, conducting in all 
directions, or they are anisotropic, conducting in a 
preferred direction only. In Figure 4.18 we show a 
schematic drawing of flip chip bonding with isotro-
pically conductive adhesives (ICAs) and anisotropi-
cally conductive adhesives (ACAs). In either case, 
the adhesives act as the electrical and mechanical 
joining agents.
Isotropic conductive adhesives consist of an adhe-
sive binder filled with conductive particles that are 
normally in contact with each other and provide a 
low electrical resistance in all directions. Generally, 
the polymer resin is an epoxy and the conducting 
particles are silver. The adhesive may be dispensed 
by stencil printing onto the substrate bond pads, or 
the bumped die may be dipped into a thin layer of 
the adhesive, coating only the bumps. Stencil print-
ing of the conductive adhesive limits minimum pad 
pitch to about 90 µm. Since dipping places adhesive 
only on the bump surface, the minimum bump spac-
ing is smaller than for stenciling, to pad pitches of 
60 µm or less. After the isotropic conductive adhe sive 
is heat cured, a nonconducting underfill adhesive is 
applied to completely fill the under-chip space.
Anisotropically conductive adhesives are pastes 
or films that are filled with metal particles or 
metal coated polymer spheres to a concentration 
that ensures electrical insulation in all directions 
before bonding, but after bonding the adhesive 
becomes electrically conductive in the z-direction. 
Anisotropically conductive adhesives have the abil-
ity to connect finer-pitch devices.
Also, nonconductive adhesives can be used for 
flip chip bonding, in this case the joint surfaces are 
forced into intimate contact by the adhesive between 
the component and substrate.
In general, the pad pitch of the die is finer with 
adhesive flip-chip than possible with solder flip-
chip. The cleaning step is not as rigorous as with 
solder-based systems; it eliminates process steps 
such as coating the interconnect pads with solder 
and eliminates the use of lead. On the downside, 
the electrical conductivity of ICAs and ACAs is infe-
rior to that of tin-lead solders. ICAs have about 1 
Isotropically conductive adhesive
Anisotropically conductive adhesive
Component
Substrate
Polymer ﬁlled with conducting
(metal) particles such as silver
Conducting particles such as
nickel plated polymer balls
Pressure
Time
Temperature
Substrate
Die
ACA
Trace
pad
Bumped
pad
Polymer
Component
Substrate
FIGURE 4.18 Schematic drawings of flip-chip joints made with conductive adhesives.

[Page 200]
200   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
magnitude greater volume resistivity than eutectic 
tin-lead solder.
Flip-chip technology gives the highest packaging 
density of the different interconnection methods 
described here. It gives excellent electrical charac-
teristics and high reliability when properly used, but 
it is a very demanding technology both to establish 
and operate. Initial costs are high, favoring high-
volume or high-end applications. The performance 
in high-frequency applications is superior to other 
interconnection methods, because the length of 
the connection path is minimized. Also, reliability 
is better than with packaged components because 
of the decreased number of connections. Flip-
chip technology is potentially cheaper than wire 
bonding because bonding of all connections takes 
place simultaneously, whereas with wire bonding 
one bond is made at a time. In practice, however, 
this price benefit is not always achieved because of 
immature processes, e.g., the cost of die bumping 
with current processes can be significant, especially 
in low volumes. Today flip-chips are widely used for 
watches, mobile phones, portable communicators, 
disc drives, hearing aids, LCD displays, automotive 
engine controllers, and mainframe computers.
Flip-chip mounting is not compatible with all 
MEMS devices. For example, there is a risk of dam-
aging the thin diaphragm of a pressure sensor dur-
ing a flip-chip process.
In what follows we review the different options for 
through-wafer electrical interconnects. Most meth-
ods work for Si only, but others may also be used to 
form vias in polymers, glass, and ceramics.
Making Vias through Silicon 
At first glance, chemical etching is the simplest way 
to form holes (vias) through Si. The author applied 
this method for the fabrication of an electrochemi-
cal sensor array bonded to a bottom Si chip carrying 
the electronics (see Volume II, Figures 4.92 to 4.96). 
Unfortunately, the aspect ratio, length versus diam-
eter, is low, less than 1, so integration is limited by 
the space between the holes.
With dry etching of vias, problems used to include 
a lack of sufficiently fast etch rates and sufficient 
selectivity over the mask. However, advances in 
 high-density plasma sources now allow for etch rates 
up to 4 µm/min, a selectivity of Si versus SiO2 of over 
150 (70:1 for resists), and aspect ratios of 30:1.15,16 
Along this line, Chow et al. present a through- 
wafer electrical interconnect fabrication process 
compatible with standard CMOS processing.17 In this 
pre-CMOS process step, a high-density SF6 plasma 
(Bosch process; see Volume II, Chapter 3) is used to 
etch circular holes of 18–25 µm in a 400-µm-thick 
wafer. By etching from each side, the aspect ratio 
capability required of the etching process is halved.
Another via alternative is laser drilling. With laser 
drilling, an aspect ratio of 1:50 can be reached, and 
relatively high drilling speeds (e.g., 10 holes per sec-
ond) are possible at a power density of 1011 W/cm2.
Ultrasonic drilling makes for cleaner vias than 
laser machining, which, unless there is a reactive 
gas involved or a femtosecond laser, leaves debris 
on via rims. The ultrasonic technique is limited 
to “large” diameter holes (100 µm and up). Laser-
machined holes are compared with ultrasonically 
drilled holes in Volume II, Figure 6.21. In all the 
techniques for making a through-wafer electrical 
interconnect thus far described, after the hole is cre-
ated, a metal or highly doped polysilicon must be 
deposited for electrical connection. In the case of a 
conductive substrate, the walls of the hole must be 
passivated first, for example, by growing a thermal 
oxide. Most methods described to deposit the metal 
in the vias combine sputtering and electroless or 
electroplating.
Localized, very deep (throughout the thickness 
of a wafer) doping of Si is possible by temperature 
gradient zone melting (TGZM).18 In this case, via 
formation and metal deposition become one and 
the same process. An example is the fabrication 
of Al interconnects through a Si wafer. At suffi-
cient ly high temperatures, aluminum will form 
an alloy with Si. If the Si substrate is subjected to 
a temperature gradient, the molten alloy zone will 
migrate to the hotter side of the wafer. In practice, 
Al thermomigration in Si starts with electron 
beam deposition of a thick layer of Al (>5 µm) and 
photolithographically defining the aluminum into 
the desired pattern on one side of the Si wafer. The 
wafer is then radiatively heated from the other side 
to temperatures considerably higher (1000–1200°C) 

[Page 201]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   201
than the eutectic temperature to form the molten 
zone. The one-sided heating imposes a thermal 
gradient of up to 50°C/cm across the molten zone, 
resulting in a highly aluminum doped (2 × 1019 cm–3) 
zone of single-crystal Si. Because of the speed (the 
zone moves through the silicon on the order of 
10 µm/min), wafers can be doped through their 
thickness in minutes. With TGZM, the concomitant 
side diffusion is a few micrometers compared with 
millimeters for solid-state diffusion.
In principle, this technique offers very excit-
ing opportunities for novel 3D structures, as con-
nections can be made front to back on a Si wafer. 
However, the lines through the silicon, being active 
junctions, are light sensitive, and the Al on the exit 
side can turn very rough. Also, because the process 
is so extreme, it needs to precede the implementa-
tion of any other structure on the wafer.
Bonding of Layers in MEMS
Introduction
Wafer bonding is a technology that has found wide-
spread use in IC as well as MEMS fabrication. It allows 
the permanent bonding of two wafers. Applications 
include packaging, fabricating 3D structures, and 
forming multilayer devices. In MEMS, more often 
than with ICs, one needs to bond a variety of mate-
rials together, including Si to a glass pedestal (e.g., 
in pressure sensors), Si to Si (in many multistack 
MEMS devices), and polymer to polymer (e.g., in 
fluidic devices).
Assisted Thermal Bonding 
or Anodic Bonding 
Field-assisted thermal bonding, also known as anodic 
bonding, electrostatic bonding, or the Mallory pro-
cess, is commonly used for joining glass to silicon. 
The main utility of the process stems from the rela-
tively low process temperature (the temperature 
limit for IC processed Si substrates is about 450°C). 
Since the glass and Si remain rigid during anodic 
bonding, it is possible to attach glass to Si surfaces, 
preserving etched features in either the glass or the 
silicon. This method is mostly applicable to wafer 
scale die bonding (L1).
A bond can be established between a sodium-
rich glass, say Corning #7740 (Pyrex), and virtu-
ally any metal.19 Besides Pyrex, Corning #7070, 
soda lime #0080, potash soda lead #0120, and 
aluminosilicate #1720 are suitable as well.20 In the 
case of Si, Pyrex is most commonly used. Bonding 
can be accomplished on a hot plate in atmosphere 
or vacuum at temperatures between 180°C and 
500°C. Typical voltages, depending on the thick-
ness of the glass and the temperature, range from 
200 to 1000 V. The operating temperatures are near 
the glass-softening point but well below its melting 
point, as well as below the sintering temperature of 
standard AlSi metallization. At the most elevated 
temperatures, the wafers are bonded in 5–10 min, 
depending on voltage and bonded area.20 Compared 
with Si fusion bonding (see below), anodic bonding 
has the advantage of being a lower-temperature pro-
cess with a lower residual stress and less stringent 
requirements for the surface quality of the wafers. 
Figure 4.19 represents a schematic of an anodic 
bonding setup and an image of the actual opera-
tion. Generally, one places a glass plate on top of 
the Si wafer and makes a pinpoint contact to the 
uppermost surface of the glass piece, which is held 
at a constant negative bias with respect to the elec-
trically grounded silicon. The bonding is easy to fol-
low: looking through the glass, the bonded region 
moves from the contact cathode pinpoint outward 
and can be detected visually through the glass by 
the disappearance of the interference fringes. When 
the whole area displays a dark gray color, the bond-
ing is complete.
A constant current, instead of constant voltage, 
could also be used but is avoided, since dielectric 
breakdown may occur after the bonding is complete 
and the interface becomes an insulator (see bonding 
mechanism below). The contacting surfaces need to 
be flat (surface roughness Ra < 1 µm and warp/bow 
< 5 µm) and dust-free for a good bond to form. The 
native or thermal oxide layer on the Si must be thin-
ner than 200 nm. The height of metal lines crossing 
under the bonded area should be less than 600 Å, or 
1000 Å for hermetic sealing. The thermal expansion 
coefficients of the bonded materials must match in 
the range of bonding. In Figure 4.20, we show the 
thermal expansion coefficient of Si, a borosilicate 

[Page 202]
202   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
glass, and a Pyrex-like glass (HOYA’s SD-2) as a 
function of temperature.21 The curves of borosili-
cate glass and silicon single-crystal wafer cross at 
about 240°C. When anodic bonding is performed at 
400°C, the difference of the expansions at high tem-
perature creates residual stress in the Si chip during 
cooling to room temperature. 
Above 450°C, the thermal properties of the 
materials begin to deviate seriously; therefore, 
the process should be limited to 450°C. One also 
expects that Si would be under compression for seal 
temperatures below 280°C and under tension for 
temperatures in excess of 280°C.21 Wafer curvature 
measurements indicate, however, that the transition 
from concave 7440 glass/Si sandwiches (Si under 
compression) to convex sandwiches (Si under 
tension) lies around a seal temperature of 315°C.21,22 
This indicates that other non-negligible, stress-
inducing effects add an additional compressive 
component. As we learned before, for most applic-
ations tensile stress is preferred over compressive 
stress, and a considerable safety margin toward 
higher bonding temperatures must be respected to 
avoid buckled Si membranes and bridges.
The anodic bonding mechanism is not yet com-
pletely understood. Electrochemical, electrostatic, 
and thermal mechanisms and combinations thereof 
have been suggested to explain bond formation, 
but the dominant mechanism has not been clearly 
defined. It is suggested that at elevated tempera-
tures, the glass becomes a conductive solid electro-
lyte, and the bonding results through the migration 
of sodium (Pyrex contains approximately 3–5% 
sodium) toward the cathode (see Figure 4.19). As 
Electrostatic force
500 V
Hot plate (300~500°…)
Glass
Silicon
(a)
FIGURE 4.19 (a) Principle sketch of anodic glass-to-Si bonding. Control parameters are temperature (300–400°C), bias volt-
age (700–1200 V), time (~2 min), and materials (glasses, Si, SiO2). (b) Actual anodic bonding process on a simple hot plate.
0
25
30
35
40
45
100
300
T(ºC)
CTE (× 10–7 /K)
200
400
500
600
Si
Borosilicate
SD-2
FIGURE 4.20 Thermal expansion coefficients of Si, boro-
silicate, and a Pyrex-like glass, HOYA’s SD-2, a substrate 
engineered to minimize the distortion or bowing effect 
caused by the thermal mismatch between the two wafers. 
CTE, coefficient of thermal expansion. (From Peeters, E. 
1994. Process development for 3D silicon microstructures, 
with application to mechanical sensor design. PhD thesis, 
Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium.21)

[Page 203]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   203
it moves, it leaves a space charge (bound negative 
charges) in the region of the glass/silicon interface. 
Most of the applied voltage drop occurs across this 
space charge region, and the high electrical field 
between the glass and Si results in an electrostatic 
force, which pulls the glass and Si into intimate con-
tact. During this charging process, the electric field is 
high enough to allow a drift of oxygen to the positive 
electrode (Si) reacting with silicon and creating Si-O 
bonds. The elevated temperatures and high electric 
field thus result in covalent bonds forming between 
the surface atoms of the glass and the silicon. A good 
quantitative discussion on the many important 
effects in anodic bonding is by Anthony.23
Field-assisted bonding has also been applied 
to bond GaAs to glass. Corning #0211 is used at 
360°C, and a bias of 800 V is applied for 30 min 
to complete the bonding process. It is well known 
that GaAs forms very poorly adhering oxides, lead-
ing to poor anodic bonding; prebaking of the glass 
at 400°C for 15 h in a reducing atmosphere (H2 and 
N2) is reported to lead to better bonding.24 Von Arx 
et al. bonded glass capsules to a smooth polysilicon 
surface to form a hermetically sealed cavity large 
enough to contain hybrid circuitry of a biocompat-
ible implant.25
The high electrical field and the migration of 
sodium make anodic bonding of glass plates to 
Si a rather difficult technology. The mismatch in 
thermal expansion coefficient between the glass and 
the Si causes both thermally induced and built-in 
mechanical stress. In addition, the viscous behavior 
of the glass results in degraded long-term stability 
of the components. As a result of these problems, 
several modifications of the basic technology have 
been introduced (see below). A typical commercial 
instrument for anodic bonding is from Electronic 
Visions Co.’s 500 Series-Wafer Bonding Systems 
(e.g., the EV560).
Field-Assisted Thermal Bonding 
Modifications
The pinpoint method for anodic bonding, as 
illustrated in Figure 4.19, requires a very high bias 
voltage and a long period of time to bond areas far 
removed from the cathode point, since the electrical 
field in the glass substrate diminishes fast as the 
distance from the pinpoint cathode increases. At 
NEC, a Ti mesh bias electrode is deposited over the 
whole glass wafer to accomplish faster bonding. 
Because of the mesh assistance, the whole wafer may 
be Si bonded at 400°C and 600 V in less than 5 min, 
compared with over an hour at the same temperature 
and voltage without the mesh.26
Another modification of anodic bonding by 
Sander27 involves deposition of intermediate layers 
of Si dioxide and aluminum to screen the underlying 
Si from harm from the high electrical fields. First, Si 
dioxide is thermally grown on the Si surface. Then, a 
layer of aluminum is deposited on the oxide surface. 
Finally, a piece of glass is bonded to the aluminum. 
This technique produces a good hermetic seal, but 
the soft aluminum may be expected to creep after 
bonding, producing drift in the sensor output. In 
addition, the aluminum is not corrosion resistant 
for in vivo applications, so that the bond area may 
corrode rapidly. A similar modification of glass-to-
silicon bonding also uses a sandwich structure, but a 
layer of polycrystalline silicon (polysilicon) is depos-
ited on the oxide surface instead of aluminum, and 
a piece of glass is bonded to the polysilicon (see also 
Von Arx et al.25).
It is also possible to anodically bond two Si 
wafers with a thin intermediate sputtered28,29 or 
evaporated30 borosilicate glass layer (4–7 µm thick). 
Because two Si wafers are used, there are fewer prob-
lems associated with mismatch in thermal expan-
sion coefficient. In addition, since the glass layer 
is very thin, the voltage necessary for the bond is 
usually no more than about 50–100 V. Using a 
thin intermediate film makes the devices akin to a 
monolithic structure. Residual stresses and thermal 
expansion coefficient mismatches only have minor 
effects on device performance. The surfaces of the 
Si to be bonded should be polished, and one of the 
two wafers should be coated with the thin glass 
layer. This intermediate layer may be sputtered from 
a Pyrex target, resulting in a rather slow process. 
Hanneborg et al., for example, report a growth rate 
of 100 nm/h at a pressure of 5 mTorr argon and sput-
tering power of 1.6 W/cm2.29 The films, as deposited, 
are highly stressed and must be annealed before 
bonding at the annealing point of 565°C in a wet 
oxygen atmosphere.20 With a 4-µm-thick sputtered 

[Page 204]
204   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
glass layer, 50 V and a temperature of 450–550°C 
suffices to create a hermetic bond. With sputtered 
layers below 4 µm thick, a thermally grown SiO2 
must be included between the glass and the silicon 
to avoid electrical breakdown during anodic bond-
ing. The bond strength with Pyrex as an intermediate 
layer, measured by pulling the wafers apart, ranges 
from 2 to 3 MPa. As the Pyrex thin films etch very 
slowly in KOH, they can be used as a mask mate-
rial for anisotropic etching.31 Esashi et al.32 report 
room temperature anodic bonding using a 0.5– 
 4-µm-thick film sputtered from a Corning glass 
#7570 target. This glass has a softening point of 
440°C compared with 821°C for Pyrex, and bonding 
is completed within 10 min with 30–60 V applied. A 
pull test reveals a resulting bond strength in excess 
of 1.5 MPa. Application of pressure up to 160 kPa on 
the wafer sandwich apparently supports the bond-
ing process; at a pressure of 160 kPa, the minimum 
voltage to achieve bonding drops by a factor of 2. 
The slow deposition rate of glass sputtering presents 
a major disadvantage for this technique, but evapo-
rated glass layers can be deposited with much higher 
rates up to 4 µm/min and could provide a solution; 
unfortunately, in this case pinholes tend to reduce 
the breakdown voltage.30
Field-assisted bonding between two Si wafers, 
both provided with a thermally grown oxide film, is 
also reported to be successful. Both Si wafers must 
be covered with 1 µm of oxide. Bonding of a bare Si 
wafer to a second wafer with oxide failed because 
of oxide breakdown under very small applied bias. 
Temperatures range from 850°C to 950°C, and a 
voltage of 30 V must be applied for 45 min at the 
chosen bonding temperature.33
Silicon Fusion Bonding
The ability to bond two Si wafers directly without 
intermediate layers or applying an electric field sim-
plifies the fabrication of many devices. This direct 
bonding of silicon to silicon, Si fusion bonding 
(SFB), is based on a chemical reaction between OH 
groups present at the surface of the native or grown 
oxides covering the wafers. The bonding relies on 
the tendency for both very smooth and flat surfaces 
to adhere, and heat annealing to increase bond 
strength. The method is of great interest for the fab-
rication of silicon-on-insulator (SOI) structures. The 
processes involved in making these bonds are sim-
pler than other currently employed bonding tech-
niques, the yields are higher, the costs are lower, 
and the mechanical sensors built according to this 
principle exhibit an improved performance. Finally, 
as demonstrated in Figure 4.21, the size of an SFB-
type device can be almost 50% smaller than that of 
a conventional anodically bonded chip.
Wafer bonding may be achieved by placing 
the surfaces of two wafers in close contact and 
(100) Si wafer 1
(100) Si wafer 1
(100) Si wafer 1
(100) Si wafer 2
(100) Si wafer 2
(a)
(b)
Tinned lightly-
doped Si wafer
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 4.21 Silicon fusion bonding enables smaller-footprint microelectromechanical system devices to be fabricated. 
(a) Etch a silicon wafer to create a square pit (inverted pyramid). (b) A plain second silicon wafer is cleaned and ready for 
fusion bonding to the first wafer. (c)  Bond the two wafer using fusion bonding. (d) The second wafer is then thinned 
down from the back side using either mechanical-chemical polishing or etching.

[Page 205]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   205
inserting them in an oxidizing ambient at tempera-
tures greater than 800°C. It may be noted that the 
term silicon fusion bonding is somewhat misleading; 
the fusion point of Si at atmospheric pressure is 
1410°C, well below the relevant process tempera-
tures.31 The quality of the bond depends critically 
on temperature and the roughness of the surface. 
Flatness requirements are much more stringent 
than for anodic bondings, with a microroughness 
Ra < 10 or 40 Å and bow < 5 µm versus 1 µm Ra 
and bow < 5 µm in anodic bonding. Because of the 
high temperature involved, active electronics can-
not be incorporated before the bonding takes place 
(the temperature limit for bonding IC-processed 
standard Si substrates is about 420–450°C; see “IC 
Compatibility” in Volume II, Chapter 7). Higher 
temperature (above 1000°C) is usually required 
to get voidless and high-strength bonding.34 Bond 
strength up to 20 MPa has been reported. The 
application of a small pressure during the bonding 
process further increases the final bond strength.35 
The bonding can be carried out successfully with 
one oxidized Si wafer to another bare Si wafer, two 
oxidized wafers, or two bare Si wafers, and even 
between one wafer with a thin layer of nitride 
(100–200 nm) and one bare wafer or two wafers 
with a thin layer of nitride. The same fusion-
 bonding technique can be applied for bonding 
quartz wafers, GaAs to Si, and Si to glass. Provided 
that the surfaces are mirror smooth and can be 
hydrated, the bonding process proceeds in an iden-
tical fashion as for Si-Si bonding (see Schmidt36 
and references therein).
According to most references, before fusion bond-
ing, the oxidized Si surfaces must undergo hydra-
tion. Hydration is usually accomplished by soaking 
the wafers in a H2O2-H2SO4 mixture, diluted H2SO4, 
or boiling nitric acid. After this treatment, a hydro-
philic top layer consisting of –OH bonds is formed 
on the oxide surface. An additional treatment in 
an oxygen plasma greatly enhances the number of 
–OH groups at the surface.37 Then, the wafers are 
rinsed in deionized water and dried. Contacting the 
mirrored surfaces at room temperature in a clean-
air environment forms self-bonding throughout the 
wafer surface, with considerable bonding forces.38 
In a transmission infrared microscope, a so-called 
bonding wave can be seen to propagate over the whole 
wafer in a matter of seconds. The bonded pair of 
wafers can be handled without danger of the sand-
wich falling apart during transportation. A subse-
quent high-temperature anneal increases the bond 
strength by more than an order of magnitude. The 
self-bonding is the same phenomenon described 
under stiction of surface micromachined features 
(see Volume II, Chapter 7).
At present, the fusion bonding mechanism is not 
completely clear. However, the polymerization of 
silanol bonds is believed to be the main bonding 
reaction:
 Si−OH + HO−Si → H2O + Si−O−Si 
Reaction 4.1
Figure 4.22 shows the suggested bonding mech-
anism, including the transformation from silanol 
bonds to siloxane bonds. Silanol groups give rise 
to hydrogen bonding, which takes place spontane-
ously even at room temperature and without apply-
ing pressure, as long as the two wafers are extremely 
clean and smooth.38
Measurements of bond strength as a function 
of anneal temperature indicate three distinct bond 
strength regions, according to Schmidt.36 For anneal 
temperatures below 300°C, the bond strength 
remains the same as the spontaneous bond strength 
measured before the anneal. For self-bonded 
Silicon
Silicon
Silanol bond
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H2O
H2O
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Si
Si
Si
Dehydration
Siloxane network
Silicon
>700°C
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
Silicon
FIGURE 4.22 Schematic illustration of the silicon-to-
 silicon bonding by fusion and a proposed mechanism.

[Page 206]
206   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
wafers with hydrogen bonding between the silanol 
groups of opposite surfaces, Tong et al.39 measured 
an activation energy of 0.07 eV for temperatures 
<110°C—fairly close to the theoretical value of 
around 0.05 eV for hydrogen bonding. At about 
300°C, according to Schmidt, the −OH groups form 
water molecules, and the voids that are sometimes 
observed at this temperature are believed to be due 
to water vapor formed in the process.40 Stengl et al. 
report that the formation of voids can be avoided by 
first contacting the wafers at a temperature of 50°C.41 
The voids tend to disappear also at temperatures 
above 300°C, while the bond strength increases and 
then levels out. It is assumed that in this regime, 
Si-O-Si bonds (siloxane) start forming between 
the surfaces (Reaction 4.1). Tong et al.39 found a 
pronounced increase of interface energy of room-
temperature, self-bonded hydrophilic Si/Si, Si/SiO2, 
and SiO2/SiO2 wafers after storage in air at room 
temperature and up to 150°C for periods between 10 
and 400 h. The interfacial energy increase is ascribed 
to the generation of additional −OH groups due to 
a reaction with water and the strained oxide and/or 
Si below 100°C, as well as the formation of stronger 
siloxane bonds, which, this group claims, already 
forms from temperatures below 150°C. They find 
that the siloxane groups have a much higher bond 
energy with an activation energy of 1.8–2.1 eV.39 After 
prolonged storage, interface bubbles were observed 
that seem to contain hydrogen and hydrocarbons. 
At the highest temperatures (>800°C), Schmidt 
finds the bond strength starts increasing again, and 
at 1000°C, the bond is reaching the fracture strength 
of single-crystalline silicon: 10–20 MPa. In this 
third region, it has been suggested that surfaces can 
deform more easily (oxide flow), bringing them into 
better contact.36 At these temperatures, oxygen also 
diffuses into the Si lattice. Multiple Si wafers can be 
fusion bonded together. In some applications, up to 
a total of seven wafers have been bonded together.
Recall that for fusion bonding, surfaces have to be 
chemically activated to prepare for the bond. This 
is quite an undesirable step because the chemicals 
needed for surface preparation often are not 
compatible with other micromachining materials. 
Another way to activate the bonding surface and 
to make it hydrophilic is to use a plasma activation 
step. The plasma slightly roughens the surface and 
increases the number of −OH groups, in a manner 
similar to hydrophilic chemical activation. The 
plasma activation is a dry process that is much more 
compatible with many micromachining process 
flows. Also, because it is a dry process, it is compatible 
with released devices (no stiction problems). The 
bond still needs to be annealed, just as in regular 
fusion bonding, but the anneal temperatures and 
times required for a strong bond are much less 
(400°C vs. 1100°C), possibly because of the slightly 
roughened surface.
It should be noted that spontaneous bonding of 
Si wafers also has been claimed with hydrophobic 
surfaces. It was suggested that such low-temperature 
bonding is due to van der Waals forces, whereas 
hydrogen bridging is involved in hydrophilic sur-
faces. The bonding energy obtained with hydro-
phobic wafers was as low as 26 mJ/m2, but after 
annealing at 600°C, the bonding energy reached 
a value of 2.5 J/m2, only attainable at 900°C with 
hydrophilic wafers.42 This is in contradiction with 
most other research done, which concludes that the 
wafers must be hydrophilic for SFB.
Early on, it was reported that Si3N4 was a non-
bondable surface.43 Based on Reaction 4.1, one 
would assume that the low-temperature direct 
bonding of Si3N4 could take place only if oxidation 
of the nitride introduced silanol groups. Indeed, an 
oxidized surface of nitride was reported to bond at 
high temperatures consistent with Si fusion bond-
ing.44 Unexpectedly, Bower et al.45 demonstrated 
extremely strong bonds between Si wafers coated 
with a smooth, clean layer of LPCVD Si3N4 at 
temperatures ranging between 90°C and 300°C. 
A 500-Å-thick nitride was first deposited in the 
LPCVD reactor and then, without breaking the vac-
uum, activated in an ammonia stream for several 
minutes. This group speculates that a chemical reac-
tion such as the following is responsible for bond-
ing where the released hydrogen diffuses from the 
bonding interface:
 ≡ Si−(NxHy) + (NxHy)−Si ≡ → ≡ Si−(2Nx)−Si ≡ + yH2  
 
Reaction 4.2
Fracture occurs at about 2 MPa. In a further exten-
sion of this work, it was found that an NH3 plasma 

[Page 207]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   207
treatment of Si, SiO2, and TiN for 5 min or longer also 
provided direct bondable surfaces. Using Si3N4 as an 
intermediate layer, Bower and coworkers bonded Si 
to Si, Si to SiO2, and Si to GaAs.46 This low-activation 
energy bonding allows bonding of optoelectronic 
components such as GaAs with completed electronic 
circuitry on Si with Al metallization in place.
Thermal Bonding with Intermediate Layers
When incorporating an intermediate layer between 
two substrates, many thermal bonding techniques 
are feasible. If the intermediate layers can be pat-
terned by lithography, both L0 and L1 packaging 
becomes possible. Anodic bonding occurs uniformly, 
but the high fields are detrimental to field-effect 
devices. Some intermediate layer materials with a 
low melting point [e.g., phosphosilicate glass (PSG)] 
do not need electric field for bonding, but the thick-
ness and uniformity are hard to control. An ideal 
method would require neither an electrical field nor 
high temperatures and would be very uniform. With 
films that become soft at low temperatures, all fea-
tures on the wafer may be covered smoothly as long 
as they are not a significant fraction of the interme-
diate film thickness itself.
LPCVD PSG has been used for Si-to-Si wafer bond-
ing. Fusion of two Si wafers coated with 1–2-µm-
thick PSG layers is fast. Excellent bonding results, 
provided the wafers are clean and reasonably flat. 
Unfortunately, the bonding process occurs at a high 
temperature of 1100°C for 30 min.47
Several suppliers of glass materials offer low-
temperature sealing glasses known as glass frits or 
glass solders. Corning Glass Works, for example, has 
introduced a series of glass frits (#75xx) with sealing 
temperatures ranging from 415°C to 650°C.48 These 
glasses are applied by a variety of methods, includ-
ing spraying, screen-printing, extrusion, and sedi-
mentation. After the glass is deposited, it needs to be 
preglazed to remove the organic residues produced 
by vehicle and binder decomposition (see “Types 
of Inks/Pastes and Applications” in Volume  II, 
Chapter  9). The substrate-glass-substrate sandwich 
is  then heated to the sealing temperature while a 
slight pressure is applied (>1 psi). Devitrifying glasses 
and thermoplastic, vitreous glasses are offered. The 
devitrifying glasses are thermosetting, and they 
crystallize during the sealing procedure, thereby 
changing their mechanical properties. The vitreous 
glasses are thermoplastic, melt at a lower tempera-
ture than devitrifying glasses, and flow during seal-
ing, but their material properties do not change after 
sealing is completed. An important problem today 
remains the uncertainty regarding the mechanical 
and chemical behavior of these glasses.27 Moreover, 
almost all of the low-melting-point formulations of 
glass frits contain some lead, which is a major draw-
back because the European Union and Japan are 
forbidding the use of lead in all electronics manu-
facturing in the coming years.
Ko et al.20 used RF sputtering from a target made 
from a Corning 7593 glass frit to obtain a thinner 
(8000 Å) and more uniform intermediate glass film 
for bonding. The sputtered glass did not need glaz-
ing. Annealing at 650°C in an oxygen atmosphere 
resulted in an excellent bond strength of two Si 
wafers coated with these films.
Legtenberg et al.49 used a thin film of atmospheric 
pressure chemical vapor-deposited (APCVD) boron 
oxide with a softening temperature of 450°C. 
However, boron oxide is hygroscopic and does not 
present a viable solution. Field et al.50 used boron-
doped Si dioxide, which also becomes soft at 
450°C. The doping is performed in a solid source 
drive-in furnace. The bond seal is hermetic, and a 
crack propagates right through the material rather 
than along the bonded surface. A problem with this 
method is the sensitivity of the film to phosphorous 
contamination.
Spin-on-glass (SOG) was reported by Yamada 
et  al.51 and Quenzer and Benecke52 In Yamada 
et al.’s effort, SOG [Si(OH)x (with 2 < x < 4)] was 
coated on the wafer surface to be bonded. After the 
50-nm-thick film was baked at a temperature of 
250°C for 10 min, the wafers were contacted and 
pressurized in vacuum at 250°C for 1 h. The bond-
ing was already strong after this step, but wafers 
were further annealed for 1 h at 1150°C in air to 
sinter the SOG layer and to improve the breakdown 
voltage of the layer. Quenzer et al. used sodium sili-
cate as an intermediate layer. The wafers were made 
hydrophilic in an RCA1 cleaning step, and the glass 
was spun on from a dilute sodium silicate solution. 
The film thickness was between 3 and 100 nm, and 

[Page 208]
208   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
annealing at 200°C produced good bonds between 
bare Si wafers, Si wafers with native oxide, thermal 
oxide, and Si nitride. No need for further annealing 
is mentioned in this work.
To bond the unpolished back side of a Si die to 
another Si part, an aqua-gel based on a hydrophilic 
pyrogenic silica powder (grain diameter smaller 
than 7 nm) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) as a binder 
may be used. In this scheme, the adhesion depends 
on hydrogen bonding between the −OH groups of 
the PVA, the SiO2 grains, and the Si surfaces. No spe-
cial surface treatment is required, and the bonding 
can be achieved in 15 min at room temperature. Bond 
strength is in excess of 1 MPa. This new technique 
works for bonding Si to Si, Si to SiO2, SiO2 to SiO2, 
and glass to Si or SiO2. Surprisingly, this technique 
was also shown to work for bonding III-V materials. 
This type of bonding is proposed for the fashioning 
of multichip-on-silicon packaging (L2 level).53
Silicon microstructures can be sealed together 
by eutectic bonding. Eutectic films are alloys of two 
materials and act as the “glue” or solder to bond 
two wafers. Solder is a form of eutectic alloy that is 
commonly used in building printed circuit boards. 
Solder has been used since antiquity to bond metal 
surfaces to one another. It is an alloy with a low 
melting point, typically containing tin or indium, 
used to join electrical components to a circuit board 
or to join metal objects together. In Au-Si eutectic 
bonding, one applies a contact force and increases 
the temperature beyond the Au-Si eutectic tempera-
ture (363°C). This results in diffusion of silicon into 
the gold (not diffusion of gold into silicon) until the 
Au-Si eutectic composition is reached (19 atomic 
percent Si). The Au-Si eutectic bonding takes place 
at a temperature of 363°C, which is well below the 
critical temperature for Al metallized components, 
and Au is a quite commonly used thin-film material. 
These are good reasons to select the Au-Si eutectic, 
but other material combinations are possible. It is 
possible to bond bare Si against Au-covered Si, or 
Au-covered Si against Au-covered Si. Another alter-
native is to use Au-Si preform with a composition 
close to the eutectic concentration. Eutectic bond-
ing in MEMS packaging is demonstrated below, in 
Figure 4.37, where we illustrate a wafer-to-wafer 
transfer of an encapulsation package. Tiensuu et al. 
have demonstrated a mean fracture strength of the 
Au-Si bond of 148 MPa.54 This compares well with 
fusion bonding with a typical bond strength of 
5–15 MPa.
There are some considerable disadvantages asso-
ciated with Au-Si eutectic bonding. It is difficult to 
obtain complete bonding over large areas, and even 
native oxides prevent the bonding to take place 
and eutectic preform (e.g., with Au-Sn) bonding is 
reported to introduce substantial mounting stress in 
piezoresistive sensors, causing long-term drift due to 
relaxation of the built-in stress.20
Bonding with Organic Layers
Two silicon wafers also can be bonded using an inter-
mediate polymer film that forms the “glue” between 
the two. Polymers such as polyimide, or “epoxy” can 
be used; if the glue can be deposited in a uniform 
film and has good adhesion to Si, it can be used to 
bond the two wafers together. One of the issues with 
polymers is that as they are baked to harden them, 
they produce vapors of solvents within them, and 
these vapors create voids, which tend to push the 
two wafers apart. Therefore, polymers that tend to 
outgas very little are desired. One of these materi-
als is benzo-cyclobutene (BCB), which is used as an 
insulator in building integrated circuits. BCB can be 
spin deposited and then patterned like photoresist. 
Thus, it is possible to create fine features on one wafer 
that can then be used to bond to a companion wafer. 
BCB patterns retain their shape after bonding, and 
the bond strength is very high (one needs to destroy 
the BCB to break the bonded wafers). It is also possi-
ble to use another polymer, such as Parylene, which 
is simply a plastic. When heated, the plastic joins 
the two wafers together. Parylene is a very inert, 
tough, and easy to deposit polymer. It is used exten-
sively in implantable biomedical systems. It can be 
evaporated at room temperature (0.1–10 µm range) 
and when deposited it is conformal, uniform, and 
pinhole-free.
A most interesting option for packaging is 
through lithographic patterning of thick resist 
layers. Prominent new candidates for packaging 
micromachines are thick ultraviolet photoresists, 
such as AZ-4000 and SU-8, reviewed in Volume II, 
Chapter 1, as well as LIGA resists such as PMMA. 

[Page 209]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   209
Using polymers, very low bonding temperatures are 
possible. The bond strength can be quite high, no 
metal ions are present, and the elastic properties 
can reduce stress. One can envision that with thick 
enough polymer layers, packaging as part of the front-
end processing will become possible (up to level 2). 
Disadvantages include impossibility of hermetic 
seals (see Figure 4.29), high vapor pressure, and 
in cases where a high Young’s modulus and low 
hysteresis is required poor mechanical properties.
An example of photopatterned bonding is pro-
vided by the flexible polysiloxane interconnection 
between two substrates demonstrated by Arquint 
et  al.55 UV-sensitive cross-linking of polysiloxane 
layers with a thickness of several hundred microme-
ters is used to pattern the polymer onto the first sub-
strate, and a condensation reaction is used to form a 
chemical bond to the second surface. The procedure 
is illustrated in Figure 4.23.55
Good bonding results with photopatternable 
resists also have been obtained by den Besten et al.,56 
who used negative photoresist at a bonding tempera-
ture of 130°C. In an important potential application, 
UV-curable encapsulant resins have been employed 
for wafer-level packaging of ion-sensitive field effect 
transistors (ISFETs).57
Bonding of Plastic to Plastic
A major concern of polymer-based MEMS, espe-
cially in microfluidic devices, is how to bond plas-
tic parts together. This bonding or application of 
plastic lids to plastic microparts can be achieved 
using adhesives or tapes, plastic welding (e.g., hot 
plate and ultrasonic welding), and selected organic 
solvents (i.e., partially dissolving the bonding sur-
faces and evaporating the solvent). In our labora-
tory, several of these techniques have been tried, 
including vacuum-assisted heat bonding, bonding 
with  double-sided adhesive tape, and water- soluble 
polymer-assisted bonding. Figure 4.24 shows a 
cross-section of microchannels bonded by these 
three methods. For large features (several hundred 
micrometers to millimeters), conventional plastic 
welding techniques such as hot plate, ultrasonic, 
and infrared (IR) welding can be used. Applying vac-
uum before welding may reduce voids at the welded 
interface, and consequently, lower pressure and tem-
perature can be used in welding. This minimizes the 
molten polymer from flowing into the bonded chan-
nels (see Figure 4.24a). Ideally, small overflow traps 
should be designed along the edge of the channels 
(as shown in Figure 4.25) to completely prevent the 
channels from being blocked by the molten polymer 
during welding. For smaller channel sizes (less than 
100 µm), the design and fabrication of overflow traps 
become difficult. Double-sided adhesive tape can be 
a useful way for microbonding, as shown in Figure 
4.24b. The main disadvantage is that the presence of 
an adhesive tape tends to change the channel size 
and channel wall properties. This is the technique 
we often used in the assembly of the compact disc 
(CD) fluidic platform (see Chapter 5, Figure 5.28). 
For very small channels (less than 1 µm), prefilling 
the channels with a water-soluble polymer (serving 
as a sacrificial material), drying the polymer, sealing 
the plate with channels to a cover lid by either weld-
ing or adhesive bonding, and then washing out the 
water-soluble polymer turns out to be a viable way to 
Condensation cross-linking
Patterned polymer layer
UV light
Mask
Mylar
sheet
Pipette
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 4.23 Procedure for silicon/polymer/silicon bond-
ing: (a) Monomer solution is deposited either by spin 
coating or casting; (b) exposure to ultraviolet light for 
photopolymerization; (c) polymeric pattern is developed 
in xylene; (d) second wafer is pressed onto the polymeric 
pattern and left for humidity-induced polymerization 
in ambient air (10 h). (From Arquint, P., P. D. van der 
Wal, B. H. van der Schoot, and N. F. de Rooij. 1995. In 
8th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators (Transducers ’95), 263–64. Stockholm, Sweden. 
With permission.55)

[Page 210]
210   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
prevent channel blockage during bonding (see Figure 
4.24c). This method, however, is more tedious and 
may not always be applicable. Development of low-
cost, high-speed, and reliable bonding techniques 
for microfluidic devices remains an important and 
challenging issue in bio-MEMS fabrication.
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), introduced in 
Volume II, Chapter 2, is the most common example 
of a group of polymers known as silicones. Silicones 
are used as a component in silicone grease and other 
silicone-based lubricants, as well as in defoaming 
agents, damping fluids, heat transfer fluids, cos-
metics, hair conditioner, and other applications; 
they are also the primary component in Silly Putty. 
PDMS is used extensively in microfluidics research 
to create channels, valves, pumps, and other com-
ponents that make up microfluidic systems. As we 
saw in Volume II, Chapter 2, the molecular structure 
of PDMS is made up of a backbone of siloxane with 
two methyl groups attached to each silicon atom. 
The backbone is terminated with either a methyl 
group or hydroxyl group. PDMS can be reversibly 
and irreversibly bonded to a variety of substrates. 
Without pretreatment, PDMS bonds reversibly to 
glass structures with a bond strength that can sur-
vive fluidic pressures of ∼4 psi, enough for many 
microfluidics applications. Activating the PDMS 
surfaces with a plasma treatment before bonding 
can create an irreversible bond. The plasma treat-
ment temporarily replaces one of the methyl groups 
of the PDMS with a silanol group. This activation 
typically lasts for tens of minutes. If the surface of 
an activated PDMS layer comes in contact with 
another activated surface, the silanol groups com-
bine to create a siloxane bond and a water molecule, 
similar to the hydrophilic fusion bonding process 
described above. There is no need to anneal this 
bond because the high permeability of the sur-
rounding polymer allows the water molecule to dif-
fuse away easily (although heat speeds the process 
up). Irreversible PDMS bonds can stand pressures of 
up to 70 psi.
The bonding processes detailed here are summa-
rized in Table 4.2. A good review of polymer micro-
molding, including polymer bonding, is that of 
Becker and Gärtner.58
Alignment during Bonding
Obtaining good alignment between the device 
wafer and support substrate (e.g., glass or another Si 
wafer) during bonding poses some extra challenges, 
because a transfer from aligner to annealing furnace 
(a)
Vacuum-assisted hot plate
bonding
Adhesive tape bonding
Water-soluble polymer-assisted
bonding
Cover
Water-soluble
polymer
Substrate with
microchannel
Substrate with
microchannel
200 m
Cover
Adhesive
tape
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 4.24 Scanning electron microscope cross-section of bonded microchannels by three diff erent methods (see text). 
(Courtesy of Dr. Marc Madou and Dr. James Lee, Ohio State University.) 
Cover lid
Horn for
ultrasonic
welding
Overﬂow
trap
Polymer
substrate
Microchannel
FIGURE 4.25 Schematic of ultrasonic welding with over-
flow trap. (Courtesy of Dr. Marc Madou and Dr. James Lee, 
Ohio State University.)

[Page 211]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   211
generally is required after alignment. One technique 
used for bonding alignment is to generate holes in 
both the device wafer and the substrate, followed by 
putting them in a specially designed fixture to per-
form the bonding. The accuracy achievable with this 
option is only around 50 µm, though. Higher align-
ment accuracy (∼2.5 µm) can be achieved by using 
a bonding machine equipped with an in situ optical 
alignment setup. Aligned wafer bonding has been 
worked on extensively by Bower et al.59 They used 
an infrared aligner modified to hold two imprinted 
wafers face to face while projecting an infrared image 
of the surfaces to a viewing screen (see Figure 4.26).59 
An array of V-grooves etched into the surface of the 
Si wafers was then precisely aligned, and the wafers 
were brought in contact for initial bonding. The 
TABLE 4.2 Comparison of Bonding Techniques
Anodic
Fusion
Glass Frit
Eutectic
Solder
Parylene
PDMS
Bond strength
Very strong
Excellent
Strong
Strong
Strong
OK
Weak
Hermeticity
Good
Excellent
Good
Good 
Good
Poor/OK
Poor
Temperature
Formation
250–400°C
200–1000°C
400–500°C
>363°C
57–400°C
230°C
RT–90°C
Service
>400°C
>1000°C
<400°C
<363°C
<<formation
<<230°C
<90°C
TCE mismatch
OK
Good
OK
OK
Poor
OK
OK
CMOS-compatible
OK
Poor
OK
OK
Good
Good
Good
Process complexity
Low
Some
Some
Some
Some
Some
Some
Planarization 
capability
Poor
Very poor
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Maturity
Decades
Several years
Several years
Several years
Years
Newer
Years
Cost
$
$$$
$$
$$$
$$
$$
$
TV monitor
CCD
camera
Microscope
Video
graphic
printer
Top wafer holder
vacuum
Substrate
vacuum
Hard
contact
knob
Infrared source
Bottom wafer
chuck
Soft contact vacuum
Mask plate holder (rotatable)
vacuum
Wafers
z
y
x
θ
FIGURE 4.26 Alignment fixture for bonding. The schematic diagram shows the infrared aligner system used for wafer 
bonding. Wafer holders are designed with a large opening at the center to allow maximum infrared energy to pass 
through to the camera. (Courtesy of Dr. R. Bower, University of California, Davis.)

[Page 212]
212   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
(111) planes that define the walls of the V-groove 
create a shadow image without the necessity of 
metal features commonly used for two-sided back-
side alignment. The initial bonding is nothing more 
than the normal soft contact provided by the aligner 
itself. Hydrogen bonds are formed between the two 
surfaces in intimate contact. These relatively weak 
bonds of about 0.05 eV are sufficient to hold the two 
pieces firmly together without relative displacement 
during the transport from the aligner to the anneal-
ing furnace. Subsequent high-temperature anneal-
ing (950°C for 30 min) was used to strengthen and 
complete the chemical bonding. The aligned-wafer 
technique also can be used when dealing with dis-
similar substrates.
Shoaf and Feinerman60 developed an alignment 
technique to assist in precise Au-Si eutectic bonding 
of Si structures. A (100)Si wafer is anisotropically 
etched to create V-grooves around the periphery of 
the structure to be bonded. Gold is deposited onto 
one of the wafers prior to dicing into individual 
dice. Optical fibers are placed into the orthogonal 
V-grooves, as demonstrated in Figure 4.27, and used 
as precision location keys for assembly prior to bond-
ing. The entire structure is placed on a hot chuck at 
400°C for bonding, and the fibers are removed after 
bonding. Results have shown a maximum misalign-
ment of 5 µm for a 1 × 1 cm die. This technique 
allows a sensor die to be precisely bonded to an 
electronics die without the aid of a microscope or 
micropositioners.
Imaging and Bond Strength and 
Package Hermeticity Tests
Methods for imaging a bonded pair of Si wafers 
include infrared transmission (voids larger than 
20–30 µm can be seen this way), ultrasound (quali-
tative information about the bond quality), and x-ray 
topography. The most common mechanical tech-
niques to characterize bond strength are illustrated 
in Figure 4.28.36 Both the burst test (Figure 4.28a) 
and the tensile/shear test (Figure 4.28b) yield impor-
tant engineering insights for sensor construction but 
do not yield information about the detailed nature 
of the bond because of the complicated loading 
of the interface.36 In the Maszara method,61 a thin 
blade is inserted between the bonded wafers and a 
crack is introduced (Figure 4.28c). The length of the 
crack, measured by infrared imaging, gives a value 
for the surface energy inferred through knowledge of 
the sample and blade thickness and the elastic prop-
erties of the wafer. This method has the advantage of 
creating a well-defined loading on the bonded inter-
face. Unfortunately, the surface energy is a fourth 
FIGURE 4.27 Schematic representation of the anisotropi-
cally etched V-groove/optical fiber alignment technique. 
Optical fibers are placed into the V-grooves of the bottom 
Si die. A second die with etched V-grooves is then placed 
on top of the first die. The fibers act as precision locating 
keys and align the two Si dice. (From Shoaf, S. E., and A. D. 
Feinerman. 1994. Aligned Au-Si eutectic bonding of silicon 
structures. J Vac Sci Technol A12:19–22.60) 
Bond
interface
Bond
interface
Tensile or
shear load
Pressure
(a)
(b)
(c)
Knife
edge
Crack
length
FIGURE 4.28 Three methods for bond strength measure-
ments. (a) Burst test. (b) Tensile and shear test. (c) Maszera 
test. (From Schmidt, M. A. 1994. In Technical Digest: 1994 
Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, 127–30. Hilton 
Head Island, SC. With permission.36) 

[Page 213]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   213
power of the crack length and uncertainties in mea-
suring that length make for large errors.
The hermeticity of sealed cavities in packaging is 
important for physical protection purposes and, in 
some cases, for the performance of the sensor inside. 
The word hermetic means airtight, so a good hermetic 
seal does not let gasses, vapors, or liquids pass across 
it. Some materials are better than others at creating 
hermetic seals because their molecules (or atoms) 
are more closely spaced together. Hermeticity is an 
important parameter for micropackaging because 
certain MEMS devices need vacuum to operate and 
ICs need a dry environment to maintain their reli-
ability. For example, the quality factor, Q, of a reso-
nator, the vacuum reference of an absolute pressure 
sensor, and the cavity of a pneumatic infrared sen-
sor (i.e., a Golay cell) all are critically dependent on 
a good hermetic package. Testing the hermeticity of 
electronic devices usually is carried out by helium 
leak detection. While this technique, with a mini-
mum detectable leak rate of 5 × 10–11 to 5 × 10–10 
Torr L/s, is appropriate for testing of relatively large 
packages, it is unacceptable for nearly every Si sen-
sor application (it is not valid for package sizes under 
1000 nL). Nese et al. have introduced Fourier trans-
form infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy for measuring the 
gas concentration inside a sealed Si cavity using N2O 
as a tracer gas.62 Although the sensitivity for leakage 
is about the same as with a helium leak detector, the 
method is accumulative, so by prolonging the expo-
sure times, the sensitivity can be increased, which is 
not possible with the dynamic helium leakage test-
ing method.
Although anodic bonding may be carried out in 
a vacuum chamber, the pressure inside a Si cavity 
differs from the chamber pressure because of gas 
generation, probably oxygen, during bonding. To 
control cavity pressure for critical damping of pack-
aged micromechanical devices, Minami et al.63 used 
nonevaporable getters. Getters are agents that coun-
teract harmful contaminants within a sealed pack-
age; they may include solids, liquids, gases, and 
combinations thereof. The solid nonevaporable get-
ter used by Minami et al.62 is a Ni/Cr ribbon covered 
with a mixture of porous Ti and Zr-V-Fe alloy that 
absorbs gases after activation at 400°C and is built 
into the microdevice. These authors monitored the 
effectiveness of their method to control cavity pres-
sure by measuring deflection of a thin membrane 
covering the cavity.
Figure 4.29 shows the relative capabilities of sev-
eral materials to exclude moisture from the encap-
sulated components over long periods. Organic 
materials are not good candidates for hermetic 
packages; for almost all high-reliability applications, 
the hermetic seal is made of glass or metal. Plastic 
packaging for integrated circuits (ICs) is governed 
by several industry standards that have evolved over 
the years; plastic packaging for MEMS, on the other 
hand, is not yet governed by any standard. For the 
simplest mechanical sensors, standard or slightly 
modified IC plastic packages are used. New plastic 
packaging technologies and their standardization 
for MEMS will begin only once the volume of MEMS 
products approaches a larger fraction of that of ICs.
For measuring moisture penetration in a pack-
age, temperature-accelerated soak tests may be per-
formed. Moisture penetration can be followed, for 
example, with an integrated on-chip dew-point sen-
sor.25 Striny64 points out that the cost or difficulty of 
obtaining a truly hermetic seal for a particular pack-
age often is prohibitive. In that case, in addition to 
polymer lid sealing, surface die coats, for example 
101
Silicones
Epoxies
Fluorocarbons
Glasses
Metals
100
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–6
MIN
H
DAY
MO YR
10
YR
100
YR
10–8
Permeability (g/cm-s-Torr)
Tickness (cm)
10–10
10–12
10–14
10–16
FIGURE 4.29 The calculated time for moisture to per-
meate various sealant materials (to 50% of the exterior 
humidity) in one defined geometry. Organics are orders 
of magnitude more permeable than materials typically 
used for hermetic seals. (From Striny, K. M. 1988. In VLSI 
Technology, ed. S. M. Sze, 566–611. New York: McGraw-
Hill. With permission.64) 

[Page 214]
214   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
with silicones, are applied. From Figure 4.29,64 we 
can conclude that silicones do not act as a moisture 
barrier; the exact mechanism by which they protect 
the die when applied as a surface coat is not yet well 
understood.65
Examples of MEMS Packages
Introduction
Pressure sensors and accelerometers typically fit in 
standard packages, but few other MEMS devices do. 
Examples of nonstandard packages that we have 
already discussed include the catheter-based electro-
chemical sensor shown in Volume II, Figures 4.92 to 
4.96, where a dual-lumen catheter forms the basis of 
the packaging scheme, and the thin-film magnetic 
head illustrated in Chapter 1, Figure 1.1d, this vol-
ume. The very fragmented nature of micromachin-
ing applications and the nonstandardness of the 
package necessitate a design approach starting from 
the package.
Cap-on-Carrier and Cap-on-Chip
In Figure 4.30, two MEMS packaging schemes are 
compared. The cap-on-carrier packaging method 
(L1) (Figure 4.30a) is suitable for accelerometers, 
gyroscopes, and other motion detectors that can be 
hermetically sealed. It is the prevalent method in 
industry today. The cap-on chip is an on-chip pack-
aging method (Figure 4.30b), also called chip scale 
packaging (CSP), that is the preferred approach, as the 
packaging can be made part of the front-end batch 
manufacturing process and may be much smaller. 
The two approaches are contrasted in Figure 4.31.
One reoccurring problem in MEMS packaging is 
how to protect sensitive movable mechanical struc-
tures during dicing. The dicing process is very harsh, 
and any loose structure might break off. Fortunately, 
in most MEMS process sequences, the step where 
movable structures are released is the final so-called 
release step (typically, a sacrificial material is etched 
away to free the movable part; see Volume II, Chap-
ter 7). By carrying this release step out after dicing, 
breakage of sensitive MEMS structures is avoided.
But individual die-level release is expensive and 
slow. Released dice, as shown in Figure 4.31, are 
packaged in ceramic or metal cavity packages. These 
packages often are large and expensive. Alternately, 
one does the MEMS release at the wafer level and 
then wafer-level packages the devices before dicing. 
Wafer-level packaging must follow the wafer-level 
release, again to avoid damaging the MEMS. The pro-
cess is called CSP with caps-on-chip. These caps may 
be made of glass or another Si piece and typically 
are still quite bulky (millimeters rather than tens or 
hundreds of micrometers). These bulk wafer caps are 
MEMS  IC
Silicon or metal cap
Molded or liquid encapsulant
Solder, weld, or polymer
(a)
MEMS  Chip
Cap
Vacuum
Seal
(b)
FIGURE 4.30 Cap-on-carrier (a) and cap-on-chip 
(b) compared.
Fabricate
Singulate
Singulate
Chip scale package (CSP)
Release
Fabricate
Release
Wafer bond
Package
Ceramic
cavity
package
FIGURE 4.31 Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) 
are either diced, then released and finally packaged in 
ceramic or metal cavity packages. Or one does the MEMS 
release at the wafer level and then wafer-level package 
the devices before dicing. The latter process is called chip 
scale packaging (CSP).

[Page 215]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   215
the current industry standard, used, for example, in 
Motorola accelerometers, Bosch gyroscopes, Clarisay 
SAW filters, and Radant MEMS switches. The bulk 
wafer caps are robust, hermetic, and implemented 
on a wafer-level, but they require a large on-chip 
area for the seal ring. Below, we review a number 
of alternative wafer-level cavity sealings, i.e., cap-
on-chip techniques such as the microassembled 
HEXSIL caps, techniques that are today mostly in 
the research and development phase. They all have 
a considerable smaller footprint than the bulk caps 
discussed here.
The Digital Mirror Device™ from Texas Instru-
ments, discussed in Volume II, Example 7.2, utilizes 
a vacuum hermetic package with a transparent opti-
cal window as shown in Figure 4.32. The package 
also includes a getter to adsorb any residual mois-
ture. This package is an example of a special type of 
cap-on-carrier package.
Next-Generation Cap-on-Chip Cavity Sealing
Introduction
Many microdevices have been fabricated making 
use of some type of cavity sealing or cap-on-chip 
technique. Cavity sealing can serve as a batch-
compatible zero- and first-level packaging technique 
by encapsulating a die feature (L0) or a whole die 
at a time (L1). In bulk micromachining (Volume II, 
Chapter 4) and Si fusion-bonded (SFB) surface 
micromachining (Volume II, Chapter 7), cavities 
are fabricated by bonding, respectively, a glass plate 
(anodic bonding) or Si wafer (fusion bonding) over 
etched cavities in a bottom Si wafer. The Si and 
glass layers bonded typically are rather thick and 
do not lend themselves well to die feature level 
packaging. In polysilicon and selective epitaxy 
surface micromachining (see Volume II, Chapter 7), 
on the other hand, sealing cavities often is a more 
integral part of the overall fabrication process, and 
both die and die features might be packaged this 
way. These and other lithography-defined packages, 
such as those involving ultraviolet patternable 
polymers, lend themselves to inexpensive batch 
solutions and represent a new technology area 
where micromachining could provide solutions for 
the MEMS and IC industries.
Sealing of Polysilicon and 
Silicon Nitride Cavities
In Figure 4.33a, we illustrate how a polysilicon 
vacuum shell encapsulates a polysilicon resona-
tor element. The micromachined surface package 
(microshell) illustrated is much smaller than typi-
cal bulk-micromachined packages. Microshells can 
be made by defining thin gaps (∼100 nm) between 
the substrate and the perimeter of the structural ele-
ments by etching away a sacrificial layer sandwiched 
Window
Heat sink
Ceramic
Weld
or
seal
MEMS digital mirrors
one section
Hermetic
Getter
250,000 mirrors
FIGURE 4.32 Packaged Digital Mirror Device™ from Texas 
Instruments utilizes a vacuum hermetic package with a 
transparent optical window. The package also includes a 
getter to adsorb any residual moisture.
(a)
(b)
Si
Polysilicon
Resonator
Vacuum
Surface micromachined sealed resonator
Etched spacer
Cavity
O2
SiO2
FIGURE 4.33 Sealed cavities in surface micromachining. 
(a) Typical sealed cavity with a resonator structure inside. 
(b) Reactive sealing.

[Page 216]
216   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
between the two and then sealing the resulting gaps. 
In so-called reactive sealing, demonstrated in the 
schematic fabrication sequence in Figure 4.33b, ther-
mal oxidation of the polysilicon and Si substrate at 
1000°C seals the narrow openings left after removal 
of the spacer phosphosilicate glass (PSG).66–68 
Reactive sealing is possible even in vacuum because 
of the reaction of oxygen, trapped inside the cavity. 
Alternatively, sealant films, such as oxides and 
nitrides, can be deposited over small etchant 
holes,67,69 as illustrated in the fabrication sequence 
in Figure 4.34A. In the latter case, the cavity is sealed 
by low-pressure chemical vapor-deposited (LPCVD) 
silicon nitride. The excellent coverage of this method 
ensures that the nitride closes the etch channel 
quickly before too much deposition in the chamber 
itself can take place. Typical deposition conditions 
during the sealing step are 850°C and 250 mTorr, 
so the residual pressure in the microshell, at room 
temperature (assuming ideal gases) should be about 
67 mTorr. Some researchers have reported residual 
pressures of 200–300 mTorr.70 Eaton and Smith71 
(a) Deposit
low-stress nitride
(b) Deposit- and
pattern-thick oxide
(c) Deposit- and
pattern-thin oxide
(d) Deposit and pattern
diaphragm nitride
(e) Etch oxides in HF
Si
Metallization
Low-stress nitride
Polysilicon piezoresistor
(A)
Tick oxide
Tin oxide
(h) Deposit and pattern aluminum
(g) Deposit-, implant-, and
pattern-piezoresistive polysilicon
(f) Seal diaphragm
with nitride
 
(B)
Reference
pressure
Ballast resistor
Radial  strain gauge
Applied pressure
Circumferential
strain gauge
Materials key
Silicon nitride
Polysilicon
Metallization
(C)
FIGURE 4.34 Absolute pressure sensor.70 (A) Schematic fabrication sequence of vacuum shell with low-pressure chemical 
vapor-deposited Si nitride sealing. The vacuum shell constitutes the reference chamber of an absolute pressure sensor. 
(B) Schematic of absolute pressure sensor with Si nitride membrane. (C) Scanning electron microscope microphotograph 
of a finished device. (Courtesy of Dr. J. H. Smith, Sandia National Laboratories.)

[Page 217]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   217
established that the resulting cavity pressure is sta-
ble for a given membrane, but the residual pressure 
is variable and nonrepeatable across a substrate and 
even less from substrate to substrate.
The fabrication time of packaging shells often 
makes for a long process. The sacrificial material 
inside the shell is removed very slowly given the 
poor access via narrow etch holes to it by the etchant. 
Lebouitz et al. at the University of California, 
Berkeley, introduced an interesting means to speed 
up the fabrication of microshells.72 The process 
is outlined in Figure 4.35. Permeable polysilicon 
windows (see Volume II, Chapter 7) are used as an 
etch access for removing the underlying sacrificial 
PSG. Using concentrated HF, shells 3 µm high and 
as wide as 1 mm have been cleared of PSG in less 
than 120 s. Subsequent low-pressure hermetic seal-
ing using low-stress Si nitride leads to deposition of 
less than 100 Å inside the package.
Sealed cavities, as shown here, lend themselves 
well to pressure sensing applications. Depending 
on the atmosphere to which the chip is exposed to 
during the sealing process, gauge, vacuum, or abso-
lute pressure sensors can be created.73,74 The process 
outline in Figure 4.34A actually illustrates the case 
of an absolute pressure sensor with a Si3N4 mem-
brane.71 The sensor consists of a circular Si nitride 
diaphragm, which forms the top of a sealed vacuum 
cavity, providing the pressure reference. Polysilicon 
strain gauges are fabricated on top of the diaphragm 
and the measured resistance changes are, to first 
order, directly proportional to the applied pressure. 
In Figure 4.34B, we show a schematic of the sensor, 
and in Figure 4.34C, we feature an scanning elec-
tron microscope (SEM) microphotograph of a fin-
ished device.
Of reactive sealing and sealant films, the reactive 
sealing process is by far the most elegant and highest 
in performance. The first commercial absolute poly-
silicon pressure sensor, incorporating a reactively 
sealed vacuum shell, was introduced for automotive 
applications in 1995 by SSI Technologies, but it is 
not a product offering anymore.75 Another applica-
tion of the above type of sealed surface shells is the 
vacuum packaging of lateral surface resonators. Most 
resonator applications share a need for resonance 
quality factors from 100 to 10,000. However, the 
operation of comb-drive microstructures, as shown 
in Volume II, Figure 7.76, in ambient atmosphere 
results in low-quality factors of less than 100 due 
to air damping above and below the moving micro-
structure.76 Vacuum encapsulation is thus essential 
for high-Q applications. It also has been shown that 
lateral comb-drive microresonators,77 besides their 
use in commercial accelerometers, have potential 
applications in areas such as mechanical filters for 
signal processing,78 noncontact electrostatic voltage 
sensing,79 and rotation-rate sensing.80
Epitaxial Deposition Cavity Sealing
Deposition of a set of epitaxial Si layers with varying 
doping has shown to afford the formation of a her-
metically sealed surface cavity.81 The cavity, in this 
Top view
Cross-section:
As fabricated
Cross-section:
After HF etch
Cross-section:
After sealing
Polysilicon
SiN
SiN
PSG
Si wafer
FIGURE 4.35 Schematic of etch access window design, 
operation, and sealing. [From Lebouitz, K. S., R. T. Howe, 
and A. P. Pisano. 1995. In 8th international conference on 
solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’95), 224–27. 
Stockholm, Sweden. With permission.72]

[Page 218]
218   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
example of selective epitaxy surface micromachin-
ing, is formed by selective etching of p+ epitaxial Si 
over more heavily doped Si p++ layers. The process is 
illustrated in Figure 4.36. The fabrication starts with 
a HCl dry etch at 1050°C in an epireactor through 
a hole in an oxide mask (Figure 4.36, steps a and 
b). Then follows a selective epitaxial growth of sili-
con in the following sequence: doped p+, p++, and 
p+, p++ as indicated in Figure 4.36, steps c, d, e, and f. 
These steps are all carried out in the same epireactor, 
simply by changing the concentration of the B2H6 
dopant. The next step consists of stripping of the 
oxide in HF (Figure 4.36, step g), followed by selec-
tive electrochemical etching in hydrazine (step h). 
In this electrochemical etching step, the n-substrate 
is passivated against the etching by the imposed 
potential and the p++ structures by the boron etch-
stop mechanism. At this juncture, one ends up with 
a microbridge covered by a cap, both made out of 
single-crystalline, heavily boron-doped Si (p++). The 
cap finally is sealed by growth of an n-type epitax-
ial layer (Figure 4.36, step i). The residual hydrogen 
in the cavity, after sealing, is diffused through the 
epitaxial layer by high-temperature annealing in a 
nitrogen ambient, resulting in a residual pressure 
inside the cavity of 1 mTorr (step j).81,82 To make a 
pressure sensor that incorporates such an encapsu-
lated resonator in a suspended membrane, one has 
to fabricate a membrane by etching from the back 
side of the wafer; a rather trivial step compared with 
the process just described. In the particular device 
shown here, the resonance of the encapsulated beam 
is activated by a Lorentz force and detected by mea-
suring the resulting inductance.
Microassembled Caps or 
HEXSIL Cavity Sealing
Researchers at the University of California, 
Berkeley (UCB) developed another vacuum encap-
sulation method suitable for L0 and L1 level 
SiO2 (600 nm)
(a) Photo lithography
(g) Removing SiO2
(h) Selective etching
(i) Epi (n)
(j) Annealing in N2
H2
H2
H2
(b) HCl etching
P+
P++
P+
P++
P+
P+
P++
P+
n-epi
Cap Resonator
Evacuated
cavity
Silicon substrate
P++
n
n
P+
n
n
(c) Selective epi (P+)
(d) Selective epi (P++)
(e) Selective epi (P+)
(f) Selective epi (P++)
(100) n-Type Si
P++
P++
P+
P+
P++
P++
P++
P++
H2
n
n
FIGURE 4.36 Epilayer-based fabrication process of a vacuum-encapsulated resonant beam. Process from (b) to (f) is 
carried out in one batch epitaxial process. For process step details see text. (From Ikeda, K., H. Kuwayama, T. Kobayashi, 
T. Watanabe, T. Nishikawa, T. Yoshida, and K. Harada. 1990. Silicon pressure sensor integrates resonant strain gauge on 
diaphragm. Sensors Actuators A A21:146–50. With permission.82)

[Page 219]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   219
packaging involving the wafer-to-wafer trans-
fer of micromachined caps as demonstrated in 
Figure 4.37a.83 Reactive sealing requires a temper-
ature of 1000°C, and thick SiN sealing requires 
850°C. Moreover, in the latter technique some seal-
ant gas deposits on the encapsulated microdevices. 
In the alternative UCB packaging method, tethered 
cap structures are sealed down to the substrate 
employing a low-temperature Au-Si eutectic bond 
(the gold-silicon eutectic at 363°C is safely below 
that for aluminum-silicon). The encapsulation caps 
are made in the HEXSIL* process, as demonstrated 
in Figure 4.37b (see Volume II, Chapter 7, for details 
on the HEXSIL process). The caps have the general 
shape of a top hat and are suspended by breakaway 
polysilicon flexures in the handle wafer. The brim 
of the hat is coated with 0.7 µm of gold. The HEXSIL 
wafer with the embedded caps is positioned (∆x < 
10 µm) over the Si wafer with the active devices to 
be encapsulated. In situ annealing in vacuum by 
infrared heating forms the eutectic bond between 
the Si of the bottom wafer and the gold rim of the 
cap. The transfer occurs at a chamber pressure of 
10–5 Torr, with 10 psi of mechanical pressure applied 
to the wafer sandwich. When the handle wafer is 
withdrawn, the polysilicon flexures break, leaving 
the caps sealed to the substrate wafer. In some lim-
ited test runs in a laboratory setting, a transfer yield 
of 100% was obtained for arrays of thirty caps. The 
HEXSIL mold wafer is reusable. An example of a 
transferred encapsulation cap is shown in the SEM 
micrograph in Figure 4.37c. To summarize, in the 
microassembled caps process, microcaps are fabri-
cated on a donor wafer and transferred to a target 
wafer by wafer bonding and separation. The thin 
seal ring on the cap requires very little real estate 
(∼1% of a bulk cap). The process potentially might 
be much less expensive than wafer-bonded caps 
as well.
Many of the newfound ways of hermetically seal-
ing and bonding different layers and making contacts 
between them increasingly interest IC manufactur-
ers. An important opportunity for micromachinists 
is to transfer the developed 3D machining technolo-
gies to the newest generations of 3D ICs.
Assembly and Self-Assembly
Introduction
Assembly is used to build complex products from 
relatively simple parts and to integrate incompatible 
* HEXSIL is the acronym for hexagonal honeycomb poly-Si.
Align
Bond
Separate
(a)
Recess etch
Deep-trench etch
Release etch
Electroplate gold bumps & seal ring
Termocompression-bond
to target wafer
Deposit & pattern sacriﬁcial,
structural layers
(b)
(c)
20KV
X200
0002
100.0U
MSME
FIGURE 4.37 Wafer-to-wafer transfer of encapsulation 
structures. (From Hok, B., C. Dubon, and C. Ovren. 1983. 
Anodic bonding of galium arsenide to glass. Appl Phys 
Lett 43:267–69. With permission.24) (a) Principle of the 
wafer-to-wafer transfer method of encapsulation caps. 
(b) Fabrication of the tethered caps in a HEXSIL process. 
(c) Scanning electron microscope micrograph of a trans-
ferred cap.82 (Courtesy of Dr. M. Cohen, University of 
California, Berkeley.)

[Page 220]
220   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
manufacturing processes. Today, IC and MEMS 
assembly is mostly carried out by humans with 
tweezers and microscopes or with pick-and-place 
robots.84 Micro- and mesoscale assembly processes 
handle objects from several micrometers to several 
millimeters in size. In Figure 4.38, we consider part 
size and assembly accuracy.
The current challenge is to assemble smaller and 
smaller components from different technologies 
with micro- and nanoprecision. The application 
field of micro- and nanoprecision assembly lies 
well beyond conventional or microscale assem-
bly, with part dimensions larger than 2 mm (see 
Figure 4.38). The various micro- and nanoassem-
bly approaches, divided into serial and parallel 
processes, are summarized in Table 4.3. In serial 
micro- and nanoassembly, parts are picked up and 
placed together on a substrate or workpiece one by 
one. Table 4.3 covers many methods enabling serial 
manipulation of very small parts/particles, includ-
ing individual atoms for nanoassembly. Unless one 
can manipulate many parts/particles in parallel, 
most of these techniques will remain research tools 
rather than manufacturing options. In parallel 
micro- and nanoassembly, where parts are assem-
bled simultaneously, we distinguish between deter-
ministic and stochastic assembly.84 In the former, 
the relationship between the part and its destina-
tion on a substrate is known in advance. In the lat-
ter, this relationship is unknown or random; parts 
“self-assemble” during a stochastic process driven 
by some motive force.
Stochastic self-assembly is an attractive option to 
integrate dissimilar process technologies. To achieve 
self-assembly, bonding forces must be present, the 
bonding must occur selectively, and the assembling 
parts must be able to move so that they can come 
together. Stochastic assembly often encompasses 
vibration of the parts in combination with electro-
static, fluidic, and other forces that operate on singu-
lated parts in various media (fluids, air, or vacuum). 
After reviewing scaling issues of the assembly pro-
cess, several examples of micro- and nanoassembly 
are presented. The smaller the building blocks, the 
higher the need for stochastic self-assembly, as han-
dling the individual components becomes more and 
more of a mechanical challenge, and the process 
would be too slow. Nature, building on the nano-
scale, does rely heavily on self-assembly (Chapter 2), 
and DNA-assisted self-assembly is an early attempt 
at co-opting nature for human manufacturing 
endeavors.
The best way to grab microparts is to use a 
microgripper, where grasping forces and jaw size 
match the requirements. Many kinds of microgrip-
pers have been built. In Volume II, Figure 7.88, we 
show an example of a microgripper made of high-
aspect-ratio molded polycrystalline silicon. The 
white bar at the bottom of the picture represents 
100  µm. The actuator is an electrically heated 
  Microprecision
assembly
<2 mm
  Microassembly
Precision assembly
Microassembly
>5 mm
2 ~ 5 mm
Part size
Assembly accuracy
Conventional
assembly
techniques
 <25 µm
25 ~ 
  200 µm
>200 µm
FIGURE 4.38 Assembly processes: part size assembled and assembly accuracy. (Courtesy of Kory Ehmann.)

[Page 221]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   221
thermal expansion beam, which causes the com-
pound lever linkage to move the tips. Such grippers 
have been used to seize various microscopic objects, 
including 2.7-µm-diameter polystyrene spheres, 
dried red blood cells, and various protozoa.
Scaling of the Assembly Process
Scaling effects in microassembly represent a daunt-
ing task. The newest pick-and-place robots with 
submicrometer resolution must be used, as con-
ventional robots that pick, transport, and place 
small parts have a control error of 100 µm at best, 
which would translate in relative errors of 100% on 
micrometer-sized parts. It might be difficult to pick 
up large objects with a robot gripper, but small parts 
(<1 mm and masses less than 10–6 g) are difficult 
to release, as adhesion forces between gripper and 
object are significant compared with gravitational 
forces at that scale.84 In Chapter 7, this volume, on 
scaling, we will indeed learn that in the microdo-
main, surface forces such as adhesion dominate over 
volume forces such as gravity or inertia. Adhesive 
forces involved in pick-and-place include surface 
tension due to moisture on the part and gripper, 
van der Waals forces (significant for gaps below 100 
nm), and electrostatic attractions (e.g., induced by 
triboelectrification).
In Figure 4.39, we compare the magnitude of 
attractive surface forces (electrostatic, van der 
Waals, and surface tension) with the gravitational 
force as a function of part size, assuming a sphere 
(part)-plane (gripper) interaction. It is observed 
that in the microworld, surface forces dominate over 
gravitational influence. At 1 µm the gravitational 
TABLE 4.3 Micro- and Nanoassembly Approaches
Serial Microassembly
Parallel Microassembly
Type
Refs.
Type
Refs.
Type
Refs.
Deterministic
Deterministic
Stochastic
Examples
Examples
Examples
Manual assembly with tweezers 
and microscopes
Flip-chip wafer-to-wafer 
see, e.g., Figure 4.13
87, 88
Fluidic agitation and 
mating part shapes
89–91
Visually based and teleoperated 
microassembly
85, 86
Microgripper arrays for 
massively parallel 
pick-and-place (see 
Volume II, Figure 7.88 
for an individual 
gripper)
94
Vibratory agitation and 
electrostatic force fields
95–99
High-precision macroscopic 
robots with submicron 
resolution
92, 93
Vibratory agitation and 
mating part shapes
103
Microtweezers
94, 100–102
Mating patterns of 
self-assembling 
monolayers
105
Optical trapping, see, e.g., 
Figure 2.33 this volume
104
Magnetic field-mediated 
separation
107
Microcapillary/pipette-based 
positioning, see, e.g., 
Figure 4.43
106
Dielectrophoretic 
trapping 
109
AFM/STM atom manipulation, 
see, e.g., Volume II, Figures 2.43 
to 2.45
108
Ultrasonic levitation and 
transportation in 
standing acoustic waves
110
Hydrodynamic/electro-
osmotic object 
manipulation in 
microchannels
111, 112
Source:  Based on Böhringer, K. F., R. S. Fearing, and K. Y. Goldberg. 1998. In Handbook of industrial robotics, ed. S. Nof. New York: 
Wiley.84

[Page 222]
222   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
force is the least important force of the four, and at 
10 µm the gravitational force equals the electrostatic 
force.
The electrostatic force is caused by charge attrac-
tion. Between a charged spherical object and a con-
ductive plane it is approximated as follows:
 
F
4
d
el
0
2
=
−
+
π
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
σ
0
0
2 
(4.1)
where 
d = the diameter of the particle
σ = the charge density on the surface
ε0 and ε = the air’s and the plane’s dielectric-
constants, respectively
The distance z between the sphere and the plane is 
assumed to be very small (Figure 4.40).
It is difficult to ensure that parts and grippers are 
electrically neutral because of the friction force and 
the difference in contact potentials between part and 
gripper. The gripper is typically coated with conduc-
tive coatings and grounded (the electrostatic force 
between two good insulators at 1 µm is 106 Pa!).
We already know that van der Waals forces may 
cause sticking together of MEMS parts and that this 
stiction may become permanent (see Volume  II, 
Chapter 7, on stiction in surface micromaching). 
The van der Waals force is an atomic force caused 
by momentary movements of electrons, i.e., dipoles 
(see Volume I, Chapter 7). The sphere-plane van 
der  Waals force is calculated as follows (see also 
Volume I, Table 7.8):
 
F
Hd
12 z
vdw
2
=
 
(4.2)
with the Hamaker constant H (see Volume I, 
Chapter  7, Table 7.6 for some typical values), the 
object diameter d, and the object-plane distance z 
(it is again assumed that z << d). This force becomes 
significant at less than 100 nm and increases with 
contact area (remember the popular study of Gecko 
Setae, with a force as high as 60 µN on a single seta; 
see Volume I, Chapter 7). Rough surfaces increase 
the effective distance z and therefore reduce the van 
der Waals force. Making the gripper surface rough 
might compromise ultimate positioning precision 
though. Also, gripper coatings can reduce the van 
der Waals force.
The presence of water on surfaces increases the 
normal force between the contacting surfaces as a 
result of capillary effects. The source of the liquid film 
between a gripper and part can be either a preexisting 
film of liquid and/or capillary condensates of water 
vapor from the environment. The surface tension force 
can be attractive or repulsive depending upon the 
configuration and the materials involved. The degree 
of hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity affects the contact 
angle (θ) and thus the surface tension force. The cap-
illary tension force between a ball and a plate, with 
reference to Figure 4.41, is given by the following: 
 
F
R
R
R
tens
2
2
1
2
= π
γ
1
1
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(4.3)
100
10–5
10–10
Force (N)
Object radius (m)
Gravity
van der Waal’s
Electrostatic
Surface tension
10–15
1e–06
1e–05
0.0001
0.001
FIGURE 4.39 Comparison of the magnitude of attractive 
surface forces, i.e., electrostatic, van der Waals, and sur-
face tension, with the gravitational force as a function of 
part size, assuming an interaction between sphere (part) 
and plane (gripper).
z
d
FIGURE 4.40 The electrostatic force between a spherical 
particle and a wall.

[Page 223]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   223
where γ  = 72 × 10−3 N/m is the water interfacial 
energy, and R1 and R2 are the axial and the tangential 
radius of the meniscus. To a good approximation, 
2Rl corresponds to the thickness of the water film 
between the ball and the plane at the level of the 
meniscus, and both radii R1 and R2 can be expressed 
as function of ball radius R.
For small values of 2R1 the capillary force between 
the ball and the plane is given by the following 
equation:
 
F
2 R
2
R
R
tens
1
= π γ
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ 
(4.4)
For R1 << R, the capillary force Ftens does not 
depend on the meniscus radius, and this relation 
simplifies to the following:
 
Ftens = 4πRγ = 2πdγ  
(4.5)
where R is the ball radius and d its diameter. When 
humidity is high, or with hydrophilic surfaces, a 
liquid film between a spherical object and a planar 
surface contributes a large capillary force. This effect 
can be reduced, for example, by working in a con-
trolled environment or in a vacuum.
Surface forces make the release of objects after 
picking them up very difficult. To overcome these 
adhesion problems, some simple mechanisms for 
small-scale manufacture have been developed. They 
include electrostatic probes and vacuum probes. 
Also, the smallest components often are manipu-
lated in a liquid medium (e.g., with laser trapping 
or dielectrophoresis). Microassembly obviously 
requires new handling techniques and electrostatic 
contact-less handling appears to be quite promis-
ing. Using a desktop factory (DTF) (see Volume II, 
Chapter 6), Nakao et al. used an electrostatic probe tip 
to assemble the microhouse shown in Figure 4.42.113 
The electrically charged tool can pick up and place 
down micro-objects, and a semiconductor laser 
bonds both metal and nonmetal materials.
Vacuum pipettes, commonly used in microbiology 
for handling living cells, are another microassembly 
option. A vacuum gripper consists of a glass pipette 
and a vacuum control unit, and the actuating force 
is generated by the pressure difference on both sides 
of microcomponents. They are easy to use and are 
capable of picking, holding, and placing, and to over-
come adhesion during placement they may use strip-
ping off, pushing, or blowing away (see Figure 4.43).
On a large scale, vibration is used extensively in 
industrial part feeders that singulate, position, and 
orient parts before they are transferred to an assembly 
station. Sony’s Advanced Parts Orientation System 
(APOS) part feeder, for example, uses an array of 
nests (silhouette traps) cut into a vibrating plate.114 
The traps and the vibratory motion are designed so 
that parts can remain in the nest only in one partic-
ular orientation. The traps in the vibrating plate are 
filled by tilting the plate and letting the parts flow 
across it. The APOS system with its controlled vibra-
tion to provide stochastic motion, combined with 
gravity as a motive force for nonprehensile manipu-
lation, is a good model for microassembly. Again, 
scaling effects must be taken into account; vibration 
relies on the inertia of the parts and becomes less 
efficient with decreasing part size, so that higher 
vibration amplitudes or frequencies are required for 
smaller parts.
In the microscale, objects can be transported, for 
example, using acoustic traveling waves generated on 
a surface (see Chapter 8, this volume, Figure 8.28). 
Two  types of waves are used, Lamb and Rayleigh 
waves. Lamb waves cause bending of the plate over 
its whole thickness (the substrate thickness is small 
R
R2
θ2
θ1
R1
FIGURE 4.41 The capillary tension force between a ball 
and a plate.
100 µm
FIGURE 4.42 Scanning electron microscope of a micro-
house. Using a desktop factory and an electrostatic probe 
tip, a microhouse was assembled.113

[Page 224]
224   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
compared with the wavelength), while Rayleigh 
waves propagate only in the surface layer of the plate. 
Objects placed on the surface move in the opposite 
direction of the traveling wave (see Figure 8.28). 
Separation of particles may be effected by the compe-
tition between the acoustic force and the electrostatic 
force. The displacement of particles from pressure 
nodes in acoustic standing waves depends on the 
effective charge, radius, and stiffness of the particles. 
Yasuda has used lead zirconate titanate (PZT) trans-
ducers in a quartz cell to continuously concentrate, 
separate, and mix cells (e.g., blood cells).115
Another option is the use of distributed micro-
motion systems using arrays of tiny simple actu ators 
that cooperate to move objects over rela tively large 
distances and possibly in different directions and 
orientations. Several MEMS re search groups have 
built such actuator arrays for micro manipulation; 
these arrays typically consist of a regular grid of 
“motion pixels” (mechanical members such as 
cilia).116–123 These actuators are called cilia by analogy 
to their biological counterparts (see Chapter 8, this 
volume, Figure 8.11, and Chapter 5, this volume, 
Figure 5.13). Cilia arrays can move small objects 
placed on them by synchronous vibrations of the 
tiny hairs. To move objects in the x direction as well 
as the y direction, four cilia, one for each direction 
and sense, are grouped in motion pixels. The motion 
system consists of an array of these motion pixels. 
Appropriate control allows motion in any direction.
Table 4.4 summarizes some of the assembly issues 
one faces when manipulating parts in the mesoscale 
to the microscale and then into the nanoscale. 
Serial Microassembly
In Volume II, Chapter 6, we saw how a 280-µm-
high Japanese temple (Gojyunoto) on a polyimide 
platform was erected with the help of a microrobot 
manipulator. Many of the serial manipulation meth-
ods listed in Table 4.3 are used for manipulation of 
even smaller components, smaller than the typical 
MEMS device, such as biological cells, subcellular 
organelles, and even atoms.125
A small-enough object that is relatively transpar-
ent to laser light of a particular frequency refracts an 
incident laser beam, bending the light. As a result of 
this refraction, momentum is transferred from the 
light to the particle (see laser tweezers in Figure 2.33 
this volume and in Volume I, Figure 5.34). When 
the geometry of light beams and particle is correct, 
the imparted momentum pulls the particle in the 
direction of the incident beam. The beam (or mul-
tiple beams) can then hold the particle in place, or 
by moving the beam(s), the laser operator can move 
the particle from place to place. In other words, 
light has momentum* and can be used to catch 
and manipulate objects in a size range from nano-
meters to micrometers in so-called optical tweezers. 
* As far back as 1619, Johannes Kepler explained that the tails of comets 
are always directed away from the sun by the pressure of sunlight.
(a) Place
Tip length
2 - 3 mm
Outer tube
diameter
1.5 mm
Outer tip
diameter
50 µm
(c) Push
(b) Strip oﬀ
(d) Blow away
Vacuum
release
Vacuum
release
Direction of
motion
Receptacle
Pressure
Auxiliary
tool
Substrate
Diamond
Tip diameter
25 - 50 µm
Vacuum
Inclination
Pipetie
α
Working tool
Sharp
edge
Vacuum
release
Direction
of motion
α
FIGURE 4.43 A glass pipette and a vacuum control unit are capable of picking, holding, and placing, and to overcome 
adhesion during placement they may use stripping off, pushing, or blowing away. 

[Page 225]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   225
The laser wavelengths in optical tweezers typically 
are between 0.7 and 1.06 µm, and 25 to 500 mW 
of power is generated in a focal spot between 0.5 
and 1.0 mm in diameter. The first work with opti-
cal tweezers was performed by Ashkin et al. at AT&T 
Bell Laboratories. In pioneering works in 1985 and 
1986, they successfully demonstrated that small par-
ticles could be trapped by focused low-power laser 
light (<1 W).126,127 The first demonstration on trap-
ping of living biological objects was also by Ashkin 
et al. in 1987.104 The authors not only trapped and 
manipulated single cells, they demonstrated that the 
trap was harmless to living biological species. For 
example, reproduction of yeast cells was achieved 
in a trap capable of manipulating them at velocities 
of 100 m/s. Combined with other techniques (such 
as a laser scalpel), a number of important studies 
within microbiology have been carried out and 
many more can be visualized in the future. The dif-
ference between tweezers and scalpels is that the lat-
ter employ short pulses of high irradiance, whereas 
tweezers use continuous, low-irradiance beams. 
The laser scalpel can be used for cutting biological 
objects inside cells (e.g., DNA segments). Steven 
Chu,* a 1997 Nobelist in Physics (see Volume  I, 
* Dr. Steven Chu is currently the US Secretary of Energy.
Figure 1.28) showed while at Stanford University 
that laser tweezers can be used to stretch molecules 
such as DNA: with colloidal spheres attached to the 
DNA strands, the spheres were trapped and the DNA 
was stretched by moving in fluid flows128 (see also 
Chapter 2, Figure 2.33). The most common form 
of optical tweezers in biology is the “single-beam 
gradient trap,” immobilizing transparent dielectric 
particles near the focal point of a tightly focused 
continuous-wave laser with a force proportional to 
the electric field gradient:125,129,130
 
F
n( 1
2
E
grad
2
= −
∇
α
) 
(4.6)
where 
n = the index of refraction of the solvent/medium
α = the polarizability of the particle
Such a beam generates forces in the piconewton 
range, more than sufficient for trapping cells and 
moving organelles inside and outside the cells. 
Usually, the technique cannot be used to lift objects 
much larger than the wavelength of the light. Links 
to pages related to optical tweezers can be found at 
http://www.phys.umu.se/exphys/OpticalTweezers. 
Two different serial manipulation approaches can 
be used together. For example, cages for biological 
TABLE 4.4 Assembly Issues as a Function of Part Size124
Assembly 
Attribute
Assembly Scale
Mesoscale
Microscale
Nanoscale
Positioning
Easy
Difficult
Very difficult
Velocity
cm/s or m/s not unusual
Slow (µm/s or mm/s), vibration 
suppression
Very slow (nm/s or µm/s)
Force sensing 
and control
Easy, necessary to avoid part 
damage and improve 
manipulability
Difficult; range of forces could be as 
low as µN
Difficult; AFM used to 
measure force
Dominant forces
Gravity, friction
Surface forces (stiction, friction, 
electrostatic, Van der Waals)
Molecular/atomic forces
Throughput
Serial assembly provides 
adequate throughput
Serial assembly usually not sufficient; 
parallel manipulation methods preferred
Parallel manipulation methods 
or self-assembly necessary
Gripper
Mechanical
Micromechanical, gripper-free 
manipulation preferred
Other methods needed: 
optical, proximity forces, etc.
Fixturing
Mechanical
Micromechanical fixturing must be used
Chemical
Compliance
Gripper compliance not 
necessary if force measured
Gripper compliance usually necessary
Mechanical compliance not 
applicable
Vision
Easy
Difficult (expensive optics)
Impossible with visible 
wavelengths; SEM and TEM 
are used

[Page 226]
226   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
cells have been made by combining optical trapping 
and dielectrophoresis.131 Such a combination enables 
manipulation of two bioparticles in close proximity, 
which would be impossible using two laser beams 
or two electrical fields, as those fields would inter-
fere. Dielectrophoresis is an AC electrokinetic effect 
(electro-osmosis and electrophoresis are direct cur-
rent  electrokinetic effects) discussed in detail  in 
Volume I, Chapter 7. It is a powerful tool for sepa-
rating particles of the size of biological cells but is 
more difficult to apply for particles below 1 µm.
In mechanosynthesis, an STM is used to manipu-
late individual atoms, as demonstrated in Volume 
II, Figure 2.43, where Pt atoms have been arranged 
on a Pt(111) surface. The Kanji character for atom in 
Figure 6.26 was also made this way. As pointed out 
in Chapter 1, serial manufacturing processes that 
use building blocks that are too small are not viable 
manufacturing candidates unless an army of them 
can work together on the same construction project.
Parallel Microassembly
The concept of self-assembly is inspired by biological 
processes in which complementary pairs such as 
antigens bind to antibodies on the basis of shape 
recognition. In the nonbiological world, objects can 
be similarly assembled on the basis of geometry. The 
advantage of self-assembly is that it is a batch process, 
in which hundreds or thousands of objects or even 
more are assembled at a time. When the interface 
is well designed, the objects are also self-aligned, 
and different types of objects can be assembled 
simultaneously by using different interfaces.
An example of deterministic parallel assembly 
by Cohn et al. for wafer-to-wafer transfer of MEMS 
and other microstructures was shown already, in 
Figure 4.37.83,87 In this HEXSIL flip-chip process, the 
finished microstructures are suspended on breaka-
way tethers on the substrate. The target wafer with 
indium solder bumps is precisely aligned and pressed 
against the substrate, such that the microstructures 
are cold welded onto the target wafer. In ano ther exam-
ple of deterministic parallel microassembly, Keller 
et al. demonstrated microgrippers (see Volume II, 
Figure 7.88) and proposed gripper arrays for parallel 
transfer of palletized microparts.94,102
Many stochastic approaches for microassembly 
are under investigation. Yando, for example, employs 
an array of magnetic sites to assemble magnetically 
coated semiconductor parts in a square array. The 
components are vibrated at a gradually attenuated 
amplitude to “place” the array elements.132 Similarly, 
Yeh et al.90,91 trap semiconductor light-emitting 
diodes (LEDs), suspended in a liquid, in microma-
chined wells on a wafer by solvent-surface forces. As 
illustrated in Figure 4.44, carrier fluid containing the 
GaAs parts is dispensed over the host Si wafer with 
etched holes to assemble the GaAs blocks. Because 
of the trapezoidal design, the blocks fit preferentially 
into the holes in the design orientation. Random 
mechanical vibration of the microstructures enables 
large numbers of microstructures to be positioned 
into precise registration with the sites. More than 
90% of the holes etched in Si were correctly filled 
by the blocks before the carrier fluid evaporated. 
However, during evaporation, surface tension pulls 
some objects out of the holes, reducing the yield to 
30–70% locally. This problem can be addressed by 
using liquids with lower surface tension or by using 
supercritical drying methods.
Si substrate
Ethanol
(a)
(b)
hv
Si substrate
GaAs
LED
GaAs
LED
FIGURE 4.44 Fluid self-assembly of GaAs light-emitting diodes (LEDs) on Si micromachined substrate. (a) Solution con-
taining the GaAs blocks is dispensed over the patterned silicon substrate. (b) Silicon substrate with GaAs LEDs integrated 
by fluidic self-assembly. [From Yeh, H.-J., and J. S. Smith. 1994. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’94), 279–84. Oiso, Japan. With permission.90]

[Page 227]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   227
In 1991, Cohn et al.96 first reported on stochastic 
assembly experiments that use vibration and gravi-
tational forces to assemble periodic lattices of up 
to 1000 silicon chiplets.133 Later, the same group96 
demonstrated an interesting variation on the work 
of Yando132 and Yeh et al.90,91 by using alignment 
capabilities over electrostatic traps. The process 
is illustrated in Figure 4.45. A critical problem in 
attempting to vibrate microstructures into specific 
sites from a liquid is that when structures adhere to 
the substrate or to each other, their progress toward 
optimal, precise registration is halted. This is caused 
by the same stiction phenomena we described for 
surface micromachined structures in Volume II, 
Chapter 7. Cohn et al. addressed this problem by 
levitating the microstructures a short distance above 
the target electrostatic trap site before letting them 
settle. As a result, random sticking is prevented, and 
critical positioning and orientation of the micro-
structure with respect to the trap become possible 
with a relatively low applied field (10 V/µm). The 
levitation over the trap site is accomplished by creat-
ing a short-range repulsive force between the micro-
structure and the target site. Microstructures with a 
relatively high permittivity (ε = 10) are suspended 
in a low-permittivity solvent (hexane), resulting 
in a net attraction to the charged electrodes mak-
ing up the sites. However, a small amount of a more 
polar solvent (acetone) is added, which segregates 
into the high-field region between the two attracted 
parts. This prevents contact between the site and 
the suspended microstructure. Critical positioning 
and orientation become possible, in the manner of a 
compass needle resting on a low-friction bearing.96 
Once the sites are populated, the polar solvent is 
titrated out, gradually lowering the trapped devices 
to the target sites and pinning them onto the surface. 
A subsequent sintering step could effect permanent 
attachment—say, by eutectic bonding. Böhringer 
et al. subsequently demonstrated the ability to break 
surface forces using ultralow-amplitude vibration 
in vacuum, which holds promise as an extremely 
sensitive technique for positioning parts as well as 
discriminating part orientation, shape, and other 
physical properties.97 Hosokawa et al.134 modeled 
the kinetics of self-assembly and, using planar parts 
of various simple geometries floating on water, 
demonstrated two-dimensional (2D) self-assembly. 
The units, consisting of a polyimide layer on a poly-
silicon layer (assembly units were 400 µm in size), 
selectively bonded to each other because of surface 
tension (a dominant force in the microscale; see 
above). The floating parts that were at equal height 
attracted each other. Sharp corners induced yet larger 
selective attractive forces, and parts located at differ-
ent heights were mutually repulsed. To disturb the 
self-assembly system, magnetic or fluid forces were 
used. The floating units tended to align, with their 
sharpest features pointing toward each other.
Fabricate
structures
Release into
solution
Flow over trap
template
Anneal
Sinter metal &
deﬁne
interconnects
(a)
pSi
Au
LTO
PSG
<Si>
<Si>
Fabricate trap
template
(b)
∆Z
A
A'
LTO 2µm
<Si> wafer
Au 1000A
SiO2 2µm
SiO2 2µm
pSi 7µm
A'
A
FIGURE 4.45 Self-assembly using electrostatic levitation. 
(a) Batch assembly of microstructures into binding sites on 
a substrate. Structures may include microelectromechani-
cal system, complementary metal-oxide-silicon, optoelec-
tronics, magnets, etc. (b) Detail of an electrostatic binding 
site. The section view shows position of a levitated micro-
structure. The levitation height (∆z) is in the range of 
0–100 mm. The microstructure, a SiO2-pSi-SiO2 sandwich, 
has an average dielectric constant (ε) of 10, between that 
for hexane and acetone. The aperture in the gold film 
may range from ∼2 to 100 mm in diameter, depending on 
the size of the microstructure to be trapped. (Courtesy of 
Dr. M. Cohen, University of California, Berkeley.)

[Page 228]
228   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
At Nanogen, Inc., electric fields are used to trans-
port and control the placement of proteins, RNA, 
and DNA, as well as semiconductor components on 
a substrate equipped with an array of electrodes in 
a low-conductivity solution.99,135 The electrophoretic 
nano assembly of DNA on the Nanogen platform is 
reviewed in Volume II, Chapter 8, Example 8.2. Here 
we illustrate the use of electric fields for precision 
placement of microlight-emitting diodes (micro-
LEDs) (20 µm in diameter) onto a Si substrate using 
electro-osmosis (for details on electrophoresis and 
electro-osmosis, see Volume I, Chapter  7). The 
InGaAs microLEDs used all have contacts on one 
side of the device, as shown in the cross-section 
schematic in Figure 4.46. The corresponding sub-
strate site has two sets of electrodes designed for the 
mounting process. As seen in Figure 4.47, a first pair 
of larger horseshoe electrodes brackets an inner set 
of electrodes. The inner set of electrodes is designed 
to mate with and bond to an LED and is made of 
standard tin/lead, electroplated to a height 50 nm 
above the surrounding surface. The linear structures 
seen in the pictures connect the exposed electrodes 
and are insulated to avoid shunting through the 
overlaying aqueous solution. Activation of the outer 
electrodes with respect to a counterelectrode (not 
shown in the figure) causes an electro-osmotic flow 
(see Volume I, Chapter 6) along the surface of the 
chip and moves the LED placed in the solution. Once 
the LED is on the electrode, the electro-osmotic flow 
is briefly reversed, and the reversal of the fluid flow 
drives the LED onto the awaiting bonding points 
n-contact (cathode)
p-contact (anode)
Light output
FIGURE 4.46 Schematic InGaAs microlight-emitting diodes have contacts on one side of the device as shown in the cross-
section. (Courtesy of Dr. M. Heller, Nanogen.)
20
FIGURE 4.47 Electric field directed placement of light-emitting diodes (LEDs). The arrow points toward the moving LED. 
(Courtesy of Dr. M. Heller, Nanogen.)

[Page 229]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   229
with microscale precision. After the fluid is removed, 
the solder is reflowed under forming gas at 250°C. 
Circuit integrity and LED activation are demon-
strated by forward-biasing the LED using the silicon 
circuit’s contacts, as demonstrated in Figure 4.48.
The Nanogen authors point out that the same pro-
cess could be used to assemble a large variety of com-
ponents simultaneously and selectively on a circuit 
by the parallel activation of sets of electrodes while 
maintaining a number of components present in the 
low-conductivity solution. They speculate that the 
process might be aided by the use of a self-sorting 
mechanism by attaching short sections of comple-
mentary DNA on components and target sites on the 
circuit (see next section).135
Self-Assembly Examples
DNA-Mediated Assembly
While work continues on self-assembly of MEMS 
components 
with 
top-down 
methods, 
many 
researchers have recognized that the exquisite 
molecular recognition of various complementary 
biological molecules may be used to assist in the 
assembly of micro- or nanocomponents into complex 
networks. In this approach, DNA nanostructures 
and DNA mediated assembly of nano- and micro-
structures have received most attention in the 
literature. In the DNA nanostructures approach, 
pioneered by N. C. Seeman, the 2-nm-wide DNA 
molecules themselves are used to form 2D and 3D 
structures.139–143 As shown in Figure 4.49a, DNA 
four-armed branched junctions are made by properly 
choosing the sequence of complementary strands. 
These DNA scaffolds can be linked together to make 
periodic crystals as shown in Figure 4.49b.
To use DNA for assembling nano- or microparts, 
one first needs to attach DNA molecules to these 
parts. The most widely used method is the covalent 
bond between sulfur and gold, that is, a metal 
thiolate (∼44 kcal/mol). DNA molecules can be 
functionalized with thiol (S-H) or disulfide (S-S) 
groups, and upon immersion of microparts with 
clean gold surfaces in solutions of such thiol or 
disulfide derivatized oligonucleotides, the sulfur 
adsorbs on the gold surfaces, forming a single layer 
of molecules. Using this methodology, Mirkin et al. 
described a method of assembling colloidal gold 
0.5
20 µm
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–6 –4 –2
0
Voltage (V)
Current (mA)
2
4
6
FIGURE 4.48 Circuit integrity and light-emitting diode 
(LED) activation demonstrated by forward biasing the LED. 
(Courtesy of Dr. M. Heller, Nanogen.)
I
III
(a)
(b)
A
A
A
B
B
B
B´
B´
B´
A´
A´
A´
1
2
4
3
II
IV
C
G
C
A
A
T
C
C
G
C
G
T
T
A
G
G
C
G
C
A
A
T
G
C
G
G
G
T
T
A
C
G
G C A C G A G T
C G T G C T C A
T G A T A C C G
A C T A T G G C
FIGURE 4.49 (a) Four-armed stable branched junction 
made from DNA molecules. (b) Use of branched junctions 
to form periodic crystals. (Based on Seeman, N. C. 1991. 
Nanotechnology 149.140) 

[Page 230]
230   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
nanoparticles into macroscopic aggregates using 
DNA as linking element.144 Noncomplementary DNA 
oligonucleotides were attached to the surfaces of two 
batches of 13-nm gold particles. An oligonucleotide 
duplex with ends complementary to the grafted 
sequences was then introduced into the particle 
mixture, and the nanoparticles self-assembled into 
aggregates. The process is illustrated in Figure 4.50. It 
can be reversed by increasing the temperature, which 
melts the double-stranded DNA linkers. Closely 
packed assemblies of aggregates with uniform particle 
spacings of about 60 Å were demonstrated this way.
The concept of DNA-mediated self-assembly has 
been extended to metallic nanowires/rods.145 The 
idea behind this is to fabricate gold and/or plati-
num wires, functionalize them with single-stranded 
DNA (ssDNA), and assemble a wiring network on a 
substrate that has the complementary ssDNA mole-
cules attached at specific sites. Thus, self-assembly of 
interconnects and wires is rendered possible. DNA 
has also been used as a template for the fabrication 
of  nano wires. Braun et al.136 formed a DNA bridge 
between two gold electrodes, again using thiol 
attachment. Once a DNA bridge is formed between 
the 12–16-µm spacing of the electrodes, a chemi-
cal deposition process is used to deposit silver ions 
along the DNA through Ag+/Na+ ion exchange and 
reduction of the silver complexes with hydroqui-
none. The result is a silver nanowire that is formed 
using DNA as a template or skeleton. The most ambi-
tious goal is the DNA-assisted assembly (molecular 
“Velcro”) of semiconductor active devices, such as 
transistors, laser diodes, etc., proposed by Edman 
et al. at Nanogen.135 For a review of this area, check 
out Bashir137 and Lee et al.138
Micro-Origami
Often MEMS includes hinged parts that must be 
set in place before operation. This can lead to chal-
lenging and time consuming manual manipulation 
of components at small length scales. Researchers 
from the ATR Adaptive Communications Research 
Laboratories in Japan (http://www.atr.co.jp) have 
developed a technique they call micro-origami to 
fabricate MEMS devices that automatically move 
parts into position.146 Micro-origami makes use 
of the energy stored as strain between lattice-mis-
matched semiconductor epitaxial layers to create 
self-positioning, three-dimensional structures with 
simple and robust hinges. The key to the micro-
 origami technique is to manufacture hinges out of a 
pair of material layers with slightly different atomic 
spacings. The lattice mismatch causes a stress that in 
turn bends a hinge, as shown generically in Figure 
4.51. In the case shown, a distributed Bragg reflec-
tor* (DBR) or micromirror is moved out of the plane 
of the substrate. Micro-origami structures are man-
ufactured by using epitaxial growth techniques to 
construct multilayered films designed with folding 
hinges etched into their surfaces in the manner of 
* A distributed Bragg reflector is a structure formed from multiple 
layers of alternating materials with various refractive indexes. Each 
layer boundary causes a partial reflection of an optical wave. For 
waves whose wavelength is close to four times the optical thickness 
of the layers, the many reflections combine with constructive inter-
ference, and the layers act as a high-quality reflector. The range of 
wavelengths that are reflected is called the photonic stopband. Within 
this range of wavelengths, light is “forbidden” to propagate in the 
structure.
Au nanoparticles
Modiﬁcation with
5'-AGTCGTTT-3'-thiol
Modiﬁcation with
3'-thiol-TACCGTTG-5'
Addition of linking DNA duplex
Further oligomerization
and settling
5'-ATGGCAAC
TCAGCAAA-5'
∆
∆
FIGURE 4.50 Fabrication process for the aggregated 
assembly of DNA conjugated gold nanoparticles. (Based 
on Mirkin, C. A., R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic, and J. J. 
Storhoff. 1996. Nature 382:607.144) 

[Page 231]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   231
the creased folds of paper. Adjusting the thickness 
and the length of the hinge that connects the plates 
to each other controls the angle between different 
plates. When the film is removed from its substrate 
by etching away a sacrificial layer, the microstructure 
takes on its designed shape because of the released 
stress in the hinge areas. In this way, this fabrication 
method reflects the design principles of origami, the 
traditional Japanese art of sculpting objects from 
folded paper. Because it is possible to fabricate three-
dimensional structures on a semiconductor sub-
strate, these structures can be integrated with lasers 
and photodetectors.
This fabrication method of simple and robust 
hinges for movable parts can be applied to any pair 
of lattice-mismatched epitaxial layers in semicon-
ductors or metals. The first work by the ATR team 
involved a multilayer structure, including AlGaAs/
GaAs component layers and an InGaAs strained 
layer, which was grown by molecular beam epitaxy 
on a GaAs substrate. After definition of the hinge 
and mirror’s shape by photolithography, the micro-
mirrors were released from the substrate by selective 
etching. They moved to their final position pow-
ered by the strain release in the InGaAs layer. The 
curvature radius of the hinges is determined by the 
thickness ratio of the bilayer and the indium com-
position in the strained layer. Depending on the 
growth structure, the hinge can fold up or down, 
making the fabrication of complex 3D semiconduc-
tor structures possible. For example, in Figure 4.52, 
we show GaAs corner plates assembled by the strain 
in two hinge regions, and in Figure 4.53 we illustrate 
a microstage fabricated on a GaAs substrate using 
hinges with different bending directions called 
tani-ori (valley fold) and yama-ori (mountain fold) 
in origami. In the latter case, a multilayered struc-
ture including InGaAs strained layers was grown by 
molecular-beam epitaxy on a GaAs substrate. After 
the multilayered structure from the substrate is 
released by the selective etching of a sacrificial layer, 
the microstage moved into its final position pow-
ered by the strain release in the InGaAs layers, and 
the stage was kept parallel to the substrate owing to 
the combination of the two types of hinges.147
The ATR team also fabricated SiGe/Si free-stand-
ing micro-objects on an SOI substrate using SiO2 as 
sacrificial layer material. SiGe/Si strained films were 
grown by molecular beam epitaxy on silicon-on-
 insulator (SOI) substrates and were released from 
the substrate by selective etching of the SiO2 layer. 
The released films rolled up because of the elastic 
strain in the SiGe layer. Microtubes and microspirals 
with a diameter of about 40 µm were obtained as 
shown in Figure 4.54.148
Compensation
layer
Component
layer (DBR)
Etch stop
layer
Sacriﬁcial layer
Hinge
r
d
a
a
d
FIGURE 4.51 Schematic of the origami process. (From 
http://microfanatic.com/origami.html.)
0410
10KV
X700
10µm WD47
FIGURE 4.52 GaAs corner plates assembled by the strain 
in two hinge regions. (From http://microfanatic.com/ori-
gami.html.)
0417
10KV
X220 100µm WD48
FIGURE 4.53 A self-assembled microstage fabricated 
using hinges with different bending directions. (From 
http://microfanatic.com/origami.html.)

[Page 232]
232   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
On a somewhat larger scale, researchers at 
the École Supérieure de Physique et de Chimie 
Industrielles in Paris, together with a team from 
the Paris Institute of Technology, have shown that 
water droplets can be used to make flat sheets of 
plastic (40–80 µm thick), a couple of millimeters 
across fold into 3D objects such as tiny pyramids, 
boxes, and spheres.149 A drop of water, large enough 
to reach all corners, is placed on top of a cut-out 
shape. As the liquid evaporates, its surface tension 
tugs the membrane closer around the water’s decreas-
ing volume, until the remaining liquid is com-
pletely encapsulated inside a sphere, tetrahedron, 
or some other shape. Tailoring the initial geometry 
of the thin membrane, as demonstrated with some 
experimental results in Figure  4.55, controls the 
final encapsulated 3D shape. For example, a flower-
like pattern produces a sphere; a triangle becomes 
a tetrahedron, and a flat cross shape folds into a 
cube. Varying the thickness of the sheet controls 
how much a structure folds up, and as expected, 
the effect of surface tension becomes stronger as 
the size is decreased.
In Chapter 3, this volume, we saw several exam-
ples of DNA origami (see Figures 3.5 and 3.6).
The intersection between the subjects of origami 
and mathematics is rich with interesting results 
and applications. For details, consult http://kahuna.
merrimack.edu/∼thull/origamimath.html and http://
www.paperfolding.com/math.
Questions
 4.1:  Explain front-end and back-end processes in 
IC or MEMS manufacturing. To which hier-
archical level of manufacturing is each one 
related?
(a)
(b)
1 mm
1 mm
1 mm
(c)
FIGURE 4.55 It is the interaction between elasticity and 
capillarity that is used to produce three-dimensional 
structures through the wrapping of a liquid droplet by a 
planar sheet. Tuning of the initial flat shape to obtain (a) a 
spherical encapsulation, (b) a cubic encapsulation, or (c) a 
triangular mode-2 fold.149
FIGURE 4.54 Free standing micro-objects on SOI sub-
strate. (a) Top view of released SiGe/Si film scrolled in a 
microtube. (b) Rolled film at large magnification. (c) SiGe/
Si microspiral. Curvature radius is about 20 µm.148

[Page 233]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   233
 4.2:  What are some of the advantages of a silicon-
silicon bonding process over anodic bonding? 
Are there any disadvantages?
 4.3:  What is the role of packaging in ICs and in 
chemical and biological MEMS?
 4.4:  Which is easier to package, an absolute pres-
sure sensor or an accelerometer? A pressure 
sensor or a pH sensor?
 4.5:  Describe and compare different wafer bond-
ing techniques.
 4.6:  Describe the process of silicon-to-glass anodic 
bonding. Make a sketch of the setup and 
describe typical conditions required. What is the 
process that takes place on the molecular level?
 4.7:  Suggest a method for preventing an acceler-
ometer sensor element from being subjected 
to undesirable mechanical stresses (from tem-
perature changes or packing stress).
 4.8:  One of the modifications of anodic bonding is 
to deposit intermediate layers of silicon diox-
ide and aluminium. What are the advantages 
and disadvantages of this method?
 4.9:  Surface forces make the release of objects after 
picking them up in microassembly very dif-
ficult. Suggest several methods to make this 
process easier.
4.10:  What are the three major electrical connection 
methods in chip-mounting?
4.11:  Describe at least four techniques one could 
use to make a via through an Si wafer.
4.12:  Describe as many methods that you know to 
vacuum seal a MEMS device on-chip.
4.13:  Describe the difference between serial microas-
sembly and parallel microassembly.
4.14:  How do gravity, van der Waal’s, electrostatic, 
and surface tension scale as a function of part 
size in microassembly, assuming a sphere 
(part) and a plane (gripper) interaction?
4.15:  What is likely to be a major concern with DNA-
assisted assembly? How could you improve the 
situation?
References
 
1. Lyke, J. C. 1995. Packaging technologies for space-based 
microsystems and their elements. Microengineering tech-
nologies for space systems. Ed. H. Helvajian, 131–80. El 
Segundo, CA: Aerospace Corporation.
 
2. de Gennes, P. G. 1979. Scaling concepts in polymer physics. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
 
3. Frank-Kamenetskii, M. D. 1997. Unraveling DNA: The 
most important molecule of life. Reading, MA: Perseus Books.
 
4. Jensen, J. R. 1989. Microelectronics processing. Eds. D. W. 
Hess and K. F. Jensen, 441–504. Washington, DC: American 
Chemical Society.
 
5. Allen, R. 1984. Sensors in silicon. High Technology 
September:43–81.
 
6. Lau, J. H. 1998. Electronic packaging: Design, materials, pro-
cess, and reliability. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 
7. Jerman, J. H. 1990. The fabrication and use of microma-
chined corrugated silicon diaphragms. Sensors Actuators A 
A23:988–92.
 
8. Spiering, V. L., S. Bouwstra, J. Burger, and M. Elwenspoek. 
1993. Membranes fabricated with a deep singel corruga-
tion for package stress reduction and residual stress relief. 
Fourth European Workshop on Micromechanics (MME ’93). 
Neuchatel, Switzerland.
 
9. Spiering, V. L., S. Bouwstra, R. M. E. J. Spiering, and M. 
Elwenspoek. 1991. On-chip decoupling zone for package-
stress reduction. Sixth International Conference on Solid-State 
Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco.
 10. Offereins, H. L., H. Sandmaier, B. Folkmer, U. Steger, and 
W. Lang. 1991. Stress free assembly technique for a sili-
con based pressure sensor. Sixth International Conference 
on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San 
Francisco.
 11. Tanger, R. K. 1976. Hermeticity of polymeric lid sealants. 
26th Electronic Components Conference. San Francisco.
 12. Flannery, A. F., N. J. Mourlas, C. W. Storment, S. Tsai, S. H. 
Tan, J. Heck, D. Monk, T. Kim, B. Gogoi, and G. T. Kovacs. 
1998. PECVD silicon carbide as a chemically resistant 
material for micromachined transducers. Sensors Actuators 
A 70:48–55.
 13. Linder, S., H. Baltes, F. Gnaedinger, and E. Doering. 1994. 
Fabrication technology for wafer through-hole intercon-
nections and three-dimensional stacks of chips and wafers. 
Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS 
’94). Oiso, Japan.
 14. Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechanical 
systems engineering. Boston: Artech House.
 15. Bhardwaj, J. K., and H. Ashraf. 1995. Advanced Si etch-
ing using high density plasmas. Micromachining and 
micro fabrication process technology (proceedings of the SPIE). 
Austin, TX.
 16. Craven, D., K. Yu, and T. Pandhumsoporn. 1995. Etching 
technology and applications for “through-the-wafer” sili-
con etching. Micromachining and microfabrication process 
technology (proceedings of the SPIE). Austin, TX.
 17. Chow, E. M., A. Partridge, C. F. Quate, and T. W. Kenny. 
2000. Through-wafer electrical interconnects compatible 
with Stanford semiconductor processing. Solid-State Sensor 
and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 18. Lischner, D. J., H. Basseches, and F. A. D’Altroy. 1985. 
Observations of the temperature gradient zone melt-
ing process for isolating small devices. J Electrochem Soc 
132:2991–96.
 19. Wallis, G., and D. I. Pomerantz. 1969. Field assisted glass-
metal sealing. J Appl Phys 40:3946–49.
 20. Ko, W. H., J. T. Suminto, and G. J. Yeh. 1985. Bonding tech-
niques for microsensors. Micromachining and micropackag-
ing of transducers. Eds. C. D. Fung, P. W. Cheung, W. H. Ko, 
and D. G. Fleming. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

[Page 234]
234   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 21. Peeters, E. 1994. Process development for 3D silicon micro-
structures, with application to mechanical sensor design. PhD 
thesis, Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium.
 22. Puers, B., A. Cozma, and E. Van De Weyer. 1993. Intermediate 
project report. KU Leuven.
 23. Anthony, T. R. 1983. Anodic bonding of imperfect surfaces. 
J Appl Phys 54:2419–28.
 24. Hok, B., C. Dubon, and C. Ovren. 1983. Anodic bonding 
of galium arsenide to glass. Appl Phys Lett 43:267–69.
 25. Von Arx, J., B. Ziaie, M. Dokmeci, and K. Najafi. 1995. 
Hermeticity testing of glass silicon packages with high-den-
sity on-chip feedthroughs. Eighth International Conference 
on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’95). 
Stockholm, Sweden.
 26. Ito, N., K. Yamad, H. Okada, M. Nishimura, and T. 
Kuriyama. 1995. A rapid selective anodic bonding method. 
Eighth International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 27. Sander, C. S. 1980. A bipolar-compatible monolithic 
capacitive pressure sensor. PhD thesis, #G558-10, Stanford 
University, December 1980.
 28. Brooks, A. D., and R. P. Donovan. 1972. Low temperature 
electrostatic Si-to-Si seals using sputtered borosilicate glass. 
J Electrochem Soc 119:545–46.
 29. Hanneborg, A., M. Nese, H. Jacobsen, and R. Holm. 1992. 
Silicon-to-thin-film anodic bonding. J Micromech Microeng 
2:117–21.
 30. Krause, P., M. Sporys, E. Obermeier, K. Lange, and S. Grigull. 
1995. Silicon to silicon anodic bonding using evaporated 
glass. Eighth International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 31. Elwenspoek, M., H. Gardeniers, M. de Boer, and A. Prak. 
1994. Micromechanics. Report no. 122830. Twente, The 
Netherlands: University of Twente.
 32. Esashi, M., A. Nakano, S. Shoji, and H. Hebiguchi. 1990. 
Low-temperature silicon-to-silicon bonding with intermedi-
ate low melting point glass. Sensors Actuators A A23:931–34.
 33. Anthony, T. R. 1985. Dielectric isolation of silicon by 
anodic bonding. J Appl Phys 58:1240–47.
 34. Ohashi, H., J. Ohura, T. Tsukakoshi, and M. Shimbo. 
1986. Improved dielectrically isolated device integration 
by silicon-wafer direct bonding (SDB) technique. Technical 
Digest: IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM 
’86). Los Angeles, pp. 211–13.
 35. Kissinger, G., and W. Kissinger. 1993. Void-free silicon-
wafer-bond strengthening in the 200–400°C range. Sensors 
Actuators A A36:149–56.
 36. Schmidt, M. A. 1994. Silicon wafer bonding technology for 
micromechanical devices. Technical digest: 1994 Solid State 
Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 37. Sun, L. G., J. Zhan, Q. Y. Tong, S. J. Xie, Y. M. Caim, and S. 
J. Lu. 1988. Cool plasma activated surface in silicon wafer 
direct bonding technology. J Physique Colloq C 49:79–82.
 38. Shimbo, M., K. Furukawa, and K. Tanzawa. 1986. Silicon-
to-silicon direct bonding method. J Appl Phys 60:2987–89.
 39. Tong, Q.-Y., G. Cha, R. Gafiteanu, and U. Gosele. 1994. 
Low temperature wafer direct bonding. J Micromechan Syst 
3:29–35.
 40. Barth, P. W. 1990. Silicon fusion bonding for fabrication of 
sensors, actuators and microstructures. Sensors Actuators A 
A23:919–26.
 41. Stengl, R., T. Tan, and U. Gosele. 1989. A model for the 
silicon wafer bonding process. Jpn J Appl Phys Part I 
28:1735–41.
 42. Backlund, Y., K. Ljungberg, and A. Soderbarg. 1992. A sug-
gested mechanism for silicon direct bonding from study-
ing hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces. J Micromech 
Microeng 2:158–60.
 43. Lasky, J. B. 1986. Wafer bonding for silicon-on-insulator 
technologies. Appl Phys Lett 48:78–80.
 44. Ismail, M. S., R. W. Bower, J. L. Veteran, and O. J. Marsh. 1990. 
Silicon nitride direct bonding. Electron Lett 26:1045–46.
 45. Bower, R. W., M. S. Ismail, and B. E. Roberds. 1993. Low tem-
perature Si3N4 direct bonding. Appl Phys Lett 62:3485–97.
 46. Ismail, M. S., R. W. Bower, B. E. Roberds, and S. N. Farrens. 
1993. Seventh International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan.
 47. Anacker, W., E. Bassous, F. F. Fang, R. E. Mundie, and H. 
N. Yu. 1976. Fabrication of multiprobe miniature electrical 
connector. IBM Tech Bull 19:372–74.
 48. Editorial. 1981. Sealing glass. Corning Technical Publication. 
Corning Glass Works.
 49. Legtenberg, R., S. Bouwstra, and M. Elwenspoek. 1991. Low-
temperature glass bonding for sensor applications using 
boron oxide thin films. J Micromech Microeng 1:157–60.
 50. Field, L. A., and R. Muller. 1990. Fusing silicon wafers 
with low  melting temperature glass. Sensors Actuators A 
A23:935–38.
 51. Yamada, A., T. Kawasaki, and M. Kawashima. 1987. SOI 
wafer bonding with spin-on glass as adhesive. Electronic 
Lett 23:39–40.
 52. Quenzer, H. J., and W. Benecke. 1992. Low-temperature 
silicon wafer bonding. Sensors Actuators A A32:340–44.
 53. Guerin, L., M. A. Schaer, R. Sachot, and M. Dutoit. 1995. 
Proposal for new multichip-on-silicon packaging scheme. 
Eighth International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 54. Tiensuu, A.-L., J.-Å. Schweitz, and S. Johansson. 1995. In 
situ investigation of precise high strength micro assem-
bly using Au-Si eutectic bonding. Eighth International 
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers 
’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 55. Arquint, P., P. D. van der Wal, B. H. van der Schoot, and 
N. F. de Rooij. 1995. Flexible polysiloxane interconnection 
between two substrates for microsystem assembly. Eighth 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 56. den Besten, C., R. E. G. van Hal, J. Munoz, and P. Bergveld. 
1992. Polymer bonding of micro-machined silicon struc-
tures. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
(MEMS ’92). Travemunde, Germany.
 57. Munoz, J., A. Bratov, R. Mas, N. Abramova, C. Dominguez, 
and J. Bartroli. 1995. Packaging of ISFETs at the wafer level 
by photopatternable encapsulant resins. Eighth International 
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers 
’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 58. Becker, H., and C. Gärtner. 2000. Polymer microfabrica-
tion methods for microfluidic analytical applications. 
Electrophoresis 21:12–26.
 59. Bower, R. W., M. S. Ismail, and S. N. Farrens. 1991. Aligned 
wafer bonding: A key to three dimensional microstructures. 
J Electron Mater 20:383–87.
 60. Shoaf, S. E., and A. D. Feinerman. 1994. Aligned Au-Si 
eutectic bonding of silicon structures. J Vac Sci Technol 
A12:19–22.
 61. Maszara, W. P., G. Goetz, A. Caviglia, and J. B. McKitterick. 
1988. Bonding of silicon wafers for silicon-on-insulator. J 
Appl Phys 64:4943–50.

[Page 235]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   235
 62. Nese, M., R. W. Bernstein, I.-R. Johansen, and R. Spooren. 
1995. New method for testing hermeticity of silicon sen-
sor structures. Eighth International Conference on Solid-State 
Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 63. Minami, K., T. Moriuchi, and M. Esashi. 1995. Cavity 
pressure control for critical damping of packaged micro 
mechanical devices. Eighth International Conference on Solid-
State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, 
Sweden.
 64. Striny, K. M. 1988. Assembly techniques and packaging of 
VLSI devices. VLSI Technology. Ed. S. M. Sze, 566–611. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
 65. Traeger, R. K. 1976. Hermeticity of polymeric lid sealants. 
26th Electronic Components Conference. San Francisco.
 66. Guckel, H., and D. W. Burns. 1984. Planar processed 
polysilicon sealed cavities for pressure transducer arrays. 
Technical Digest: IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting 
(IEDM ’84). San Francisco.
 67. Guckel, H., and D. W. Burns. 1986. Fabrication techniques 
for integrated sensor microstructures. IEEE International 
’86. Los Angeles.
 68. Guckel, H., and D. W. Burns. 1985. A technology for inte-
grated transducers. International Conference on Solid-State 
Sensors and Actuators. Philadelphia.
 69. Guckel, H., D. W. Burns, C. K. Nesler, and C. R. Rutigliano. 
1987. Fine grained polysilicon and its application to planer 
pressure transducers. Fourth International Conference on 
Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’87). Tokyo, 
Japan.
 70. Lin, L., K. M. McNair, R. T. Howe, and A. P. Pisano. 1993. 
Vacuum-encapsulated lateral microresonators. Seventh 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan.
 71. Eaton, W. P., and J. H. Smith. 1995. A CMOS-compatible, 
surface-micromachined pressure sensor for aqueous ultrasonic 
application. Smart Structures and Materials 1995: Smart 
Electronics (Proceedings of the SPIE). San Diego, CA.
 72. Lebouitz, K. S., R. T. Howe, and A. P. Pisano. 1995. Permeable 
polysilicon etch-access windows for microshell fabrication. 
Eighth International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden.
 73. Guckel, H., D. W. Burns, and C. R. Rutigliano. 1986. In 
Technical Digest: 1986 Solid State Sensor and Actuator 
Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 74. Erskine, J. C. 1983. Polycrystalline silicon-on-metal strain 
gauge transducers. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 30: 
796–801.
 75. SSI Technologies. 1995. Janesville, WI: SSI Technologies.
 76. Cho, Y.-H., B. M. Kwak, A. P. Pisano, and R. T. Howe. 1993. 
Viscous energy dissipation in laterally oscillating planar 
microstructures: a theoretical and experimental study. 
Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS 
’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL.
 77. Tang, W. C., T. H. Nguyen, and R. T. Howe. 1989. Laterally 
driven polysilicon resonant microstructures. Sensors 
Actuators 20:25–32.
 78. Lin, L., T. C. Nguyen, R. T. Howe, and A. P. Pisano. 1992. 
Microelectromechanical filters for signal processing. 
Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS 
’92). Travemunde, Germany.
 79. Hsu, C. H., and R. S. Muller. 1991. Micromechanical 
electrostatic voltmeter. Sixth international conference 
on solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers ’91). San 
Francisco.
 80. Bernstein, J., S. Cho, A. T. King, A. Kourepenis, P. Maciel, 
and M. Weinberg. 1993. A micromachined comb-drive tun-
ing fork rate gyroscope. Proceedings: Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL.
 81. Ikeda, K., H. Kuwayama, T. Kobayashi, T. Watanabe, 
T. Nishikawa, T. Yoshida, and K. Harada. 1990. Three-
dimensional micromachining of silicon pressure sensor 
integrating resonant strain gauge on diaphragm. Sensors 
Actuators A A23:1007–10.
 82. Ikeda, K., H. Kuwayama, T. Kobayashi, T. Watanabe, T. 
Nishikawa, T. Yoshida, and K. Harada. 1990. Silicon pres-
sure sensor integrates resonant strain gauge on diaphragm. 
Sensors Actuators A A21:146–50.
 83. Cohn, M. B., Y. Liang, R. T. Howe, and A. P. Pisano. 1996. 
Wafer-to-wafer transfer of microstructures for vacuum pack-
aging. Technical Digest:1996 Solid State Sensor and Actuator 
Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC.
 84. Böhringer, K. F., R. S. Fearing, and K. Y. Goldberg. 1998. 
Microassembly. Handbook of industrial robotics. Ed. S. Nof. 
New York: Wiley, pp. 1045–66.
 85. Nelson, B., and B. Vikramaditya. 1997. Visually guided 
microassembly using optical microscopes and active vision 
techniques. Proceedings: IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and 
Automation (ICRA). Albuquerque, NM: IEEE.
 86. Feddema, J. T., and R. W. Simon. 1998. CAD-driven 
microassembly and visual servoing. Proceedings: IEEE Int. 
Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). Leuven, Belgium: 
IEEE.
 87. Cohn, M. B., and R. T. Howe. 1997. Wafer-to-wafer transfer 
of microstructures using breakaway tethers. IEEE solid-state 
sensor and actuator workshop. Hilton Head, SC.
 88. Singh, A., D. A. Horsley, M. B. Cohn, A. P. Pisano, and R. 
T. Howe. 1997. Batch transfer of microstructures using 
flip-chip solder bump bonding. Digest: Int. Conf. on Solid 
State Sensors and Actuators. Chicago: Transducers Research 
Foundation.
 89. Yeh, H.-J., and J. S. Smith. 1994. Fluidic self-assembly for 
the integration of GaAs light-emitting diodes on Si sub-
strates. IEEE Photonics Tech Lett 6:706–708.
 90. Yeh, H.-J., and J. S. Smith. 1994. Fluidic self-assembly of 
microstructures and its application to the integration of 
GaAs on Si. Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop 
on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, 
Japan.
 91. Yeh, H.-J., and J. S. Smith. 1994. Integration of GaAs verti-
cal-cavity surface-emitting laser on Si by substrate removal. 
Appl Phys Lett 64:1466–68.
 92. Quaid, A. E., and R. L. Hollis. 1996. Cooperative 2-dof 
robots for precision assembly. Proceedings: IEEE Int. Conf. 
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). Minneapolis, MN: 
IEEE.
 93. Zesch, W. 1997. Multi-degree-of-freedom microposition-
ing using stepping principles. PhD thesis, Swiss Federal 
Institute of Technology, Zurich, Switzerland.
 94. Keller, C. G., and R. T. Howe. 1997. Hexsil tweezers for 
teleoperated micro-assembly. Proceedings: IEEE Workshop on 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS). Nagoya, Japan.
 95. Cohn, M. B. 1992. Self-assembly of microfabricated devices. 
US Patent 5,355,577.
 96. Cohn, M. B., R. T. Howe, and A. P. Pisano. 1995. Self-
assembly of microsystems using non-contact electrostatic 
traps. Proceedings of the ASME International Congress and 
Exposition, Symposium on Micromechanical Systems (IC ’95). 
San Francisco.

[Page 236]
236   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 97. Böhringer, K.-F., M. B. Cohn, K. Goldberg, R. Howe, and 
A. Pisano. 1997. Electrostatic self-assembly aided by ultra-
sonic vibration. AVS 44th National Symposium. San Jose, CA.
 98. Böhringer, K.-F., K. Goldberg, M. B. Cohn, R. Howe, and 
A. Pisano. 1998. Parallel microassembly with electrostatic 
force fields. Proceedings: IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and 
Automation (ICRA). Leuven, Belgium.
 99. Edman, C. F., C. Gurtner, R. E. Formosa, J. J. Coleman, and 
M. J. Heller. 2000. Electric-field-directed pick-and-place 
assembly. HDI October:30–35.
 100. Kim, C.-J., A. P. Pisano, and R. S. Muller. 1992. Silicon-
processed overhanging microgripper. J Microelectromech 
Syst 1:31–36.
 101. Pister, K. S. J., M. W. Judy, S. R. Burgett, and R. S. Fearing. 
1992. Microfabricated hinges. Sensors Actuators A 33:249–56.
 102. Keller, C., and R. T. Howe. 1995. Hexsil bimorphs for ver-
tical actuation. Digest: Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators. Stockholm, Sweden.
 103. Hosokawa, K., I. Shimoyama, and H. Miura. 1995. 
Dynamics of self-assembling systems: Analogy with chemi-
cal kinetics. Artificial Life 1:413–27.
 104. Ashkin, A., J. M. Dziedzic, and T. Yamane. 1987. Optical 
trapping and manipulation of single cells using infrared 
laser beams. Nature 330:769–71.
 105. Srinivasan, U., and R. Howe. 1997.
 106. Brown, K. T., and D. G. Flaming. 1992. Advanced micropi-
pette techniques for cell physiology. IBRO handbook: Methods 
in neurosciences. Chichester United Kingdom: Wiley.
 107. Miltenyi, S., W. Mueller, W. Weichel, and A. Radbruch. 
1990. High-gradient magnetic cell separation with MACS. 
Cytometry 11:231–38.
 108. Stroscio, J. A., and D. M. Eigler. 1991. Atomic and molecu-
lar manipulation with the scanning tunneling microscope. 
Science 254:1319–26.
 109. Schnelle, T., R. Hagedorn, G. Fuhr, S. Fiedler, and T. Müller. 
1993. Three-dimensional electric field traps for manipula-
tion of cells—calculation and experimental verification. 
Biochim Biophys Acta 1157:127–40.
 110. Coackley, W. T. 1997. Ultrasonic separations in analytical 
biotechnology. TIBTECH 5:506–11.
 111. Giddings, J. C. 1993. Field-flow fractionation: analysis 
of macromolecular, colloidal and particulate materials. 
Science 260:1456–64.
 112. Fu, A., C. Spence, A. Scherer, F. H. Arnold, and S. R. Quake. 
1999. A microfabricated fluorescence-activated cell sorter. 
Nat Biotech 17:1109–11.
 113. Nakao, M., K. Tsuchiya, K. Matsumoto, and Y. Hatamura. 
2001. Micro handling with rotational needle-type tools 
under real time observation. CIRP Annals Manufact Tech 
50:9–12.
 114. Hitakawa, H. 1988. Advanced parts orientation system has 
wide application. Assembly Automation 8:147–50.
 115. Yasuda, K. 2000. Non-destructive mixing, concentration, 
fractionation and separation of μm-sized particles in liquid 
by ultrasound. Micro total analysis systems 2000. Eds. A. van 
den Berg, W. Olthuis, and P. Bergveld, 343–46. Enschede, 
The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
 116. Darling, R. B., J. W. Suh, and G. T. Kovacs. 1998. Ciliary 
microactuator array for scanning electron microscope posi-
tioning stage. J Vac Sci Technol A 16:1998–2002.
 117. Pister, K. S. J., R. Fearing, and R. Howe. 1990. A planar air 
levitated electrostatic actuator system. Proceedings: IEEE 
Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS). 
Napa Valley, CA.
 118. Fujita, H. 1993. Group work of microactuators. International 
Advanced Robot Program Workshop on Micromachine 
Technologies and Systems. Tokyo, Japan.
 119. Böhringer, K.-F., B. R. Donald, R. Mihailovich, and N. C. 
MacDonald. 1994. A theory of manipulation and con-
trol for microfabricated actuator arrays. Proceedings: IEEE 
Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS). 
Oiso, Japan.
 120. Storment, C. W., D. A. Borkholder, V. Westerlind, J. W. 
Suh, N. I. Maluf, and G. T. A. Kovacs. 1994. Flexible, dry-
released process for aluminum electrostatic actuators. J 
Microelectromech Syst 3:90–96.
 121. Suh, J. W., S. F. Glander, R. B. Darling, C. W. Storment, 
and G. T. A. Kovacs. 1996. Combined organic thermal 
and electrostatic omnidirectional ciliary microactuator 
array for object positioning and inspection. Proceedings: 
Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head 
Island,SC.
 122. Liu, C., T. Tsao, P. Will, Y. Tai, and W. Liu. 1995. In Digest: 
Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators. Stockholm, 
Sweden: Transducers Research Foundation.
 123. Liu, W., and P. Will. 1995. Parts manipulation on an intel-
ligent motion surface. IEEE/RSJ Int. Workshop on Intelligent 
Robots, and Systems (IROS). Pittsburgh, PA.
 124. Popa, D. O., and H. E. Stephanou. 2004. Micro and meso 
scale robotic as sembly. Proceedings of WTEC Workshop: 
Review of US Research in Robotics. WTEC.
 125. Wheeler, A. R., K. Morishima, D. W. Arnold, A. B. Rossi, 
and R. N. Zare. 2000. Single organelle analysis with inte-
grated chip electrophoresis and optical tweezers. Micro total 
analysis systems 2000. Eds. A. van den Berg, W. Olthuis, and 
P. Bergveld, 25–28. Enschede, The Netherlands: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.
 126. Ashkin, A., and J. M. Dziedzic. 1985. Observation of radi-
ation-pressure trapping of particles by alternating light 
beams. Phys Rev Lett 54:1245–48.
 127. Ashkin, A., J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm, and S. Chu. 
1986. Observation of a single-beam gradient force optical 
trap for dielectrical particles. Optics Letters 11:228–90.
 128. Perkins, T. T., D. E. Smith, R. G. Larson, and S. Chu. 1995. 
Stretching of a single tethered polymer in a uniform flow. 
Science 268:83–87.
 129. Ashkin, A., and J. M. Dziedzic. 1987. Optical trap-
ping and manipulation of viruses and bacteria. Science 
235:1517–20.
 130. Svoboda, K., and S. M. Block. 1994. Biological appli-
cations of optical forces. Ann Rev Biophys Biomol Struc 
23:247–85.
 131. Fuhr, G. R., and C. Reichle. 2000. Living cells in opto-elec-
trical cages: characterisation, manipulation and force mea-
surements. Micro total analysis system. Eds. A. van den Berg, 
W. Olthuis, and P. Bergveld. Enschede, The Netherlands: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
 132. Yando, S. 1969. Method and apparatus for fabricating an 
array of discrete elements. US Patent 3439416.
 133. Cohn, M. B., C. J. Kim, and A. P. Pisano. 1991. Self-
assembling electrical networks: an application of micro-
machining technology. Digest: Int. Conf. Solid-State 
Sensors and Actuators. San Francisco: Transducers Research 
Foundation.
 134. Hosokawa, K., I. Shimoyama, and H. Miura. 1996. Two-
dimensional micro-self-assembly using the surface ten-
sion of water. Ninth Annual International Workshop on Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ‘96). San Diego, CA.

[Page 237]
Packaging, Assembly, and Self-Assembly   237
 135. Edman, C. F., R. B. Swint, C. Gurtner, R. E. Formosa, S. D. 
Roh, K. E. Lee, P. D. Swanson, D. E. Ackley, J. J. Coleman, 
and M. J. Heller. 2000. Electric field directed assembly of an 
InGaAs LED onto silicon circuitry. IEEE Photonics Tech Lett 
12:1198–200.
 136. Braun, E., Y. Eichen, U. Sivan, and G. B. Yoseph. 1998. 
DNA-templated assembly and electrode attachment of a 
conducting silver wire. Nature 391:775.
 137. Bashir, R. 2001. DNA nanobiostructures. Materials Today 
4:30–9.
 138. Lee, S. W., W. J. Chang, and R. Bashir, “Bottom-up” 
approach for implementing nano/microstructure using 
biological and chemical interactions. Biotech Bioprocess Eng 
12:185–99.
 139. Seeman, N. C. J. 1982. Nucleic acid junctions and lattices. 
Theor Biol 99:237–47.
 140. Seeman, N. C. 1991. The use of branched DNA for nano-
scale fabrication. Nanotechnology 2:149–59.
 141. Seeman, N. C., Y. Zhang, and J. Chen. 1994. J Vac Sci Technol 
A12:1895.
 142. Seeman, N. C. 1998. DNA nanotechnology: novel DNA 
constructions. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struc 27:225–48.
 143. Winfree, E., F. Liu, L. Wenzler, and N. C. Seeman. 1998. 
Design and self-assembly of two-dimensional DNA crys-
tals. Nature 394:539–44.
 144. Mirkin, C. A., R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic, and J. J. Storhoff. 
1996. A DNA-based method for rationally assembling 
nanoparticles into macroscopic materials. Nature 382: 
607–09.
 145. Martin, B. R., D. J. Dermody, B. D. Reiss, M. Fang, L. A. 
Lyon, M. J. Natan, and T. E. Mallouk. 1999. Orthogonal 
self-assembly of colloidal gold-platinum nanorods. Adv 
Materials 11:1021–25.
 146. Vorob’ev, A., P. Vaccaro, K. Kubota, S. Saravanan, and T. 
Aida. 2003. Array of micromachined components fab-
ricated using “micro-origami” method. Jpn J Appl Phys 
42:4024–26.
 147. Kubota, K., T. Fleischmann, S. Saravanan, P. O. Vaccaro, and 
T. Aida. 2003. Self-Assembly of Microstage Using Micro-
Origami on GaAs. Jpn J Appl Phys 42:4079–83.
 148. Vorob’ev, A., P. O. Vaccaro, K. Kubota, T. Aida, T. Tokuda, 
T. Hayashi, Y. Sakano, J. Ohta, and M. Nunoshita. 2003. 
SiGe/Si microtubes fabricated on a silicon-on-insulator 
substrate. J Phys D Appl Phys 36:L71–L73.
 149. Charlotte, P., P. Reverdy, L. Doppler, J. Bico, B. Roman, 
and C. N. Baroud. 2007. Capillary origami: Spontaneous 
wrapping of a droplet with an elastic sheet. Phys Rev Lett 
98:156103.

[Page 238]
[empty page]

[Page 239]
239
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Selected MEMS and NEMS 
Materials
Quartz
GaAs
Diamond
SiC
Bulk and Surface Microstructuring 
of Ceramics
Polymer MEMS-Polyimides
Silicon Nitride
Amorphous Silicon and 
Hydrogenated Amorphous 
Silicon
Selected MEMS and NEMS 
Processes
Biocompatibility and Surface 
Modiﬁcation
Surface Modiﬁcations 
Questions
References
5
Selected Materials 
and Processes for 
MEMS and NEMS
Micro glass blowing, a process developed by Andrei Shkel and  others at the 
University of California, Irvine. The diameter of the glass spheres on a Si wafer is 
approximately 900 μm. (Courtesy of Dr. Andrei Shkel.)
Carbon microflowers, made in a process developed by Ashutosh Sharma and 
others at IIT Kanpur, India. An example of a carbon-based microelectromechani-
cal system (C-MEMS) based on pyrolysis of  resorcinol-formaldehyde gels (RF-gels). 
(Courtesy of Dr. Ashutosh Sharma, IIT Kanpur, India.)

[Page 240]
240   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Introduction
Silicon is one of the most commonly used microma-
chining materials not only because of its excellent 
electronic and mechanical properties, the incred-
ible degree of control one can exert over doping 
this semiconductor material, and the ease of insu-
lating its surface with SiO2 but also because it has 
been the dominant material in the integrated circuit 
(IC) industry ever since the early 1950s. However, 
silicon is not perfect for all applications, nor can it 
function on its own: the IC arsenal features a small 
group of additional materials, such as the met-
als Al, Cu, W, B, and P and the insulators SiO2 and 
Si3N4. There are plenty of new demands that are 
challenging the continued dominance of silicon 
and will require the introduction of new materials 
that work in conjunction with silicon or necessitate 
the switch to alternative semiconductors altogether: 
higher speeds; better heat dissipation; merging of 
sensors and actuators with active electronics, opto-
electronics, and quantum devices; lower power 
consumption; more environmentally friendly man-
ufacturing processes, etc. In microelectromechani-
cal systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical 
systems (NEMS), and in some application-specific 
ICs, alternative semiconductor materials already 
are being used, including gallium arsenide (GaAs), 
AlxGa1-xAs compounds, SiGe, CdSe, SiC, TiO2, ZnO, 
and carbon nanotubes. A wide variety of poly-
mers, ceramics and metals, foreign to the standard 
IC process also have been adopted, especially in 
bio-MEMS. In this chapter, we review some selected 
materials and processes that have affected and will 
continue to affect the direction MEMS and NEMS 
take on next. The chapter is headed by a descrip-
tion of possible substrate materials for MEMS and 
NEMS: quartz, GaAs, diamond, SiC, ceramics (with 
emphasis on Al2O3), polyimides, silicon nitride, and 
amorphous and hydrogenated amorphous silicon. 
For exciting new MEMS/NEMS techniques, we sur-
vey carbon-based MEMS (C-MEMS), bulk metallic 
glasses (BMGs), fast microfluidic compact disc (CD) 
prototyping, and micro glass blowing. Finally, we 
dedicate a section to biocompatibility and the vari-
ous chemistries for surface derivation of solids to 
make them biocompatible. Studies of in vivo MEMS 
devices are regaining popularity, making a deeper 
understanding of biocompatibility a necessity. 
Selected MEMS and NEMS Materials
Introduction
Miniaturization—a mantra in electrical engineer ing 
for a long time—has become a widely accepted disci-
pline in the other engineering branches. This has led 
to a wider and wider array of materials used in min-
iaturization science. Here we dwell upon the impor-
tance of the substrate material, i.e., the principal 
material on which or in which to fabricate the MEMS 
or NEMS. In Chapter 1, this volume, we presented 
a section on substrate choice, including a compari-
son of important substrate materials for MEMS and 
NEMS (see Tables 1.9 and 1.10). These tables include 
materials that are merely “passive” substrates (e.g., 
plastics or cardboard support structures) and others 
that are “active” and may constitute an active mem-
ber of a micromachine (e.g., GaAs or quartz).1 If the 
substrate to be machined must combine good elec-
tronic properties with excellent mechanical behav-
ior, single-crystal Si is still the favored material. The 
electronic qualifications of Si are well known through 
the resounding successes scored by the IC industry in 
this and the previous century (see Volume I, Chapter 
4). But, when comparing the yield strength, density, 
specific strength (i.e., ratio of yield strength to den-
sity), Knoop hardness, Young’s modulus, thermal 
conductivity, and thermal expansion coefficient for 
some of the most important technological materials 
(Volume I, Tables 4.15 and 4.16), one realizes that Si 
Microtable made with carbon MEMS at UCI (Courtesy of 
Dr. Marc Madou).

[Page 241]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   241
also is an outstanding mechanical sensor/actuator 
substrate. Although a large percentage of MEMS and 
NEMS relies on single-crystal Si, and the IC indus-
try is almost exclusively based on it, the need for all 
types of miniaturized devices with a wide variety of 
new functions is rapidly changing this picture. This is 
particularly true for chemical and biological sensors, 
actuators, harsh environment devices, and microflu-
idic structures. But even for mechanical devices, Si is 
far from the only choice, with quartz, for example, 
being an excellent contender. For biomedical appli-
cations and microfluidics, glass and polymers are 
becoming an increasingly favored miniaturization 
substrate. Fast ICs, radio frequency (RF)-MEMS, opto-
electronics, and NEMS are push ing GaAs, AlxGa1-x As 
compounds, and SiGe to the foreground. For harsh 
environments, ceramic micro machining is emerging 
as a new opportunity. A check-off list to determine the 
optimum substrate for a given micromachining task 
was introduced in Chapter 1, Table 1.11. Many MEMS/
NEMS substrates were covered earlier in the book; 
some additional details on quartz, GaAs, diamond, 
SiC, ceramics (with emphasis on Al2O3), polyimides, 
silicon nitride, and amorphous and hydrogenated 
amorphous silicon, which were not treated in suffi-
cient detail elsewhere, follow. 
Quartz
Quartz Properties and Quartz Machining
Quartz is the only material known that possesses 
the following combination of properties:
 
◾Piezoelectric
 
◾Zero-temperature expansion coefficient cuts 
 
◾Stress-compensated cut exists
 
◾Low loss [i.e., high-quality factor (Q)]
 
◾Easy to process: low solubility in everything, 
under “normal” conditions, except fluoride and 
hot alkali etchants
 
◾Hard but not brittle
 
◾Abundant in nature; easy to grow in large 
quantities, at low cost, and with relatively high 
purity and perfection 
Some quartz properties are summarized in Table 
5.1, and in Figure 5.1, a quartz angular rate sensor 
(tuning fork-based), developed by Jan Söderkvist 
(Colibri Pro Development AB, Sweden) for automo-
tive and other applications, is shown. The tines of 
the tuning fork sensor element shown are 2.5 mm 
long. The sensor is well suited, for example, to space 
applications because of its small size and ability to 
withstand harsh conditions.
The properties of quartz vary greatly with cry-
stallographic direction: when a quartz sphere is 
etched deeply in an HF bath, the sphere takes on 
a triangular shape when viewed along the z-axis 
and a lens shape when viewed along the y-axis. The 
etching rate is more than 100 times faster along the 
fastest etching rate direction (the z-direction) than 
along the slowest direction (the slow-x-direction). 
Quartz, in some respects, presents us with an even 
more ideal sensor material than Si because of its 
nearly temperature-independent thermal expansion 
TABLE 5.1 Some Important Physical Properties of Quartz 
Property
Value || Z
Value ⊥ Z
Temperature 
Dependence
Thermal conductivity [cal/(cm/s/°C)]
29 × 10–3
16 × 10–3
Decreases with T
Dielectric constant
4.63 (ε1)
4.52 (ε3)
Decreases with T
Thermal expansion coefficient (1/°C)
7.1 × 10−6
13.2 × 10–6
Increases with T
Electrical resistivity (Ω·cm)
0.1 × 1015 (ionic)
20 × 1015 (electronic)
Decreases with T
Piezoelectric constant, d (pC/N)
2.31 (d11)
0.73 (d14)
Young’s modulus (N/m2)
9.7 × 1010
7.6 × 1010
Decreases with T
Density (kg/m3)
2.66 × 103
Maximum coupling coefficient, k
0.1
Curie temperature (°C)
573
Young’s modulus E(GPa)
107
|| Z, parallel with Z; ⊥ Z, perpendicular to Z. T, temperature. See also Chapter 8, this volume, Table 8.7. 

[Page 242]
242   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
coefficient. The thermal expansion coefficient of 
quartz is 7.8 × 10−6/°C along the z-direction and 
14.3 × 10−6/°C perpendicular to the z-direction; 
the temperature coefficient of density therefore is 
−36.4  × 10−6/°C. The temperature coefficients of 
the elastic constants range from − 3300 × 10−6/°C 
(for C12) to +164 × 10−6/°C (for C66). For the proper 
angles of cut, the sum of the different tempera-
ture coefficients may cancel, i.e., temperature-
compensated cuts exist in quartz. Micromachined 
quartz is chemically and mechanically robust 
and may be used in high-temperature, high-shock 
applications where Si would fail. A variety of quartz 
micromachined piezoelectric devices also are on the 
market, such as electronic filters, resonators, and 
wristwatch tuning forks. Quartz exhibits very good 
temperature and long-term stability and therefore is 
ideal for high-precision oscillators. The frequency-
accuracy, including all the environmental effects, 
after one year of aging, is of the order of few parts 
per million to tens of parts per million.
Prior to about 1956, the material used for quartz 
resonators was natural quartz, i.e., mined quartz. 
Natural quartz has been replaced by quartz grown 
in large single crystals in factories: “cultured quartz.” 
Wafers up to 3 in. in diameter are commercially 
available as starting material. Although this quartz 
often is referred to as “synthetic quartz,” nobody has 
yet found a way to synthesize single-crystal quartz 
directly from silicon and oxygen. Large quartz bars 
(typically ∼15 cm long) of uniform size and shape are 
grown from small, irregularly shaped pieces of quartz. 
So, strictly speaking, the quartz is cultured quartz. 
Quartz is a common material in the earth’s crust 
(e.g., sand is mostly quartz); however, the high-purity 
crystals needed for quartz growing are not as com-
mon. Most of the nutrient materials used by quartz 
growers are mined in Brazil and the United States.
Machining methods for quartz include mechan-
ical machining, such as diamond saw cutting, 
grinding, lapping, polishing, and, relatively more 
recently, ultrasonic machining and wet and dry 
chemical etching. Lapping and polishing can be used 
for fashioning quartz plates as thin as 100 µm. These 
techniques do not lend themselves to making small, 
complex shapes, though. For the latter applications, 
ultrasonic machining has been applied to make, for 
example, high-precision bulk wave oscillators and 
complex-shaped piezoelectric resonator sensors in 
the millimeter size range, but the technique is not sui-
table for mass production. Wet chemical etching of 
quartz using HF/NH4F on z-cut quartz can be used 
for submillimeter fashioning of complex quartz 
shapes and currently is used for mass production 
of wristwatch tuning fork resonators.2 Etching rates 
depend strongly on the crystallographic orientation, 
with the z-cut exhibiting the highest etching rates: 
1 mm/min at 50°C, with typical etch ratios in the 
range of 50:1 to 500:1 with respect to x-cut and 
y-cut plates.3,4 Conventional photolithography is 
used to pattern shapes on quartz with chromium/
gold for masking layers. High repeatability and 
automatic batch processing yield lower cost devices. 
Similar technologies are used for the fabrication of 
force sensors5 and accelerometers. The tolerances 
of these quartz devices for mechanical sensing 
applications are, as expected from the temperature-
independent thermal expansion coefficient, better 
than those of Si devices. Quartz also allows a 
greater number of different geometrical shapes 
than Si, and there is no need for deposition of an 
insulator between conductor and substrates. Dufour 
et al.6 presented  a balanced comparison between 
micromachined pres sure sensors using quartz 
versus silicon vibrating beams and concluded that 
both materials are strong candidates for mass-
produced micromachines. Com panies such as Systron 
Donner7 that have been selling traditional precision 
FIGURE 5.1 Quartz angular rate sensor (tuning fork) 
developed by Jan Söderkvist, Colibri Pro Development AB 
(Sweden), for automotive and other applications. The sen-
sor is well suited to space applications because of its small 
size and ability to withstand harsh conditions. The tines of 
the tuning fork sensor element shown are 2.5 mm long.

[Page 243]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   243
quartz  products  such  as high-temperature, high-
shock-resistance accelerometers are appreciating the 
potential competition from a Si technology and are 
developing silicon technology in parallel. 
Hjort et al.8 developed a most interesting, novel 
anisotropic dry/wet etching scheme for single-
crystalline quartz. By bombarding quartz with fast 
heavy ions [e.g., 197Au at 11.6 MeV/a and 129Xe at 11.4 
MeV/a specific energy (where a is the atomic mass 
unit)], deep nanosized amorphous cylindrical latent 
tracks (±10 mm wide) are formed. The bombarded 
wafers are then Au-Cr masked and etched in 20 M 
KOH at 143°C. By masking parts of the wafer prior 
to etching, microstructures can be generated along 
the ion track direction. The masked zone remains 
latent, and the tracks can be eliminated in an 
annealing step. When the ion tracks are etched in 
the mask windows, the latent pores are opened, and 
they widen until they overlap, creating the desired 
microfeatures. By irradiating the sample off its 
normal, slanted microstructures can be generated. 
The aspect ratio of the cylindrical nanotracks rea-
ches a whopping 104, and after etching, aspect 
ratios larger than 100 result. Features as large as 
80 µm were demonstrated in this fascinating new 
micromachining approach.
As mentioned earlier, quartz resonators constitute 
important quartz micromachining applications. 
From Table 5.2, accuracies of various oscillators 
range from 10−4 to 10−11, and quartz can deliver even 
the highest accuracies required. Moreover, quartz 
comes with an excellent Q (see Chapter 8, this vol-
ume, Equation 8.28). Q is proportional to the decay 
time and is inversely proportional to the line width 
of the resonance peak. The higher the Q, the higher 
the frequency stability and accuracy capability of a 
resonator; i.e., high Q is a necessary but not a suf-
ficient condition for high accuracy.*
Silicon MEMS (Si-MEMS) startup companies 
Discera, Silicon Clocks, and SiTime are currently 
targeting the quartz oscillator market. They are 
building packaged Si-MEMS oscillators, consisting 
of a MEMS resonator and the electrical circuits for 
the oscillator function and frequency and tempera-
ture compensation. The micromechanical resonator 
is a Si micromachined structure that vibrates at a 
specific frequency because of an external excitation 
(e.g., electrostatic). Today, the main technologies 
for oscillator clock products are quartz, ceramic 
and complementary metal-oxide-silicon (CMOS) 
silicon clocks. Si-MEMS is just barely emerging as 
a potential competitor. The market is still mostly 
served by quartz (70−80% of the value), with 
Japanese companies such as Kyocera, Rakon, and 
Epson Toyocom in control of this market. Silicon 
timing or CMOS clocks (i.e. non-MEMS, simply 
electronic) are available from, for example, Maxim 
or Linear Technologies and gradually are replacing 
* If, e.g., Q = 106, then 10−10 accuracy requires the ability to determine 
the center of the resonance curve to 0.01% of the line width, and 
stability (for some averaging time) of 10−12 requires the ability to stay 
near the peak of the resonance curve to 10−6 of line width.
TABLE 5.2 Accuracies of Various Oscillators
Oscillator Typea
Accuracyb
Typical Applications
Crystal oscillator (XO)
10−5 to 10−4
Computer timing
Temperature-compensated 
crystal oscillator (TXCO)
10−6
Frequency control in tactical 
radios
Microcomputer-compensated 
crystal oscillator (MCXO)
10−8 to 10−7
Spread spectrum system clock
Oven-controlled crystal 
oscillator (OCXO)
10−8 (with 10−10 per g option)
Navigation system clock and 
frequency standard, MTI
Small atomic frequency 
standard (Rb, RbXO)
10−9
C3 satellite terminals, bistatic, 
and multistatic radar
High-peformance atomic 
standard (Cs)
10−12 to 10−11
Strategic C3, EW
a Sizes range from <5 cm3 for clock oscillators to >30 L for cesium standards. Costs range from <$5 for clock 
oscillators to >$50,000 for cesium standards.
b Including environmental effects (e.g., –40oC to +75oC) and one year of aging.
MTI, moving-target indicator radar; C3, command, control, and communications radar; EW, early-warning 
radar.

[Page 244]
244   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
ceramic devices in applications with more relaxed 
specifications. Somewhere between CMOS clocks 
and quartz oscillators, Si-MEMS clocks now are 
looking for their piece of this multibillion-dollar pie 
(see Chapter 10, this volume).
The ∼5-MHz resonant frequency resonator from 
SiTime is illustrated in Figure 5.2 and is made of 
single-crystal silicon. The resonator is ∼200 µm on 
a side by ∼10 µm thick. The trench gap is 0.4 µm 
and the Q is ∼75 k at room temperature. The 
resonator is integrated into standard silicon CMOS 
chips, which makes the oscillator inexpensive 
to produce. All oscillator frequencies are derived 
from the same 5-MHz resonator. The oscillator is 
compensated by measuring the temperature with 
a bandgap thermometer on the same CMOS die. 
The temperature resolution is ∼0.05°C, giving a 
frequency resolution of ∼1.5 ppm.
An analysis of the competition between silicon 
and quartz for MEMS oscillators constitutes a good 
exercise to acquire a better insight into all of the 
arguments that need consideration in such a com-
parison (it is also another opportunity to test the 
decision tree presented in Chapter 1, “Decision Tree 
for the Optimized Micromanufacturing Option”). 
Si-MEMS oscillators are not new; the first publica-
tions mentioning MEMS resonators for oscillator 
applications appeared in the 1980s. Until recently, 
however, the poor temperature stability of silicon 
and the need for expensive ceramic or metal vac-
uum packaging prevented Si-MEMS oscillators from 
becoming a serious alternative to quartz. But, prog-
ress in processes, packaging and integration of the 
circuitry over the last five years has gone quite a way 
to address those issues.
Si-MEMS technology, in theory, offers major 
advantages over quartz in terms of size ( especially for 
mobile applications), power  consumption, integra-
tion cost, and ability to provide multiple operation 
frequencies. Let us look at each of these criteria in 
somewhat more detail, starting with the size argu-
ment (http://www.memsinvestorjournal.com/2006/ 
10/mems_oscillator.html). 
Size Argument 
Si-MEMS resonator elements have traditionally 
been much smaller than their quartz MEMS 
counterparts. This used to be the key selling 
argument in the mobile communication industry. 
A tiny MEMS oscillator often is pictured on top of 
a quartz oscillator that is 100 times its size to seal 
this argument. However, as is clear from the above 
discussed quartz micromachining efforts, the latest 
quartz MEMS products are very small as well. 
A new generation of quartz MEMS is emerging, with 
dimensions similar to those of the first Si-MEMS 
oscillators (e.g., 2 × 2.5 × 0.8 mm for a quartz device 
from NDK compared with 2 × 2.5 × 0.85 mm for the 
Si-MEMS structure from SiTime). The first genera-
tion Si-MEMS oscillators are pin-to-pin compatible 
with quartz products, allowing an easy one-on-one 
replacement. Since the size of the package will be 
the  same, the main advantage of Si-MEMS oscil-
lators in the “small oscillator segment” will not be 
size but price. The manufacturing and encapsula ting 
of small quartz devices is expensive compared with 
Si-MEMS (see next). Printed circuit board (PCB) 
space also can be saved with Si-MEMS oscillators, 
which do not require additional bypass capacitors 
and resistors. 
Low Cost Argument 
Si-MEMS resonators can be manufactured at a lower 
cost than quartz MEMS oscillators since Si-MEMS 
leverages IC batch manufacturing techniques much 
better. The first commercial Si-MEMS oscillators 
are hybrid parts, though; e.g., SiTime’s Si-MEMS 
resonators are wire bonded to an ASIC. SiTime uses 
an innovative wafer-scale packaging solution that is 
licensed from Bosch and is compatible with CMOS 
processing. It involves placing resonators on top 
of an SOI wafer and encapsulating them with an 
epitaxial layer of silicon, facilitating sealing at high 
temperatures and creating a barrier to moisture (see 
Chapter 4, this volume, on packaging, assembly, 
and self-assembly). The Si resonator is inexpensive 
FIGURE 5.2 The ~5 MHz resonant frequency resonator 
from SiTime is made of single-crystal silicon.

[Page 245]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   245
in volume and is estimated to be less than $0.10. 
The typical price of a Si-MEMS oscillator will start 
at $0.50 and may reach a few dollars in some 
instances.
Multifrequency Argument 
Several RF-MEMS resonators with different frequen-
cies can be manufactured on the same die, allow-
ing for multifrequency devices while retaining small 
size and low cost. Crystals, on the other hand, are 
single-frequency devices. If multiple frequencies are 
needed such as in a cell phone, e.g., a 32 kHz oscil-
lator for the real-time clock and several MHz oscil-
lators for transmission, reception, and processing 
functions, several discrete-packaged crystals must 
be used.
High Q Argument 
Si-MEMS devices exhibit a higher Q than CMOS 
clocks. However, Si-MEMS has not yet reached the 
quality factor of quartz (100,000−200,000 for quartz 
compared with 75,000 for Si-MEMS). The related 
phase noise of MEMS also is an issue that must be 
overcome to reach the performance required for 
temperature-compensated crystal oscillators (TCXOs).
Integration Argument 
Contrary to the case with quartz, Si-based  RF- 
MEMS oscillators are manufactured with CMOS-
compatible processes. This could pave the way to 
true single-chip solution with built-in frequency 
references. Advantages in terms of power consump-
tion (lower parasitics from the wires) and size are 
obvious. However, as stated above, the first com-
mercially available Si-MEMS oscillators are actually 
hybrid parts. 
Low Power Argument 
The low power consumption of MEMS resonators is 
a key advantage in portable applications. However, 
MEMS solutions only reduce power consumption 
when monolithically integrated, because all of the 
parasitics associated with an off-chip component 
(i.e. wire bonding quartz or discrete MEMS) are 
eliminated. This advantage also is diminished in a 
hybrid part because of wire-bond parasitics. 
Summary
Of the human-grown single crystals, quartz, at 
∼3000 tons per year, is second only to silicon 
grown in quantity (three to four times as much 
Si was grown  annually as of 1997). Despite the 
mechanical/thermal advantages of quartz, quartz 
micromachining lags considerably behind that of Si. 
This is mainly due to the lack of plasma processes 
to structure quartz with the versatility achieved in 
the case of Si. Another reason that quartz is not 
competing better with Si as a mechanical MEMS 
substrate is the lack of large quartz substrates and its 
cost: a quartz wafer, 76.2 mm in diameter, 0.45 mm 
thick, and polished on one side costs about $200, 
while the average selling prices for 200- and 300-mm 
silicon wafers are about $45 and $200, respectively.
GaAs
GaAs Properties 
The first gallium arsenide (GaAs) metal semi-
conductor field effect transistor (MESFET) was 
proposed in 1966 and the first GaAs high-electron 
mobility transistor (HEMT) was demonstrated in 
1978 at the Bell Laboratories. However, GaAs is 
only now rising from its position as the technology 
that remains the technology of the future to true 
technological wonder. The main economic driver 
for widespread use of GaAs semiconductors was 
the emergence of the digital cellular phone, which 
needs faster IC technology than Si can provide, and 
ever since 1994, the GaAs industry has grown at 
least 25% per year. As the micromachining industry 
largely evolves in lockstep with the IC industry, we 
can expect GaAs micromachines to succeed as GaAs 
use penetrates the IC industry further. The growing 
importance of quantum mechanical devices also is 
pushing GaAs toward becoming a more important 
MEMS/NEMS substrate contender. As we pointed 
out in Volume I, Chapter 3, an important feature 
of the III-V technologies in general, and of GaAs in 
particular, is the possibility of forming compatible 
ternary and quaternary compounds. Using GaAs as 
the substrate material, the formation of AlxGa1-xAs 
compounds is especially attractive, since their lattice 
constants are nearly equal to those of  GaAs,  and 

[Page 246]
246   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
aluminum and gallium atoms are easily substituted 
in the lattice without causing too much strain. 
Today, epitaxy techniques have matured, and both 
high-quality MOCVD and molecular beam epitaxy 
(MBE)  epitaxy are commercially available. Layers 
deposited with these techniques have very little 
induced strain, which allows them to be grown almost 
arbitrarily thick. In Volume I, Chapter 3, we describe 
GaAs-based quantum wells; Volume I, Chapter 5 
covers double-barrier resonant tunneling diodes 
and quantum cascade lasers, all based on layers of 
gallium aluminum arsenide sandwiched between 
gallium arsenide layers. With its direct bandgap, 
GaAs can be used to emit light efficiently, whereas 
silicon has an indirect bandgap and is very poor at 
emitting light (see Volume I, Chap ter 3). Nonetheless, 
recent advances in nanotech nology, as we described 
in Volume I, Chapters  3 and 5, may make silicon 
light-emitting diodes and lasers possible after 
all. Another important application of  GaAs (and 
III-V compounds in general) is for high-efficiency 
solar cells. In 1970, Zhores Alferov (see Volume 
I, Figure  3.60) and his team in the USSR created 
the first GaAs heterostructure solar cells. Today, 
the combination of GaAs with germanium and 
indium gallium phosphide is the basis of a triple-
junction solar cell that holds the record for solar 
light conversion efficiency of over 32% and can 
operate also with light as concentrated as 2000 
suns.*  This  type of solar cell powers the robots 
Spirit and Opportunity, which are exploring the Mars 
surface.
In Chapter 1, this volume, Table 1.10, we compare 
some of the material properties of single-crystal 
SiC, Si, GaAs, and diamond with relevance to elec-
tronics and MEMS/NEMS. Gallium arsenide, it 
emerges, is a very promising MEMS/NEMS substrate 
for a variety of reasons. These include well-known 
optoelectronic properties such as a direct bandgap 
transition (see above) and high-mobility electrons. 
The higher saturated electron velocity and higher 
electron mobility of GaAs compared with those of 
Si allow it to function at frequencies in excess of 
250 GHz. GaAs HEMTs are a typical high-electron 
* Where one sun equals 1000 W/m² at the point of arrival. One sun is 
a unit of power flux. 
mobility application, and the same property also 
renders the  material ideal for the measurement 
of magnetic fields through the Hall effect (see 
Volume  I, Equation 3.64). Also, GaAs devices 
generate less noise than silicon devices when 
operated at those high frequencies. Because of its 
high switching speed, GaAs, it would seem, also 
is more ideal for computer applications than Si. In 
the 1980s it often was suggested that the IC market 
might switch from Si to GaAs, which it never really 
did (from there its unfortunate designation as 
“the technology that remains the technology of the 
future”). Cray even built a GaAs-based computer 
in the early 1990s, the Cray-3, but the company 
filed for bankruptcy in 1995. Because it has a larger 
bandgap than Si, GaAs is considered to be a better 
material for high-temperature electronics. GaAs 
devices can be operated at higher power levels than 
equivalent silicon devices because GaAs has a higher 
breakdown voltage. Pressure, temperature, and 
vibration sensors, making use of the influence of 
external pressure and temperature on the bandgap, 
have already been built. 
GaAs has piezoelectric properties comparable 
to those of quartz, and various physical effects 
give higher piezoresistive values than those of sili-
con. The piezoelectric effect enables GaAs-based 
piezoelectric transducers, and one may excite any 
vibration mode used in quartz if the proper crys-
tal orientation is observed. Overall, the material is 
less attractive for purely mechanical MEMS devices, 
though, since the yield load is smaller by a factor of 
two compared with silicon.9 We summarize some of 
the most important GaAs properties in Table 5.3.
GaAs Micromachining
Besides wet9 and dry10 bulk micromachining of 
GaAs, some GaAs surface micromachining work has 
been reported.11 Because of the zinc blend structure 
of GaAs (same as Si), the wet etching of {111} crys-
tal planes proceeds more slowly than all others. In 
wet bulk micromachining of GaAs, a unique trian-
gular prism-shaped bridge can be obtained through 
anisotropic etching by appropriate placement of 
the etch mask (see Figure 5.3). This unique profile, 
not possible in silicon, is formed because of the 

[Page 247]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   247
crystallographic polarity in some axial directions, 
and the differences between the etch rates of the 
A{111} planes and the other low-index planes.12 
Although slower etching planes exist, GaAs does 
not present real etch stop planes, as observed in 
silicon when using, for example, KOH-based solu-
tions (see Volume II, Chapter 4). In the latter etchants, 
the {111} Si planes present etch rates of up to 400 
times lower than the other planes. Surface micro-
machined sensor and actuator structures made of 
metal on a GaAs substrate have been demonstrated 
in schemes compatible with normal GaAs IC pro-
cessing. The most frequently used sacrificial wet and 
dry etch systems for III-V crystals are presented in 
the review papers of K. Hjort14 and S. D. Collins15 
and in the work by Karam et al.16 It was shown that 
to craft surface micromachined structures in epitax-
ial GaAs, AlxGa1−xAs (x ≥ 0.5) may act as a sacrificial 
TABLE 5.3 GaAs Properties
Property
GaAs
Atomic or molecular weight
144.63
Atoms or molecules/cm3
4.42 × 1022
Breakdown field, V/cm>
~4 × 105
Chemical resistance 
Poor
Crystal structure
Zinc blend
De Broglie electron wavelength (Å)
240 
Debye temperature
360
Density, g/cm3
5.32
Dielectric constant (high frequency)
10.89
Dielectric constant (static)
12.9
Effective density of states: valence band Nv (cm−3)
7.0 × 1018
Effective density of states: conduction band Nc (cm−3)
4.7 × 1017
Effective mass: electrons
0.063 m0
Effective mass: holes
0.051 m0
Electron affinity (eV)
4.07
Energy gap (eV)
1.42 direct
Energy gap (eV)
1.43
Intrinsic carrier concentration, ni (cm3)
1.8 × 106
Intrinsic mobility: Electron, cm2/V-s
8600
Intrinsic mobility: Hole, cm2/V-s
400
Knoop hardness (kg/mm2)
600
Lattice constant, nm
0.5653
Maximum operating temperature (°C)
460
Melting point (°C)
1238
Number of atoms in 1 cm3
4.42 × 1022
Optical phonon energy
0.035
Physical stability
Fair; sublimation of arsenic is a problem
Saturated electron drift velocity (× 107 cm/s)
2
Symmetry group
T2
d− F43 m
Temperature coefficient of expansion (°C–1)
6.8 × 10–6
Thermal conductivity (W/cm-oC)
0.46
Yield strength (GPa)
2.0
Young’s modulus (GPa)
75
See also http://www.ioffe.rssi.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/GaAs/index.html. 
GaAs substrate
Suspended triangular
prism-shaped structure
(011)
(100)
(011)
FIGURE 5.3 Free-standing triangular bridge in GaAs.13

[Page 248]
248   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
layer. By using several steps of MOCVD epitaxial 
layer regrowth, structures of polysilicon-like com-
plexity were built.17,18 Note that not only different 
material compositions but also different dopant 
concentrations and damaged regions of GaAs can 
act as stop and sacrificial layers. 
In Volume II, Chapter 3, we detail the GaAs 
 single-crystal reactive etching and  metallization pro-
cess, which includes chemically assisted ion beam 
etching (CAIBE) and reactive ion etching (RIE) for ver-
tical and undercut dry etches, respectively. Suspended 
and movable GaAs structures are produced with a 
25:1 aspect ratio of vertical depth (10 µm) to lateral 
width (400 nm) (Volume II, Figure 3.43). 
Ribas from TIMA developed a front-side bulk GaAs 
micromachining approach compatible with standard 
GaAs microelectronics technologies for the fabri-
cation of integrated, low-cost, high- volume micro-
system applications (http://cmp.imag.fr/ products/ 
mems/thesis.pdf).13 Dr. Ribas also developed a set 
of computer-aided design tools for GaAs MEMS lay-
out level design, such as cross-section and three-
dimensional layout viewers, layout generators, and 
a bulk GaAs etching simulator within the Mentor 
Graphics environment. In the same context of GaAs 
IC compatibility, Karam et al.16 are investigating gal-
lium arsenide micromachining techniques using 
high-electron mobility transfer (HEMT) and metal 
Schottky field effect transistor (MESFET) foundry 
processes.
In an interesting example of self-assembly, two-
dimensional arrays of self-positioning, free- standing 
GaAs structures were fabricated using a new method 
of surface micromachining called micro-origami. 
This technique is based on epitaxial growth of III-V 
multi layers on GaAs substrates followed by pho-
tolithography and wet etching, as we described in 
Chapter  4, this volume, on packaging, assembly, 
and self-assembly. 
Progress in processes to deposit GaAs epitaxially 
on Si could benefit both IC and micromachining 
industries. GaAs grown epitaxially on Si substrates 
has great potential to lower the costs, improve the 
manufacturability, and improve the thermal charac-
teristics of GaAs-based ICs. GaAs/Si wafers are larger 
and stronger and lighter than GaAs wafers.19 This 
combination opens the possibility of monolithic 
integration of GaAs-based ICs with Si-based ICs. 
GaAs-on-Si has significant market potential, both 
as a substitution technology for manufacturing tra-
ditional GaAs devices and as a new technology for 
monolithic integration of GaAs devices and silicon 
integrated circuits. As a substitution technology, 
GaAs-on-Si holds the potential to fundamentally 
change the economics of manufacturing GaAs inte-
grated circuits and GaAs optical components. As 
a technology for monolithic integration of GaAs 
devices and silicon integrated circuits, GaAs-on-Si 
technology is even more interesting. In fiber optics, 
integration of GaAs lasers and photodetectors with 
silicon control circuitry would become feasible. 
Because of these obvious advantages, many attempts 
have been made over the past thirty years to grow 
GaAs on Si substrates. The GaAs lattice constant 
(5.65 Å) is about 4% larger than silicon’s (5.43 Å), 
and this difference makes it difficult to grow high-
quality GaAs directly on silicon. Instead, Motorola 
researchers place a thin layer (about 50 Å) of stron-
tium titanate (SrTiO3) between the two semicon-
ductors.20 Strontium titanate’s lattice constant falls 
roughly halfway between GaAs and Si. Moreover, 
an amorphous layer (10–20 Å thick) forms between 
Si and SrTiO3. This layer, it is hypothesized, absorbs 
the lattice mismatch strain between the two materi-
als, allowing the crystalline SrTiO3 to form a normal 
lattice without distortion from the underlying Si. 
Because the SrTiO3 layer is very thin, the amorphous 
interlayer also absorbs the mismatch strain between 
the SrTiO3 and GaAs layers.
In 2001, scientists from Motorola reported on 
supposedly device-quality GaAs epitaxial layers with 
low dislocation densities, close to that of bulk GaAs 
crystals (∼104/cm2), grown onto Si by molecular 
beam epitaxy (MBE) (Figure 5.4).21 In spite of the 
initial worldwide publicity, Motorola decided to 
stop its activity in this area in 2003.22 The presence 
of a low dislocation density in the epitaxial GaAs 
layers has never been independently confirmed and 
remains controversial. So it is back to the drawing 
board. Another approach to integrating GaAs on 
a Si substrate was pursued by Yeh and Smith, who 
assembled GaAs laser diodes in micromachined 
wells in a Si substrate by trapping them as discussed 
in Chapter 4, this volume (see Figure 4.44).23,24 

[Page 249]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   249
In the micromachining world, possible applica-
tions of GaAs MEMS are optical shutters or chop-
pers, actuators in monolithic microwave integrated 
circuits (MMIC), sensors using piezo- or optoelec-
trical properties of GaAs, or applications favor-
ing integration of micromechanical devices with 
electronic circuitry for fast signal processing, high 
operating temperature, or high radiation tolerance. 
GaAs micromachining might constitute a good 
method by which to incorporate micromirrors in 
resonant optical cavities for tunable lasers. Also, 
micromachining using gallium arsenide and group 
III-V compound semiconductors is a practical way to 
integrate RF switches, antennas, and other custom 
high-frequency components with ultrahigh-speed 
electronic devices for wireless communications (see 
Chapter 10, this volume). 
Summary
Overall, it remains hard for GaAs to compete with 
Si as a semiconductor substrate, but GaAs did 
start making major commercial inroads for high-
frequency applications with the introduction of 
mobile phones. Silicon presents at least three major 
advantages over GaAs, explaining why it is so hard 
for GaAs to compete. To begin, silicon is abundant 
and cheap to process. Silicon’s greater physical 
strength allows working with larger wafers (maxi-
mum of ∼300 mm compared with ∼150 mm dia-
meter for GaAs). Silicon is abundantly available in 
the Earth’s crust in the form of all types of silicate 
minerals, and the economy of scale available to the 
silicon IC industry discourages a more rapid adap-
tation of GaAs. The second major advantage of Si 
over GaAs is the existence of silicon dioxide—one 
of the best and most stable insulators that may be 
created with a very low defect concentration at inter-
face Si/SiO2. Silicon dioxide can easily be incorpo-
rated onto silicon circuits, and such layers adhere 
very well to the underlying Si. GaAs does not form 
such a stable adherent insulating layer (its native 
oxides are typically leaky). The third, perhaps most 
important advantage of silicon over GaAs is that it 
possesses a much higher hole mobility. This high 
hole mobility allows for the fabrication of higher-
speed p- channel field effect transistors required for 
CMOS logic. Because they lack a fast CMOS struc-
ture, GaAs logic circuits have much higher power 
consumption, which has made them unable to com-
pete with silicon logic circuits. 
As suggested before, the micromachining indus-
try largely evolves with and piggybacks on the IC 
industry, so we can expect GaAs micromachines to 
succeed as GaAs use penetrates the IC industry fur-
ther. The most effective approach to the cost reduc-
tion of any device is to increase the diameter of 
GaAs wafers. Along this line, Anadigics Inc., which 
manufactures RF ICs for the wireless handset and 
broadband communications markets, is building a 
6-in. GaAs fab in China, a certain sign that GaAs 
has arrived (cost per 6-in. GaAs wafer is projected 
at $300). 
The SiGe devices market has grown more rapidly 
than some anticipated, and III-V producers have 
some reason to be concerned about the transition 
from Si to SiGe instead of using GaAs in a number of 
key applications. With the talk of SiGe (see Volume I, 
Figure 4.59) matching performance with GaAs 
and beating it on cost, GaAs still edges out SiGe in 
terms of efficiency, so for those applications where 
this is less important—e.g., the shorter-range wire-
less networks, such as WiFi and Bluetooth—SiGe is 
going head to head with RF-CMOS.
Diamond
Introduction
Diamond, the hardest of all natural materials, 
is a wide bandgap semiconductor material with 
FIGURE 5.4 Motorola Labs created the world’s first 8-in. 
GaAs on silicon wafer and worked with epitaxial wafer 
manufacturer IQE to create the world’s first 12-in. GaAs 
on silicon wafer.

[Page 250]
250   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
excellent thermal, tribological, and mechanical 
properties. The thermal conductivity of diamond is 
higher than that of any other material near room 
temperature, making it an ideal material for heat 
sinking. Diamond components may be as much as 
10,000 times more wear-resistant than those made 
from silicon and come with a much higher thermal 
and chemical stability. Diamond is also a biocom-
patible material, so that it could be used in the body 
as a drug-dispensing unit without initiating an aller-
gic reaction. This is because carbon (the elemental 
ingredient of diamond) is chemically benign (see 
also below, under C-MEMS). If it could be microma-
chined easily, the exceptional physical and chemi-
cal properties of diamond would promise to expand 
the range of applications for microdevices. It is an 
ideal candidate for MEMS applications, particu-
larly in harsh environments. In addition, diamond 
reduces stiction compared with silicon (diamond’s 
low coefficient of friction is comparable to that of 
Teflon), perhaps making diamond-surface microma-
chined devices easier to manufacture. Diamond can 
be doped to change it from an insulator to a semi-
conductor: p-doping works fine, but it remains dif-
ficult to make an n-type diamond. We compare the 
properties of diamond with those of silicon, GaAs, 
and SiC in Table 5.4.
Diamond Deposition and 
Diamond Micromachining
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of single-crystal-
line diamond has been the subject of a great deal 
of research since the early 1980s. Very high-quality 
diamond thin films with negligible levels of defects 
and impurities (even superior to natural diamonds 
and high-pressure, high-temperature diamonds) are 
achievable when using microwave plasma chemical 
vapor deposition. However, high- quality homoepi-
taxial single-crystal CVD diamonds are still very 
expensive and are available only on small areas 
(3 × 3 or 4 × 4 cm2) because of the need of single-
 crystalline diamond substrates.25,26
Alternatively, polycrystalline diamond film, depo-
sited by CVD, is one potentially viable approach 
TABLE 5.4 Properties of Diamond and Other Semiconductors at 293 K
Diamond
Silicon
GaAs
SiC
Lattice constant (Å)
3.567
5.431
5.653
a = 3.086; c = 15.117
Hardness (kgf/mm2)
7,000–10,000
1,000
1,875–3,980
Density (g/cm3)
3.52
2.30
5.32
3.10
Refractive index
2.4195
3.448
3.4
2.65–2.69
Thermal conductivity (W/cm·K)
20
1.41
0.455
4
Specific heat (J/g·K)
0.52
0.70
0.35
0.65
Optical phonon energy (meV)
163
63
35
100 
Longitudinal phonon velocity (cm/s)
1.8 × 106
9 × 105
5.2 × 105
1.3 × 106 
Coefficient of thermal expansion
0.8 × 10–6
2.5 × 10−6
5.9 × 10−6
2.9 × 10−6
Debye temperature (K)
1,860
645
344
1,200
Electron saturated velocity (cm/s)
1.5 × 107
1 × 107
0.8 × 107
2 × 107 
Hole saturated velocity (cm/s)
1.05 × 107
9 × 106
1 × 107
1 × 107 
Electron mobility (cm2/V·s)
2,000 (500)
1,420
8,800
600
Hole mobility (cm2/V·s)
1,500 (500)
470
400
650 
Effective mass
Electron
0.57
1.1
0.068
0.45 
Hole
1.2
0.8
0.5
1.0 
Dielectric constant
5.7
11.9
12.5
10 
Intrinsic resistivity (Ω·cm)
>1015
105
108
>1015
Breakdown field (V/cm)
1–20 × 106
3 × 105
3.5 × 105
1–5 × 106 
Bandgap (eV)
5.47
1.12
1.42
2.2
Effective density of states
Conduction band (cm–1)
1 × 1019
2.8 × 1019
4.7 × 1017
7 × 1018
Valence band (cm–1)
3 × 1019
1.04 × 1019
7 × 1018
2.5 × 1019

[Page 251]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   251
to high-temperature, harsh-environment MEMS27 
(see also http://www.nasatech.com/Briefs/Feb99/
NPO20529.html). Chemical vapor deposition of 
diamond on Si substrates is compatible with the 
integration of Si-based electronics. The most com-
mon polycrystalline diamond CVD process involves 
a flowing mixture of methane and hydrogen, typi-
cally at a total pressure of 45 Torr (6 kPa) and a 
substrate temperature of 800–950°C. Diamond 
heteroepitaxially deposited on Si is polycrystalline 
(Figure 5.5) with a large number of grain bound-
aries, a high intrinsic stress, and a rough surface, 
making it difficult to use in MEMS. The grain size 
of typical diamonds grown from a methane and 
hydrogen gas source by microwave plasma CVD on 
Si is around 30 nm to 10 µm.28 Problems with poly-
crystalline diamond films also include difficulties 
in growing good-quality diamond films and mak-
ing reliable ohmic contacts to the material, as well 
as poor reproducibility.29 This leaves us with ultra-
nanocrystalline diamond (2–5 nm grain size)30 and 
amorphous diamond31 as the two most suitable dia-
mond candidates for MEMS applications. 
At Argonne National Laboratories, “ultranano-
crystalline” diamond films have been deposited by 
a novel CVD process that may overcome some of the 
problems mentioned above (http://www.anl.gov/
techtransfer/Available_Technologies/Chemistry/
uncd_flc.html). Argonne’s patented CVD method 
was developed at first using fullerenes as the carbon 
source. Fullerene powder was vaporized and intro-
duced into an argon plasma, causing the fullerenes 
to fragment into two-atom carbon molecules (dim-
ers). Silicon or other substrate materials are “primed” 
with fine diamond powder. When the carbon dim-
ers settle out of the plasma onto the substrate, they 
arrange into a film of small diamond crystals about 
3–5 nm in diameter. Subsequent work showed that 
the same result can be achieved by introducing 
methane into an argon plasma as long as little or no 
additional hydrogen is present. The Argonne method 
differs in two major respects from other CVD meth-
ods for making diamond film. First, the molecular 
building block is different (carbon dimers rather 
than methyl radicals), and second, little or no hydro-
gen is present in the plasma (∼1%), whereas in other 
methods the plasma contains 97–99.5% hydrogen 
along with methane. The ultrananocrystalline films 
produced by Argonne’s method are completely free 
of intergranular flaws and nondiamond secondary 
phases that degrade the properties of convention-
ally produced diamond films, have crystals about 
50–200 times smaller than those in other films, and 
are 10–20 times smoother than conventional high-
 purity CVD diamond films.
For surface micromachining, a “starter” (nucl-
eation) layer of nanocrystalline diamond powder 
on a silicon substrate is patterned, and the diamond 
film forms only in the areas where the nucleation 
layer 
remains. 
Flat, 
free-standing 
diamond 
films can also be grown on silicon dioxide. The 
diamond layer may be released from the substrate 
by etching away the silicon dioxide. The result is 
free-standing diamond structures as little as 300 
nm thick with features as small as 100 nm and 
friction coefficients as low as 0.01. Argonne is 
also developing deposition methods  that permit 
integrated fabrication of com plete devices, such 
as micrometer-sized pinwheels, gears, turbines, 
and micromotors, without manual assembly. Also, 
hollow, three-dimensional (3D) structures can be 
fabricated in diamond surface micromachining. In 
this case, silicon is used as the sacrificial material 
(e.g., a disc or pin) for the desired diamond 
component. The diamond film is grown on the Si 
structure and conforms to its shape. The silicon is 
etched away, leaving a diamond cylinder or tube. 
It has been shown that this method is capable of 
making convex hollow structures (e.g., a hollow 
pyramid)—shapes that cannot be produced by 
conventional silicon lithographic methods.
FIGURE 5.5 A typical SEM image of a CVD diamond 
surface on a Si substrate. (Courtesy of Dr. Chunlei Wang, 
Florida International University.) 

[Page 252]
252   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Sandia researchers have explored amorphous dia-
mond for micromachining. Amorphous diamond 
is the second hardest substance known, after crystal-
line diamond (http://www.sandia.gov/media/NewsRel/ 
NR2000/diamond.htm). They use pulsed laser depo-
sition, and a simple proof-of-principle device—a 
diamond interdigitated comb—takes about 3 h to 
fabricate. Subsequent annealing of the diamond 
film device down to zero stress (to prevent warpage) 
takes a few minutes. Before this work, amorphous 
diamond itself had been impractical because its 
tremendous internal stresses—hundreds of atmo-
spheres—made it impossible for the material to 
stand alone or to coat thickly on any but the stron-
gest substrates.
Diamond-based MEMS, such as cantilevers, 
membranes, and microturbines, can be fabricated 
using two strategies: lithographic patterning and 
selective deposition.31,32 In the selective deposition 
method, diamond microstructures are fabricated by 
selective diamond growth on Si using a patterned 
SiO2 mask. With this selective growth approach, 
piezoresistors and thermal resistor structures have 
been patterned.32 
In lithographic diamond patterning, diamond 
films are synthesized on an appropriate substrate 
such as Si. This is followed by diamond surface 
micromachining processes similar to the ones used 
in the fabrication of poly-Si-MEMS. Diamond lay-
ers can be masked by photoresist or metals, fol-
lowed by dry etching (RIE) in oxygen-containing 
plasmas.
Diamond films also can be directly patterned 
using focused ion beam (FIB) milling without the 
use of a mask.33 Figure 5.6 shows CVD diamond 
microscale p-i-p electronic devices fabricated on 
homoepitaxially grown single-crystalline layers by 
FIB etching; the latter devices were used to investi-
gate carrier transport properties of diamond at high 
electric field strengths (more than107 V/cm).33 
A number of other diamond-based devices have 
been investigated; these include basic electron-
ics elements, sensors, and actuators.34−36 Although 
their cost, performance, and processibility are still 
not compatible with Si-based MEMS, diamond as a 
complementary MEMS material remains very prom-
ising, especially for use in extreme environments.
SiC
Like diamond, silicon carbide (SiC) is well known 
for its mechanical hardness, chemical inertness, 
high thermal conductivity, and electrical stability at 
temperatures well above 300oC, making it another 
excellent candidate for high-temperature MEMS. 
Both exhibit piezoresistive properties. In compari-
son with diamond, other SiC features are that it 
can be doped both p-type and n-type fairly easily 
and that it allows a natural oxide to be grown on its 
surface, which make SiC an attractive candidate for 
alternative semiconductor MEMS material. Because 
of its large bandgap and good carrier mobility, it can 
be employed in high-temperature and high-power 
applications. In addition, the fabrication technol-
ogy for SiC active electronic devices is based mostly 
on processes established in the Si microelectronics 
industry. One property that makes SiC films par-
ticularly attractive for micromachining is that these 
films easily can be patterned by dry etching using 
Al masks. Patterned SiC films actually can be used 
as passivation layers in the micromachining of the 
underlying Si substrate (SiC can withstand both 
KOH and HF etching).37 
SiC crystallizes in many different polytypes, 
which  differ from one another in the stacking 
sequence of a repeat unit consisting of two planes 
B-doped diamond
FIB
Undoped diamond
FIB  Ti/Au electrodes
SEM image
P
I
P
0.2 μm
0.2 μm
5 μm
1
2
3
4
FIGURE 5.6 Schematic fabrication processes for a 
 diamond p-i-p structure consisting of a narrow  intrinsic 
(undoped) region sandwiched between two p-type 
(boron-doped) regions. Top view schematic drawing 
and a scanning electron microscope picture show narrow 
(0.2-μm) grooves formed in the 0.2-μm-thick p layer (at 
step 2). These grooves are filled with i diamond (at step 3).33

[Page 253]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   253
of close-packed Si and C atoms. The two most com-
mon SiC polytypes are 3C-SiC and 6H-SiC. The 3C 
polytype, also known as β-SiC, is the only poly-
type with a cubic structure. 3C-SiC crystallizes in 
a ZnS-type structure; hence, it can be deposited on 
Si. Historically, most research has focused on devel-
oping 6H-SiC as a semiconductor material for high-
temperature and high-power electronics. However, 
the small wafer size (<2 in.) and the inability to grow 
epitaxial layers on substrates other than 6H-SiC have 
hindered the development of the 6H polytype. Over 
the last seven years we have witnessed a growing 
interest in 3C-SiC as a MEMS material. As we saw 
above, unlike 6H-SiC, the 3C-SiC polytype can be 
epitaxially grown on single-crystal silicon substrates. 
Large-area substrates enable low-cost batch process-
ing, essential in making SiC MEMS devices viable for 
mass production applications (e.g., automotive). It 
was at Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) that 
the first successful depositions of spatially uniform, 
single-crystal, 3C-SiC films on 4-in. (100) silicon 
wafers were made. These epitaxial 3C-SiC films on 
Si were used to craft structures such as diaphragms 
and cantilever beams. Since SiC films are highly 
resistant to KOH and EDP etching, dry etching and 
Al masks are employed for patterning. Because these 
diamond films must be grown directly on single-
crystal silicon, surface micromachining with a sacri-
ficial layer was not possible at first. The solution was 
again invented at CWRU and involves growing poly-
crystalline cubic silicon carbide (poly-SiC) films of 
about 2 µm thickness by an APCVD process on 4-in. 
polysilicon-coated (100) silicon wafers.38,39 Surface 
micromachining is achieved by using the underlying 
polysilicon film as the sacrificial layer. The poly-SiC 
deposition process is carried out at 1280°C in a cold-
wall, RF-induction heated, vertical APCVD reactor. 
After deposition, the SiC film is polished to reduce 
the surface roughness (Ra) from ∼400 Å in the as-
grown film to <40 Å. The poly-SiC lateral resonant 
device shown in Figure 5.7 was made by this surface 
micromachining approach, and the finished device 
exhibits Qs as high as 215,000 at pressures below 
10−5 Torr (see also “Quality Factor” in Chapter 8, this 
volume, on actuators). Resonant frequency drifts of 
less than 18 ppm/h have been observed, and device 
operation at elevated temperatures as high as 950°C 
has been achieved. The poly-SiC surface microma-
chining steps are outlined in Figure 5.8. 
In Chapter 1, this volume, Table 1.10, we compared 
some of the material properties of single- crystal SiC 
with Si, GaAs, and diamond with relevance to elec-
tronics and MEMS/NEMS. For an update on this 
FIGURE 5.7 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) micro-
graph of a released poly-SiC lateral resonant device. The 
suspension beam length and width are nominally 100 and 
2.5 µm, respectively. Exposed poly-SiC shows up as dark 
gray, while Ni metallization appears light gray. (Courtesy 
of Dr. M. Mehregany, Case Western Reserve University.)
(a)
Single-crystal Si
Poly-SiC
PolySilicon
Al
Nickel
SiO2
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
FIGURE 5.8 Schematic description of the poly-SiC reso-
nator fabrication process showing cross-sections after a 
5000-Å-thick layer of aluminum is sputter deposited over 
the polished poly-SiC (a); the Al layer is patterned using 
lithography and anisotropic CHF3/O2/He plasma etching to 
transfer the Al pattern into the poly-SiC (b); the Al layer 
is stripped and a 7500-Å-thick layer of Ni is deposited by 
sputtering (c); the Ni film is patterned for contacts using 
photolithography and wet etching (d); and poly-SiC is 
released in 40 wt% KOH at 40°C (e).

[Page 254]
254   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
table for SiC properties, consult http://www.ioffe.
rssi.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/SiC/index.html.
Further advances in SiC deposition and pattern-
ing techniques have led to the development of single 
and multilevel implementations similar to the poly-
silicon MUMPs (multiuser MEMS process). The mul-
tiuser silicon carbide (MUSiC) is an eight-mask, four 
polycrystalline SiC (poly-SiC) layer surface micro-
machining process.
The State of Ohio has funded high- temperature 
MEMS efforts both at Case Western Reserve Univer-
sity (http://mems.case.edu) and at NASA Glenn 
(http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/SiC/SiC.html) and 
made these two centers leaders in the field.
Bulk and Surface Microstructuring 
of Ceramics
Ceramics encompass a vast array of materials, and a 
concise definition of ceramics is almost impossible. 
A workable definition of ceramics is that of a class 
of refractory, inorganic, and nonmetallic materials. 
This class of materials can be divided into tradi-
tional and advanced ceramics. Traditional ceram-
ics include clay products, silicate glass, and cement, 
whereas advanced ceramics consist of carbides (SiC; 
see above), pure oxides (quartz; see above: Al2O3, 
etc.), nitrides (Si3N4), nonsilicate glasses, and many 
others. Ceramics offer many advantages compared 
with other materials. They are harder and stiffer 
than steel, more heat and corrosion resistant than 
metals or polymers, and less dense than most met-
als and their alloys, and their raw materials are both 
plentiful and inexpensive. Ceramic materials display 
a wide range of properties, which facilitates their 
use in many different product areas and ceramic 
MEMS, and NEMS represents another promising 
development. 
The inherent chemical resistance of refractory 
materials makes their anisotropic micromachining 
very difficult and expensive.40,41 In Volume II, 
Chapter  9, we promoted the use of plasma spray 
deposition for making oxygen-sensitive ZrO2 mem-
branes in batch mode (see Volume II, Figure 9.24). 
Another potential solution for working with these 
poorly machinable materials is by casting or by gas 
phase deposition into molds. MIT’s micromachined 
gas turbines, for example, were made of thick 
(10–200 µm) SiC or silicon nitride, deposited by 
CVD into Si molds (http://web.mit.edu/aeroastro/
faculty/index.html). Sol-gel-type soli dification of 
ceramic liquid precursors in molds, as covered in 
Volume II, Chapter 8, is another available option—
less expensive but yielding low- to medium-
resolution microstructures only. Deep UV resists 
may be used as alternative, sacrificial molds. In 
most cases a high-temperature sintering step will 
significantly shrink the dimensions of the high-
temperature part, reducing achievable accuracy. 
In Volume II, Chapter 10, on LIGA, we described 
how UV and LIGA techniques provide some of the 
highest-resolution ceramic parts. Finally, in Volume 
II, Chapter 7, we introduced atomic layer deposition 
by which precursor gases or vapors alternately are 
pulsed onto the substrate surface to make Al2O3 (see 
Volume II, Figures 7.47 and 7.48).
Here we introduce Al2O3 and TiO2 micromachin-
ing work for high-accuracy ceramic MEMS with the 
potential for a plethora of novel micro- and nano-
machining applications. 
Micromachining of alumina ceramic appears par-
ticularly appealing and might have advantages over 
other high-temperature MEMS substrates, such as 
quartz, 3C-SiC, diamond, and GaAs (see Chapter 1, 
this volume, Table 1.10), in terms of cost, manufac-
turability, and performance. 
Routkevitch et al.42 and Li et al.43 have made fas-
cinating microstructures from nanoporous anodic 
alumina films (also known as porous anodic alu-
mina). Anodic alumina is a self-organized material 
with unique pore morphology, composition, and 
properties. Regular porous films, from less than 
100 nm thick to more than 300 µm, are formed 
when aluminum metal is anodized in solutions of 
phosphoric, oxalic, or sulfuric acid (in low concen-
trations—from 2 wt% to 10 wt%). Pore diameter 
is tunable from a few nm to several hundred nm, 
and pore densities vary from 109 to 1011 cm−2. For 
typical anodization voltages (50–100 V), the pore 
diameter ranges from 0.15 to 0.3 µm, and by sin-
tering above 830°C in air, the amorphous anodic 
alumina may be converted into crystalline mate-
rial, thereby increasing its chemical and thermal 

[Page 255]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   255
stability dramatically. The schematic in Figure 5.9 
summarizes two approaches for micromachining 
of porous anodic alumina. In the higher-accuracy 
micromachining method (Figure 5.9a), the alumina 
film is anisotropically etched after patterning with 
conventional lithography. As prepared, anodic alu-
mina dissolves readily at a pH lower than 4.2 and 
at a pH higher than 9.9, and the dissolution process 
is highly anisotropic. The walls of the porous pipes 
through the alumina film (see Figure 5.10) consist of 
an anion-contaminated outer layer and a purer inner 
alumina layer. The outer anion contaminated layer 
etches 25 times as fast as the purer inner layer. This 
etching rate difference and the anisotropic nature 
of the pores themselves, which provides access for 
the etchant throughout the entire thickness of the 
film, results in microstructures with aspect ratios as 
high as 50 (Tan et al.41 projected the possibility of a 
1000:1 aspect ratio) and a resolution better than 2 
µm. The lateral underetching of the photoresist mask 
stops once the purer alumina at the wall of the first 
pore closed off at the top by the mask is reached by 
the etchant. Obviously, the smaller the pore diam-
eter, the better the expected resolution of the tech-
nique. Routkevitch et al.42 developed a second type 
of alumina micromachining process based on local 
anodization of aluminum metal. This process is 
simpler but has a somewhat poorer resolution limit 
(∼20 µm) as pictured schematically in Figure 5.9b. 
In this case, the sidewalls do not remain vertical, 
since aluminum under the mask gets oxidized, and 
the alumina expands as compared with the initial 
volume of aluminum. Either the aluminum metal 
or the aluminum oxide may be etched selectively to 
reveal textured surfaces, with one being the exact 
imprint of the other. For selective etching of anodic 
alumina, a mixture of chromic and phosphoric acids 
is used, and aluminum may be selectively etched 
away in a solution of CuCl2 in HCl. This work pres-
ents a whole new approach to microstructuring 
ceramic and metal surfaces.
The nanoporous morphology of this ceramic 
MEMS material presents a controllable, very high 
surface area (up to 100 m2/g) with numerous 
opportunities for applications such as a mechanical 
filter or as a support for catalysts and gas sensors, 
the latter of which require a high number of triple 
points (i.e., sites where gas reactants, catalyst, and 
support can meet). Recently, the method has been 
used in template-assisted nanowire growth as well.
Mechanical filters based on porous  alumina are 
called Anodisc™ Membrane Filters. These  aluminum 
oxide membrane filters are available in three nomi-
nal sizes (47, 25, and 13 mm diameter) and three pore 
sizes (0.2, 0.1, and 0.02 µm). Inorganic mechanical 
Aluminum
Aluminum
Anodization
(b)
(a)
Anodic alumina
Photoresist
Photoresist
Porous alumina
Etchant
FIGURE 5.9 Schematic of two approaches for micromachining of anodic alumina. (a) High-resolution micromachin-
ing. (b) Lower-resolution microstructure prepared by localized anodization of aluminum. (Based on Routkevitch, D., A. 
Govyadinov, and P. Mardilovich. 2000. High aspect ratio, high resolution ceramic MEMS. 2000 International Mechanical 
Engineering Congress and Exposition, 1–6.42)
Amorphous
contaminated
alumina
Relatively
pure alumina
Cell
Pore
Aluminium
substrate
FIGURE 5.10 Schematic morphology and chemical com-
position of amorphous alumina. (Based on Routkevitch, 
D., A. Govyadinov, and P. Mardilovich. 2000. High aspect 
ratio, high resolution ceramic MEMS. 2000 International 
Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, 1–6.42)

[Page 256]
256   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
filters have several advantages over polymer mem-
branes (e.g., polycarbonate sheets, about 10  µm 
thick, with pore sizes in the range of 15–12,000 
nm), including higher flow rates, sieving of particles 
at the surface rather than trapping at an uncertain 
depth within the membrane and temperature and 
electron beam radiation resistant (see Figure 5.11) 
For more information, see http://www.2spi.com/
catalog/spec_prep/filter2.shtml.
Porous alumina-based humidity sensors have 
been demonstrated.44 The insulating material also 
makes for an excellent low-power and very-high- 
temperature microheater substrate with demon-
strated temperatures up to 1200°C, power consump-
tion as low as 50 µW/°C, and a very fast response.44 
The latter application represents an important alter-
native to Si as a microheater substrate in Taguchi 
sensors (see Volume II, Figures 9.11 and 9.12); Si is 
limited in temperature range and is a rather good 
heat conductor, so that it needs to be passivated 
for this application (it is also considerably more 
expensive). 
The nanopores can also serve as a template for 
the deposition of nanostructures of a material of 
choice, such as metals, semiconductors, and poly-
mers.45 This is demonstrated in Figure 5.12 for the 
electrochemical deposition of nanowire thermo-
electric material Bi2Te3. The process allows the oxide 
barrier layer to be removed/dissolved so that pores 
are in contact with the substrate. Filling rates of up 
to 90% have been achieved (T. Sands, HEMI group, 
http://www.mse.berkeley.edu/groups/Sands/HEMI/
nanoTE.html).
The growth of aligned arrays of carbon nano-
tubes (CNTs) inside the pores of the self-organized 
nanoporous alumina templates is an especially 
intriguing application. Govyadinov et al.46 synthe-
sized arrays of CNTs (deposited with catalytic CVD) 
in alumina pores with diameters in the sub-100-nm 
range and densities from 108 to 1011 tips per cm2. 
These prototype CNT arrays have been used as 
field emitters (carbon has a low work function) and 
shown to exhibit field emission at a low threshold of 
3−5 V/µm and emission current densities up to 100 
mA/cm2 in low-vacuum conditions. 
Other applications of porous alumina include 
microchannel plates, mesoscopic engines, filters, 
membranes, and nozzles and apertures. 
Nanostructures similar to the ones shown in 
porous alumina have been produced by photoelec-
trochemical etching of polycrystalline n-type semi-
conductors, such as TiO2, CdSe, CdS, and ZnO.47 
The most detailed work was performed on TiO2. 
Results demonstrate an underlying anisotropic etch-
ing mechanism substantially different from the one 
FIGURE 5.11 (a) Top view of a 0.2-µm Anopore™ inorganic membrane. (b) A cross-sectional view (below right) showing 
0.23-µm latex microspheres retained on the membrane’s surface. Membrane thickness is approximately 60 µm. Note the 
extraordinarily high pore density, which makes very high flow rates possible—unusual for membrane filters with pore 
sizes this small.
50 µm
Alumina template
Unﬁlled pore
Bi2Te3 nanowire
~40 nm
FIGURE 5.12 Nanoporous alumina works well for the elec-
trochemical deposition of thermoelectric materials (Bi2Te3) 
and for metals. The process allows for the removal/dissolu-
tion of the oxide barrier layer so that pores are in contact 
with substrate. Filling rates of the pores of up to 90% have 
been achieved. (From T. Sands/HEMI group.)

[Page 257]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   257
at play in anodized alumina films.48 Anodization 
of polycrystalline TiO2 in a sulfuric acid solution 
under UV irradiation causes photoelectrochemical 
corrosion or photoetching. After a prolonged pho-
toetching procedure, regularly ordered submicrom-
eter porous structures (called nanohoneycombs) are 
observed at the TiO2 surface. The quadrangle cells 
of the revealed nanohoneycomb are a few hundred 
nanometers wide and several micrometers deep. 
The thin walls (10–20 nm) of the pattern consist 
of {110} crystal faces. Etching selectively dissolves 
the grains, while the grain boundaries remain. The 
explanation for this selective etching behavior is 
readily understood from the fact that the holes cre-
ated in the valence band of the semiconductor by 
the UV light readily corrode the bulk of the grains 
but recombine with electrons at the grain boundar-
ies, leaving those intact. Besides their use in a dye-
sensitized solar-cell and as a photocatalyst, fewer 
applications have been suggested for these new 
nanostructures than for porous alumina.
Conceptually, the alumina and TiO2 microma-
chining approaches described here are somewhat 
similar to the quartz micromachining approach 
discussed earlier in which high-aspect ratio micro-
machining is achieved in single-crystal quartz by 
etching along the nuclear tracks left after bombard-
ment with heavy ions. Obviously, alumina micro-
machining is a lot less complicated and costly, and 
so is the TiO2 etching procedure, although the lat-
ter entails a rather difficult to control photoetching 
step and results in much less regular patterns than 
porous alumina.
Polymer MEMS-Polyimides
Introduction
Quartz and ceramic micromachining, discussed 
above, principally address harsh environment 
MEMS. Polymer materials also have some distinct 
advantages over more traditional engineering mate-
rials used in MEMS. Incentives for using polymers 
include increased fracture strength, low Young’s 
modulus, high elongation, and reduced material 
costs. Furthermore, polymers are often inert and 
biocompatible, making them attractive for use in 
biological and chemical applications. As we have 
seen, in Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics, polymers 
are the most-used substrate for all types of fluidic 
platforms. We saw plenty of other examples of poly-
mer MEMS in the section on soft lithography and 
dry photoresists in Volume II, Chapters 1 and 2, on 
lithography, in Volume II, Chapter 10, on replication 
and LIGA, and in Chapter 4, this volume, on pack-
aging, assembly, and self-assembly. We conclude this 
section on new MEMS and NEMS substrate materi-
als by considering the many applications of polyim-
ides as an example of polymer MEMS. 
Polyimide MEMS
Polyimides are part of a group of high-temperature 
polymers that have been in commercial use since 
the 1970s. Because of their structure, involving 
very  strong carbon ring bonds, they do not melt 
and flow as most thermosets and thermoplasts do. 
Polyimides are synthesized from two monomers, a 
dianhydride and a diamine. Commercial products 
are supplied as soluble polyamic acid (PAA) 
intermediates, which undergo a thermal imidization 
with the evolution of water to form the insoluble 
polyimide. Polyimide films feature excellent ther-
mal stability (up to ∼450°C for short periods of 
time, Tg > 300°C), low dielectric properties (ε = 3.3) 
and a resistivity of ∼1016 ohm-cm, superior chemical 
resistance, toughness, wear resistance, and flame 
retardance. Because of their flexibility they also 
exhibit interesting mechanical properties, and the 
material is easy to process. However, its tendency 
to absorb moisture causes the polyimide layers 
to swell and their dielectric constants to increase 
significantly. Another negative aspect of polyimides 
is their short shelf-life stability, which still needs to 
be addressed by organic chemists. Various polyimide 
analogs have been developed to avoid some of these 
inherent undesirable properties. 
Current macro applications of nonphotosensitive 
polyimides include ball-bearing separators and 
mechanical seals. Polyimides in the microworld 
are used as passivating and interlayer dielectrics, 
planarizing compounds, reactive ion masks, alpha-
particle barriers, humidity-sensitive materials,49,50 
liquid crystal display, color filters51 (by incorpora-
ting dyes), and other optical elements, such as 

[Page 258]
258   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
waveguides. In planarization, polyimides smooth 
the undulation caused by topographic features on 
the wafer, so that the top-imaging layer has a much 
smaller thickness variation (see Volume II, Chapter 1, 
on photolithography). A typical polyimide, designed 
for MEMS applications, packaging dielectric and as 
substrate material is PI 2611, a low-moisture, low-
stress (coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) = 
5 ppm), and high modulus of elasticity (8.5 GPa) 
polyimide. This polyimide can be patterned using 
dry etching techniques as well as TMAH etching (for 
example, using the developers MF 319 and AZ 300). 
Film thicknesses in the range 4–8 µm can be obtained 
in a single coat with good uniformity by varying spin 
speeds in the range 5000–1000 rpm. The polyimide 
substrate can withstand metal sputtering such as Cr, 
Au, and Al without substantial damage.
An organic ciliary array of thin-film polyimide 
bimorph 
microactuators 
exploiting 
combined 
thermal and electrostatic control was employed to 
implement sensorless manipulation strategies for 
small objects. The tasks of parts translation, rotation, 
orientation, and centering were demonstrated using 
small integrated circuit (IC) dice by Kovacs et al. (see 
Figure 5.13).52,53 To induce motion on a part that is 
placed on an array of cilia, the cilia are actuated in a 
cyclic, gait-like fashion. In each cycle, the part is moved 
in a certain direction by the motion of the actuators 
that are in contact with it. The speed of the moving 
part depends on the (horizontal) displacement 
of the actuators per cycle, as well as the frequency 
of cycle repetition. It also depends on the surface 
properties and weight of the moving part. 
In our own work, we have used polyimide sheets 
as precursor material to design carbon structures in 
C-MEMS (see below), and in building flat panel dis-
plays at SRI International, Capp Spindt used poly-
imide posts to separate the glass plate from the Si 
field emitters (see Volume II, Figure 7.90). 
Photosensitive polyimides have found many 
applications in both integrated circuitry and in 
MEMS and NEMS. Photosensitive polyimide is typi-
cally a negative tone resist and in use as photoresist, 
polyimide precursors, called polyamic acids (PAAs), 
are spun on the wafer; upon exposure to UV light, 
cross-linking results (more recently introduced 
positive polyimide resists are discussed in Volume 
II, Chapter 1, on photolithography; see Volume II, 
Figure 1.28). During development, the unexposed 
regions are dissolved, and final curing by further 
heat treatment leads to a chemical transformation 
(known as imidization) of the remaining cross-linked 
material, which yields polyimide. At a temperature 
of 275°C, more than 99% of the polyimide precur-
sor is converted to polyimide. As with other negative 
resists, an oxygen effect is noted in the exposure. The 
actinic sensitivity of the resist usually is confined to 
365 nm. 
Polyimide photoresists often are used as permanent 
photoresists; that is, as resists that after exposure 
and curing can be left behind as a structural and/or 
functional component. For example, they have been 
used as a dielectric, especially when the uniquely low 
dielectric constant of the polyimide gives devices a 
decreased capacitance, resulting in increased speed 
for electronic applications.54 In multiple spin-coats, 
thick polyimide films can be deposited (>100 µm). 
Since the films are so transparent, UV lithography 
permits the fabrication of high aspect ratio features 
(see LIGA-like processes in Volume II, Chapters  1 
and 10). An important commercial application 
of both photosensitive and nonphotosensitive 
polyimides is in multiple chip modules.55 As we 
explained in Volume II, Chapter 1 on lithography 
in the multiple chip module application, the use of 
photosensitive polyimides dramatically simplifies 
the manufacturing procedure as compared with non-
photosensitive option, as illustrated in Figure 1.28.55 
FIGURE 5.13 Polyimide cilia motion pixel (scanning elec-
tron microscope micrograph). Four actuators in a common 
center configuration make up a motion pixel. Each cilium 
is 430 µm long and bends up to 120 µm out of the plane. 
(Figure by John Suh.52)

[Page 259]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   259
In a finished device, up to five layers of metallization 
are insulated by 15–20-µm-thick polyimide films on 
a ceramic wiring board.
Photosensitive polyimides also come as dry-film 
photoresists. Dry photoresists were introduced by 
DuPont as far back as 1968. These dry films come 
in rolls and consist of a photopolymerizable layer 
sandwiched between a polyester support film and 
a separator sheet (see Volume II, Figure 1.33). They 
do not need to be spin coated on, as they can, after 
removal of the separator sheet, be laminated onto 
a substrate. Also, the polyester cover sheet protects 
the resist film from oxygen diffusion, which would 
inhibit the cross-linking reaction. Both chlorinated 
and aqueous-base-developable dry film resist systems 
are available. The current resolution capabilities of 
dry film resists are less than 75 µm. The fact that the 
laminated dry film can bridge or “tent” over holes and 
cavities not only benefits the manufacture of printed 
wiring boards (PWBs) but can be exploited in the 
manufacture of biosensors as well, as we illustrate 
in Chapter 1, this volume, Example 1.1. For other 
photosensitive dry resist systems, see Table 1.12. 
Exploration of IC and MEMS applications of 
modified polyimides also has started. A common 
approach to reducing the dielectric constant of 
polyimides is the inclusion of organofluorine 
components, in the form of pendant perfluoroalkyl 
groups. The polyamic acid precursor for fluori-
nated polyimides is commonly based on hexa-
fluorodianhydrideoxydianiline. The inclusion of 
fluorinated monomers in the polyimide backbone 
has been found to reduce their moisture absorp-
tion and dielectric constant. Unfortunately, these 
polyimides generally show an increased suscepti-
bility to chemical attack, making their use in multi-
layer fabrication questionable. Recently, however, 
newer formulations have improved the chemical 
resistance of the polyimide and have demonstrated a 
unique wet etch capability for vias with aspect ratios 
approaching 1.2:1. 
Special perfluorinated polyimides were synthe-
sized at the NTT laboratories in Japan. These 
remarkable materials are resistant to soldering tem-
peratures (260°C) and are highly transparent at 
the wavelengths of optical communications (1.0–
1.77 mm). In addition, their low dielectric constants 
and refractive indices match the conventional fluo-
rinated polyimides, whereas their birefringence is 
lower.56 As we saw in Volume II, Example 3.4, dry 
plasma etching of these modified polyimides results 
in very high aspect ratio microstructures with inter-
esting optical properties. 
Silicon Nitride
Introduction
Silicon nitride (SixNy) is a commonly used mate-
rial in microcircuit and microsensor fabrication 
because of its many superior chemical, electrical, 
optical, and mechanical properties. The material 
provides an efficient passivation barrier to the dif-
fusion of water and to mobile ions, particularly Na+. 
It also oxidizes slowly (about 30 times less than sili-
con) and has highly selective etch rates over SiO2 
and Si in many etchants. Some applications of sili-
con nitride are optical waveguides (nitride/oxide), 
encapsulant (diffusion barrier to water and ions), 
insulator (1016 Ω-cm, high dielectric strength, field 
breakdown limit of 107 V/cm), mechanical protec-
tion layer, etch mask, oxidation barrier, and ion 
implant mask (density is 1.4 times that of SiO2). 
Silicon nitride also is hard, with a Young’s modulus 
higher than that of Si, and can be used, for example, 
as a bearing material in micromotors.57 
Silicon nitride can be deposited by a wide vari-
ety of the CVD techniques reviewed in Volume II, 
Chapter 7—APCVD, low-pressure chemical vapor 
deposition (LPCVD), and plasma-enhanced chemi-
cal vapor deposition (PECVD)—and its intrinsic 
stresses can be controlled by the specifics of the 
deposition process. Silicon nitride and silicon oxide 
deposited with these techniques usually exhibit too 
much residual stress, which hampers their use as 
mechanical components. However, CVD of mixed 
silicon oxynitride can produce substantially stress-
free components.
Nitride often is deposited from SiH4 or other Si 
containing gases and NH3 in a reaction such as the 
following.
 
3SiCl2 + 4NH3 → Si3N4 + 6HCl + 6H2  
Reaction 5.1

[Page 260]
260   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
In this CVD process, the stoichiometry of the 
resulting nitride can be moved toward a silicon-rich 
composition by providing excess silane or dichlo-
rosilane compared with ammonia.
PECVD Nitride
Plasma-deposited silicon nitride, also plasma nitride 
or SiN, is used as the encapsulating material for the 
final passivation of devices. The plasma-deposited 
nitride provides excellent scratch protection, serves 
as a moisture barrier, and prevents sodium diffusion. 
Because of the low deposition temperature, 300–
350°C, the nitride can be deposited over the final 
device metallization. Plasma-deposited nitride and 
oxide both act as insulators between metallization 
levels, which is particularly useful when the bottom 
metal level is aluminum or gold. The silicon nitride 
that results from PECVD in the gas mixture of 
Reaction 5.1 has two shortcomings: high hydrogen 
content (in the range of 20–30 atomic percent) and 
high stress. The high compressive stress (up to 5 × 109 
dyn/cm2) can cause wafer warping and voiding 
and cracking of underlying aluminum lines.58 The 
hydrogen in the nitride also leads to degraded 
MOSFET lifetimes. To avoid hydrogen incorporation, 
source gases containing little or no hydrogen, such 
as nitrogen, may be employed instead of ammonia 
as the nitrogen source. Also, a reduced flow of SiH4 
results in less Si-H in the film. The hydrogen content 
and the amount of stress in the film are closely 
linked. Compressive stress, for example, changes to 
tensile stress upon annealing to 490°C in proportion 
to the Si-H bond concentration. By adding N2O 
to the nitride deposition chemistry an oxynitride 
forms with lower stress characteristics; however, 
oxynitrides are somewhat less effective as moisture 
and ion barriers than nitrides.
One key advantage of PECVD nitride, besides 
the low temperature aspect, is the ability to control 
stress during deposition. Silicon nitride deposited at 
the typical 13.56 MHz plasma excitation frequency 
exhibits tensile stress of about 400 MPa. When 
depositing the film at 50 kHz, a compressive stress 
of 200 MPa is typical. We discussed the effect of RF 
frequency on nitride stress, hydrogen content, den-
sity, and the wet etch rate in more detail in Volume 
II, Chapter 7. We concluded that low frequency 
(high energy bombardment) results in films with 
low compressive stress, lower etch rates, and higher 
density. Therefore, the effect of ion bombardment 
is more pronounced at lower pressures, and better 
quality CVD films ensue, characterized as films with 
a low wet etch rate (high film density) and low com-
pressive stress. Experimental results show that  as 
the reactor pressure is lowered, film stress goes from 
tensile to compressive (Volume II, Figure 7.59) and 
wet etch rates decrease. Often, stress dynamically 
changes when the film is exposed to the atmosphere 
and subsequent heating; the higher  the ion bom-
bardment during PECVD, the higher the stress. 
Stress also is affected by moisture exposure and 
temperature cycling (for a good review, see Wu and 
Rosler59).
We compare properties of silicon nitride formed 
by LPCVD and PECVD in Table 5.5, and Table 5.6 
highlights typical PECVD process parameters. The 
refractive index of the deposited silicon nitride films 
is a measure of impurity content and overall quality. 
Its value ranges from 1.8 to 2.5 for PECVD films as 
compared with 2.01 for stoichiometric LPCVD (see 
below). The higher numbers indicate excess silicon, 
and lower numbers represent excess oxygen. 
LPCVD Nitride
In the IC industry, stoichiometric silicon nitride 
(Si3N4) is LPCVD deposited at 700–900°C and at 
200–500 mTorr, and it functions as an oxidation 
mask and as a gate dielectric in combination 
with thermally grown SiO2. In micromachining, 
LPCVD nitride serves as an important mechanical 
membrane material and isolation/buffer layer. The 
standard source gases are SiH2Cl2 and ammonia, and 
at the above specified temperatures and pressures, 
this leads to a deposition rate of about 30 Å/min. 
The deposition of the amorphous silicon nitride is 
reaction-limited, so it deposits on both sides of the 
wafers with equal thickness. Dichlorosilane is used 
instead of silane because it results in more uniform 
film thickness, and the wafers can be spaced closer 
together for larger loads. For stoichiometric silicon 
nitride, typical gas flows are in a 10:1 ratio of 
ammonia to dichlorosilane. Stoichiometric silicon 
nitride has a large residual tensile stress of about 1010 
dynes/cm2, and as a consequence, film thickness 

[Page 261]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   261
often is limited to a few thousands angstroms. By 
increasing the Si content in silicon nitride, the tensile 
film stress reduces (even to compressive), the film 
turns more transparent, and the HF etch rate lowers. 
Such films result by increasing the dichlorosilane to 
ammonia ratio.63 At an ammonia to dichlorosilane 
ratio of approximately 1 to 6, the films are nearly 
stress free, for deposition temperatures of 850°C and 
pressures of 500 mTorr.64 Figure 5.14 illustrates the 
effect of gas flow ratio and deposition temperature 
on stress and the corresponding refractive index and 
HF etch rate.63
Silicon-rich or low-stress nitride has emerged as 
an important micromechanical material. Low resid-
ual stress means that relatively thick films can be 
deposited and patterned without fracture. Low etch 
rate in HF means that films of silicon-rich nitride 
survive release etches better than stoichiometric 
silicon nitride. The etch characteristics of LPCVD 
SixNy are summarized in Table 5.7. The properties 
of a LPCVD SixNy film, deposited by the reaction 
of SiCl2H2 and NH3 (5:1 by volume) at 850°C, were 
already summarized in Table 5.5.
Amorphous Silicon and Hydrogenated 
Amorphous Silicon
Amorphous silicon behaves quite different from the 
coarse- and the fine-grained polysilicon discussed 
in Volume II, Chapter 7. Amorphous Si can be 
stress annealed at temperatures as low as 400°C.65 
This low-temperature anneal makes the material 
TABLE 5.5 Properties of Silicon Nitride
Deposition
LPCVD
Plasma-Enhanced CVD
Temperature (°C)
700–800
250–350
Density (g/cm3)
2.9–3.2
2.4–2.8
Pinholes
No
Yes
Throughput
High
Low
Step coverage
Conformable
Poor
Particles
Few
Many
Film quality
Excellent 
Poor
Dielectric constant
6–7
6–9
Resistivity (ohm-cm)
1016
106–1015
Refractive index
2.01
1.8–2.5
Atom % H
4–8
20–25
Energy gap
5 eV
4–5 eV
Dielectric strength (106 V/cm)
10
5
Etch rate in conc. HF
200 Å/min
Etch rate in BHF
5–10 Å/min
Residual stress (109 dyne/cm2)
1 T
2 C–5 T
Poisson ratio
0.27
Young’s modulus
270 GPa
TCE
1.6 × 10−6/°C
Sources: Based on 1) Adams, A. C. 1988. In VLSI technology, ed. S. M. Sze. New York: McGraw-Hill60; 2) Sinha, 
A. K., and T. E. Smith. 1978. Thermal stresses and cracking resistance of dielectric films. J Appl Phys 
49:2423–2661; and 3) Retajczyk, T. F. J., and A. K. Sinha. 1980. Elastic stiffness and thermal expansion 
coefficients of various refractory silicides and silicon nitride films. Thin Solid Films 70:241–47.62
Note: C = compressive; T = tensile.
TABLE 5.6 Silicon Nitride Plasma-Enhanced Chemical 
Vapor Deposition Process Conditions
Flow (sccm)
SiH4
190–270
NH3
1900
N2
1000
Temperature (°C)
T.C.
350 or 400
Wafer
~330 or 380
Pressure (Torr)
2.9
RF power (watts)
1100
Deposition rate (Å/min)
1200–1700
Refractive index
2.0
Source: Wu, T. H. T., and R. S. Rosler. 1992. Stress in PSG and nitride 
films as related to film properties and annealing. Solid 
State Technol May, 65–71. With permission.59

[Page 262]
262   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
compatible with almost any active electronic com-
ponent. Unfortunately, little is known about the 
mechanical properties of amorphous Si.
Hydrogenated amorphous Si (α-Si:H), with its 
interesting electronic properties, is even less well 
understood in terms of its mechanical proper-
ties. If the mechanical properties of hydrogenated 
amorphous Si were found to be as good as those of 
polysilicon, the material might make a better choice 
than polysilicon as a MEMS material, given its better 
electronic characteristics.
The amorphous polysilicon material produces a 
high breakdown strength (7–9 MV/cm) oxide with 
low leakage currents (vs. a low breakdown voltage 
and large leakage currents for polycrystalline Si 
oxides). Amorphous polysilicon also attains a broad 
maximum in its dielectric function without the char-
acteristic sharp structures near 295 and 365 nm (4.2 
and 3.4 eV) of crystalline polysilicon. Approximate 
refractive index values at a wavelength of 600 nm 
are 4.1 for crystalline polysilicon and 4.5 for amor-
phous material.60 As deposited, the material is under 
compression, but an anneal at temperatures as low 
as 400°C reduces the stress significantly, even lead-
ing to tensile behavior.65
Like polysilicon, amorphous silicon exhibits a 
strong piezoresistive effect. The gauge factor is about 
five times smaller than that of single-crystal Si, but 
the temperature coefficient of the resistance (TCR) is 
lower than that of Si.
Hydrogenated amorphous silicon enables the 
fabrication of active semiconductor devices on 
foreign substrates at temperatures between 200°C 
and 300°C. The technology, first primarily applied 
to the manufacturing of photovoltaic panels, now 
quickly is expanding into the field of large-area 
microelectronics, such as active matrix liquid crystal 
displays (AMLCD). It is somehow surprising that 
micromachinists have not taken more advantage of 
this material to either power surface micromachines 
or implement electronics cheaply on nonsilicon 
substrates. In Figure 5.15 we compare polycrystalline-
based solar cells with ultrathin amorphous Si on glass 
and ultrathin amorphous Si on flexible substrates.
800
600
400
200
Residual stress (MPa)
SiH2CL2/NH3 Ratio
(a)
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
T = 750ºC
T = 800ºC
T = 850ºC
8
–200
Refractive index
SiH2CL2/NH3 Ratio
(b)
T = 750ºC
T = 800ºC
T = 850ºC
2
4
6
8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
Etch rate (Å/min)
Refractive index
(c)
2
0
20
21
22
23
4
6
8
10
12
14
25
FIGURE 5.14 Silicon nitride low-pressure chemical vapor 
deposition parameters. (a) Effect of gas-flow ratio and 
deposition temperature on stress in nitride films. (b) The 
corresponding index of refraction. (c) The corresponding 
HF etch rate. (From Sakimoto, M., H. Yoshihara, and T. 
Ohkubo. 1982. Silicon nitride single-layer x-ray mask. J Vac 
Sci Technol 21:1017–21. With permission.63)
TABLE 5.7 Etching Behavior of Low-Pressure Chemical 
Vapor-Deposited Si3N4
Etchant
Temperature 
(°C)
Etch Rate 
(Å/min)
Selectivity of 
Si3N4:SiO2:Si
H3PO4
180
100
10:1:0.3
CF4–4% O2 
plasma
250
3:2.5:17
BHF
25
5–10
1:200:±0
HF (40%)
25
200
1:>100:0.1

[Page 263]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   263
Spear and Le Comber66 showed that, in con-
trast to α-Si, α-Si:H could be doped both n- and 
p-type. Singly bonded hydrogen, incorporated at 
the silicon dangling bonds, reduces the electronic 
defect density from ∼1019/cm3 to ∼1016/cm3 (typi-
cal H concentrations are 5–10 atomic percent—
several orders of magnitude higher than needed 
to passivate all the Si dangling bonds). The lower 
defect density results in a Fermi level that is free to 
move, unlike in ordinary amorphous Si, where it is 
pinned. Other interesting electronic properties are 
associated with α-Si:H—exposure of α-Si:H to light 
increases  photoconductivity by four to six orders of 
magnitude, and its relatively high-electron mobil-
ity (∼1 cm2/V s−1) enables fabrication of useful thin-
film transistors. Lee et al.67 noted that hydrogenated 
amorphous silicon solar cells are an attractive means 
to realize an onboard power supply for integrated 
micromechanical systems. They point out that the 
absorption coefficient of α-Si:H is more than an 
order of magnitude larger than that of single-crystal 
Si near the maximum solar photon energy region 
of 500 nm. Accordingly, the optimum thickness of 
the active layer in an α-Si:H solar cell can measure 
1 µm, much smaller than that of single-crystal Si 
solar cells. By interconnecting 100 individual solar 
cells in series, the measured open circuit potential 
reaches as high as 150 V under AM 1.5 conditions, a 
voltage high enough to drive onboard electrostatic 
actuators.
Hydrogenated amorphous silicon is manufac-
tured  by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor depo-
sition (PECVD) from silane. Usually, planar RF-driven 
diode sources using SiH4 or SiH4/H2 mixtures are 
used. Typical pressures of 75 mTorr and tempera tures 
between 200°C and 300°C allow silane decomposi-
tion with Si deposition as the dominant reaction. 
Decomposition occurs by electron impact ioniza-
tion, producing many different neutral and ionic 
species.68 Deposition rates for usable device qual-
ity α-Si:H generally do not exceed ∼2–5 Å/s, due to 
the effects of temperature, pressure, and discharge 
power. Table 5.8 gives state-of-the-art parame-
ters for α-Si:H prepared by PECVD. Although its 
semiconducting properties are inferior to those of 
single-crystal Si, the material is finding more and 
more applications. Some examples are thin film 
transistor (TFT) switches for picture elements 
in AMLCDs,69 page-wide  TFT-addressed  docu-
ment scanners, and high-voltage TFTs capable of 
switching up to 500 V.70 An excellent source for 
further information on amorphous silicon is the 
book Plasma Deposition of Amorphous Silicon-Based 
Materials.71
Item
Structure
Poly c-Si
Wafer
n+ emitter
Module
Poly c-Si wafer
Household
Semitransparent
Ultrathin amorphous
ﬂexible substrate
Ultrathin amorphous
glass substrate
Flexible
Si thickness : 180~300 µm
Si thickness : 1.5 µm
Glass
p-type
Transparent
conductive oxide
n-type
Metal
Intrinsic
a-Si:H
p-type
Transparent
conductive oxide
n-type
Metal
Intrinsic
a-Si:H
Si thickness : 1.5 µm
FIGURE 5.15 Comparison of polycrystalline-based solar cells with ultrathin amorphous Si on glass and ultrathin 
 amorphous Si on flexible substrates. (From http://www.displaybank.com.)

[Page 264]
264   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Selected MEMS and NEMS Processes
Introduction
In this section we review selected MEMS/NEMS 
processes that might affect the direction that 
MEMS/NEMS takes next. Many relatively new and 
important processes, such as soft lithography (see 
Volume II, Chapter 1) and atomic layer deposition 
(see Volume II, Chapter 7), are covered elsewhere 
in this work. The following additional selection is 
rather arbitrary and complements the new mate-
rials/processes covered elsewhere. For exciting 
new MEMS/NEMS techniques, we survey carbon-
based MEMS (C-MEMS), bulk metallic glasses 
(BMG), fast microfluidic CD prototyping, and 
micro glass blowing.
TABLE 5.8 Typical Optoelectronic Parameters Obtained for Plasma-Enhanced 
Chemical Vapor Deposition α-Si:H
Symbol
Parameter
Undoped
Hydrogen content
~10%
Dark conductivity at 300 K
σD
~10–10 (Ω-cm)−1
Activation energy 
Eσ
0.8–0.9 eV
Pre-exponent conductivity factor
σ0
>103 (Ω-cm)−1
Optical bandgap at 300 K
Eg
1.7–1.8 eV
Temperature variation of bandgap
Eg(T)
2–4 × 10−4 eV/K
Density of states at the minimum
gmin
>1015–1017 cm3/eV 
Density of states at the conduction band edge
~1015/cm3
ESR spin density
Ns
~1021/cm3-eV
Infrared spectra
2000/640 cm−1
Photoluminescence peak at 77 K
~1.25 eV
Extended state mobility
Electrons
µn or µe
>10 cm2/V-s
Holes
µp or µh
~1 cm2/V-s
Drift mobility
Electrons
µn or µe
~1 cm2/V-s
Holes
µp or µh
~10–2 cm2/V-s
Conduction band tail slope
25 meV
Valence band tail slope
40 meV
Hole diffusion length
~1 µm
Doped amorphous
n-typea
σD
10–2 (Ω-cm)−1
Eg
~0.2 eV
p-typeb
σD
10–3 (Ω-cm)−1
Eg
~0.3 eV
Doped microcrystalline
n-typec
σD
≥1 (Ω-cm)−1
Eg
≤0.05 eV
p-typed
σD
≥1 (Ω-cm)−1
Eg
≤0.05 eV
Source: Crowley, J. L. 1992. Plasma enhanced CVD for flat panel displays. Solid State Technol February, 
94–98. With permission.68
a 1% PH3 added to gas phase.
b 1% B2H6 added to gas phase.
c 1% PH3 added to dilute SiH4/H2, or 500 vppm PH3 added to SiF4/H2 (8:1) gas mixtures. Relatively high 
powers are involved.
d 1% B2H6 added to dilute SiH4/H2.

[Page 265]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   265
C-MEMS
Introduction
In nature, carbon occupies a very special place as 
the essential building block of life. In human enter-
prise, too, carbon in its various forms has acquired 
an enviable position. To just name a few, diamonds 
are made of carbon, and graphite, coke, diamond-
like carbon, and glassy carbon are all forms of car-
bon. So are the more recently discovered buckyballs, 
carbon fibers, and carbon nanotubes (CNTs).72,73 
Carboneous materials have been used in various 
application fields because their widely different crys-
talline structures and morphologies enable different 
physical, chemical, mechanical, thermal, and elec-
trical uses. For example, glassy carbon electrodes 
often are used because of their wide electrochemical 
stability window, low background currents and low 
cost. Graphite and hard carbons are well known for 
their utility in Li ion battery applications be cause of 
their Li intercalation/deintercalation capacity. Other 
properties, such as biocompatibility, chemically inert-
ness, and ease of functionality have made carbon 
very attractive for biosensor and implantable device 
applications. Moreover, CNTs are of tremendous 
current interest in both fundamental research and 
for nanoelectronics applications, including flat 
panel displays, chemical sensors, and the next gen-
eration of transistors (see Volume I, Figure 1.30). 
Recently, new microfabrication methods for car-
boneous materials have received a lot of attention, 
especially with regard to their use as microelec-
trodes in electrochemical sensors and miniaturized 
energy storage/energy conversion devices. Some key 
advantages of carbon compared with Si are summa-
rized in Table 5.9. Although silicon, human’s fore-
most technological material, is abundant in silicate 
minerals, carbon is the key to life. It can rightfully 
be argued that carbon is becoming a more and more 
important material in human technology. Besides 
the common use of carbons in sensors and batter-
ies, carbon nanotubes might form the basis for a 
future carbon-electronics industry. We speculate 
that C-MEMS, described here, might be the mate-
rial to use to  contact those carbon-nanotube-based 
devices. 
Additional important C-MEMS properties are 
included in Table 5.9: the material has a very wide 
TABLE 5.9 Carbon: The Next Si? 
• Polymerizes better than Si (see inset 1 below)
• Takes all types of forms: amorphous, graphite, nanotubes, etc. (see inset 2 below)
• Has a wide electrochemical stability window 
• Exhibits biocompatibility
• Has a low cost 
• Is chemically inert 
• Is easy to derivatize 
• Is well known for its battery and sensor application
• Carbon nanotubes connect via carbon-based microelectromechanical system
• Is nature’s building block for living things
H
H
H
H
H
H
Mer unit
(a)
Diamond
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.6
0.8
0.8
Hard a-C
Hard a-C:H
Soft a-C:H
Pre-graphitic
carbon
Graphite
[CH] n
[CH2] n
No
ﬁlm
ta-C
Soft a-C
Csp3
Csp2
H
(b)
Inset 1
Inset 2
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C

[Page 266]
266   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
electrochemical stability window, exhibits excellent 
biocompatibility, and is low cost, and the surface of 
this very chemically inert material is easy to func-
tionalize. The material has particular importance in 
bio-MEMS applications, including electronic DNA 
arrays (replacing the platinum shown in Nanogen’s 
DNA array; see Figure 8.51 this Volume), glucose 
sensors, and microbatteries (see below).
Microfabrication of Carbon: 
C-MEMS Process
For microfabrication of carbon structures, IC pro-
cessing technologies, such as focused ion beam (FIB) 
and reactive ion etching (RIE), are time consuming 
and expensive because of the need of high-vacuum 
systems. Low feature resolution and poor repeat-
ability of the carbon composition, as well as the 
widely varying properties of the resulting devices, 
limit the application of screen printing with com-
mercial carbon inks for carbon microfabrication.73 
Recently, more nontraditional carbon microfab-
rication methods were reported. Whitesides and 
 co-workers described the use of soft lithography 
(see Volume II, Chapter 2) to fabricate glassy carbon 
microstructures.74 In this approach, micromold-
ing of a resin such as poly(furfuryl alcohol) in an 
elastomeric mold yields polymeric microstructures, 
the microstructures are converted to free-standing 
carbon by heat treatment (500−1100 °C) in an inert 
atmosphere (see Volume II, Figure 2.55). 
The carbon microfabrication technique intro-
duced by this author is based on the pyrolysis of 
shaped/patterned polymers (e.g., resists patterned 
with photolithography) at different temperatures 
and different ambient atmospheres.75,76 Carbon, 
because it is brittle and hard, is a difficult material 
to machine. Polymers, on the other hand, can be 
machined easily in a wide variety of machine tools. 
The underlying principle of C-MEMS is to choose an 
easy to work with polymer precursor, machine, or 
pattern this precursor material and then convert it 
to carbon by pyrolysis.
In one embodiment of the C-MEMS process, a 
photoresist is patterned by photolithography and 
is subsequently pyrolyzed at high temperatures 
in an oxygen-free environment. By changing the 
lithography conditions, soft and hard baking times 
and temperatures, additives to the resist, pyrolysis 
time, temperature, and environment, C-MEMS 
permits a wide variety of interesting new MEMS 
and NEMS applications that employ structures 
having a wide variety of shapes, resistivities, and 
mechanical properties. The process is detailed in 
Figure 5.16.73 
The photolithography to make C-MEMS struc-
tures, illustrated in Figure 5.16, includes the usual 
spin coating, soft bake (not shown), near-UV expo-
sure, postbake (not shown), and development. A 
typical patterning process for a 200-µm-thick SU-8 
photoresist film involves photoresist spinning at 
approximately 500 rpm for 12 s and then at 1400 
rpm for 30 s, followed by a 10-min soft-bake at 65°C 
and finally a soft-bake for 80 min at 95°C. Exposure 
is performed in a Karl Suss MJB3 contact aligner for 
about 100 s. The postbake is carried out for 2 min 
at 65°C and for 30 min at 95°C. Development is 
UV light
Pyrolisis
Photoresist layer on
Si/SiO2 substrate.
Standard photolithography.
Negative resist case.
Photopatterned resist.
Planar and/or volumetric
structures.
Carbon structures. Planar
and/or volumetric.
Isometric shrinkage.
FIGURE 5.16 An illustration of one type of carbon-based microelectromechanical system: photolithography patterning 
of a polymer precursor and pyrolysis (see text for details).

[Page 267]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   267
carried out using a SU-8 developer from MicroChem 
(NANO• SU-8 developer). 
Photoresist-derived C-MEMS architectures are 
obtained in a two-step pyrolysis process in an open-
ended quartz-tube furnace, in which samples are 
postbaked in an N2 atmosphere at 300°C for about 
40 min first and then heated in a N2 atmosphere 
(2000 sccm) up to 900°C. At this point, the N2 gas is 
shut off and forming gas [H2 (5%)/N2] is introduced 
(2000 sccm) for 1 h, and then the heater is turned 
off and the samples are cooled down again in an N2 
atmosphere to room temperature. The heating rate 
is  about 10°C/min, and the total cooling time is 
about 10 h. 
The resulting carbon material was found to be 
amorphous and glass carbon-like in electrochemi-
cal behavior.77 The average height of the SU-8 posts 
shown in two typical scanning electron microscope 
(SEM) pictures (Figure 5.17a and 5.17b), is around 
300 µm.
As shown in Figure 5.17c and 5.17d, after pyroly-
sis, the overall shape of the cylindrical posts largely 
is retained, and a typical aspect ratio of the carbon 
post achieved is around 10:1. It was found that the 
C-MEMS posts shrink much less during the pyroly-
sis process near the base of the structures than at the 
midsection because of the good adhesion of SU-8 to 
the substrate. 
The processes described above easily can be 
extended to two-level or multilevel C-MEMS struc-
tures. This feature was used for making Li-ion-based 
C-MEMS batteries.78 In the C-MEMS battery depicted 
in Figure 5.18, one layer of carbon constitutes the 
current collector for the rows of anode and cathode 
posts made in a second C-MEMS layer.78
In Figure 5.18, the current collector is 20 µm thick 
and the posts are 250 µm high. C-MEMS Li ion bat-
teries, as shown here, hold the promise of changing 
the battery world in three significant ways (see also 
Chapter 9, this volume, on power and brains in min-
iature devices): 1) Smarter batteries: C-MEMS bat-
teries contain a multitude of anodes and cathodes 
(we call them baxels, by analogy to pixels) that can 
be interconnected to provide the optimal current 
or voltage depending on the application need. In 
other words, we can perform in-battery smart load 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
madou 1.0kV 3.2mm×40 9/24/03 16:55
1.00mm
VIA 1.0kV 32mm×150 9/24/03 16:51
300um
madou 1.0kV 12.7mm×45 12/2/03
1.00mm
madou 20.0.0kV 13.1mm×45 11/4/03 00:33
1.00mm
FIGURE 5.17 Typical scanning electron microscope photos. (a) and (b) SU-8 post arrays before pyrolysis. (c) and 
(d) Carbon post arrays after pyrolysis.

[Page 268]
268   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
leveling; 2) Faster charging batteries: in charging the 
C-MEMS battery, Li ions only need to intercalate into 
the thin individual carbon posts rather than interca-
lating into one big chunk of carbon; 3) Theoretically, 
the capacity of the C-MEMS batteries, depending on 
the aspect ratio of the posts and the thickness of the 
electrolyte, can be significantly higher than that of 
current Li ion batteries.79 
In order to build yet higher aspect ratio C-MEMS 
structures (up to 40:1), we developed a three-level 
C-MEMS process. In a multilayer C-MEMS process, 
each layer of SU-8 photoresist is exposed and baked 
separately, but the whole assembly is developed all 
at the same time in the last step. Typical SEM photos 
of three-level C-MEMS devices are shown in Figure 
5.19, with a three-level C-MEMS structure in which 
the first two are in good alignment but the third is 
out of alignment. 
By carefully controlling the lithography processing 
parameters, a variety of complex 3D C-MEMS 
structures, such as suspended carbon wires, bridges, 
plates, and self-organized posts (carbon flowers) 
and ribbons (networks), were also microfabricated 
by Madou and coworkers.72 These intricate 3D struc-
tures are fabricated using nontraditional process 
recipes, such as overexposure, underdevelopment, 
photoresist additives, directed flow of the developer, 
and exploitation of surface tension in the developing 
photoresist patterns. Suspended carbon fibers are 
shown in Figure 5.20, and a C-MEMS table was 
shown in the inset in the heading of this chapter. The 
diameter of the suspended carbon fibers in Figure 
5.20 is submicrometer. The wire resistance between 
two posts was measured at room temperature and in 
air using two point probes, and a typical resistivity 
Madou 0.5kV 12.8mm×250 2/10/04
200 um
1.00mm
FIGURE 5.18 Typical two-level carbon-based microelectromechanical system electrodes with carbon contacts under-
neath. The inset image shows enlarged SU-8 two-level structure.78
FIGURE 5.19 Typical scanning electron microscope photos 
of three-level carbon-based microelectromechanical 
system (C-MEMS) devices: a three-level C-MEMS structure 
with two levels in good alignment but with a third level 
out of alignment.

[Page 269]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   269
of 1.8 × 10−2 Ωcm was obtained. The Madou team 
is currently working on measuring the influence of 
chemical reactions on the suspended wire’s resistivity. 
The aim is to turn these amorphous carbon “washcloth 
lines” into “washcloth line sensors” by derivatizing 
the C-MEMS surface with a monolayer of a sensor 
molecules (e.g., proteins, DNA). It is anticipated that 
the fact that these nanowires are removed from the 
supporting substrate and are thus suspended in air 
or liquid will lead to significant advantages over 
other nanowire-based sensors typically embedded 
on a solid substrate. This arrangement exposes the 
sensor to its sensing environment in all directions 
and avoids deleterious substrate influences, such as 
contamination and charge shunting.
In Figure 5.21, we illustrate self-organized groups 
of carbon posts (bunched posts)—a feature most 
readily observed when starting with high-aspect 
ratio SU-8 arrays with posts higher than 300 µm. 
It should be noted that when bunching of the 
SU-8 posts occurs, the bowed posts in each bunch 
remain structurally intact when converted to car-
bon. This means that the aggregation/bunching 
takes place after UV exposure, i.e., during postbake, 
development, or the drying after development. 
Bunching could in principle occur at the postbake 
temperature, as that temperature (65°C) is above 
the glass transition temperature of unexposed SU-8 
(50–55°C); at those temperatures, the unexposed 
areas reflow, which could enable the posts to move 
toward each other. From SEM observations, after 
the postbake, the mask patterns are transferred 
with high fidelity. Clearly no aggregation or bunch-
ing is happening during postbake. The opportunity 
to control and optimize self-organized two-dimen-
sional textures obviously presents itself only dur-
ing the development process itself. We speculate at 
this point that the dominant cause for the bunching 
of resist posts is surface tension. When the devel-
oper solution is removed, it gently pulls posts that 
are tall and close enough together into symmetric 
patterns.
The electrochemical characteristics of carbon 
produced by pyrolysis of photoresists  have been 
extensively studied.76,77 It is found that electroche-
mical reactions on pyrolyzed photoresist exhibit 
reaction kinetics very similar to those on glassy 
carbon. We also found that C-MEMS electrodes can 
madou 20.0kV 16.3mm×900 11/4/03 00:18
50.0 um
madou 20.0kV 15.9mm×200 11/4/03 00:21
200 um
FIGURE 5.20 Carbon-based microelectromechanical system suspended carbon wires. Washcloth lines.
1.0kV 12.9mm×300 12/12/03
100 um
1.0kV 12.9mm×180 12/12/03
300 um
FIGURE 5.21 Carbon flowers. Self-assembly of polymer structures converted into carbon.

[Page 270]
270   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
be reversibly charged and discharged with Li ions,78 
which led to the construction of C-MEMS Li ion 
batteries, as shown in Figure 5.18. The advantage 
of using photoresists as the starting material for 
the microfabrication of various carbon structures 
is that the photoresists can be very finely patterned 
by lithography techniques, and hence, a wide 
variety of repeatable shapes are possible. Moreover, 
different temperature treatments result in different 
resistivities and mechanical properties. Molecular 
rectification and conductance switching in pyrolyzed 
carbon-based molecular junctions were studied 
by McCreery et al.80 They found that the current/
voltage behavior showed strong and reproducible 
rectification and strong dependence on temperature 
and scan rate. Pyrolyzed photoresist carbon films 
were demonstrated to be useful in electroanaly-
tical and microfluidic applications; for example, 
pyrolyzed carbon has been used in conjunction with 
a microchip capillary electrophoretic device.81 
Madou and co-workers, as explained in Chapter 9, 
this volume, have presented theoretical arguments 
demonstrating that making fractal-like carbon elec-
trodes will lead to better sensors and more energy 
efficient batteries and fuel cells.82 In ongoing work, 
our team is attempting to make what we call a frac-
tal garden. An artistic rendition of this concept is 
shown in Figure 5.22. In this fractal garden, each 
element in the array of fractal electrodes can be 
addressed individually. These electrodes maximize 
surface area while minimizing internal resistance 
and can be implemented gainfully for the sensors, 
batteries, and fuel cells of the future. 
In Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics, we intro-
duced 3D C-MEMS dielectrophoresis (see Volume I, 
Example 6.2). The main concept behind using 3D 
carbon electrodes here was to reduce the mean dis-
tance of any targeted particle contained in a channel 
or chamber to the closest electrode surface.83
The author believes that C-MEMS/NEMS technol-
ogy can find applications in several MEMS fields as 
a substitute for silicon-based devices. This technol-
ogy can be revolutionary not only in energy appli-
cations, such as biofuel cells, microbatteries, and 
supercapacitors, but also in biological and chemical 
sensing applications. The C-MEMS/NEMS approach 
gives the development engineers unprecedented 
freedom in designing and manufacturing high-sur-
face area conductive structures through the use of 
new MEMS materials and innovative fabrication tech-
niques. The development of novel biofuel cells based 
on high-aspect ratio 3D carbon structures from mil-
limeter to nanometer size, integrating “top-down” 
and “bottom-up” processing approaches and com-
bining soft biological components with hard MEMS/
NEMS structures, could have the effect of making the 
bio-MEMS world less Si-centric and start a trend of 
lithographically patterning materials other than Si. 
Beyond the impact on the MEMS/NEMS/bio-MEMS 
community, one expects a broader anticipated impact 
on industry and on the technology end user. 
Bulk Metallic Glasses
Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) are multicomponent 
alloys for which crystallization is avoided during 
cooling. Sluggish crystallization kinetics and  a 
corresponding ease of solidification into the amor-
phous state have been observed for a wide range 
of alloys, including compositions based on Zr, Cu, 
Ni, Ti, Fe, Mg, Pd, Pt, and Au.84−94 Because of their 
random amorphous structure and lack of dislocation 
formation during deformation, these materials 
exhibit very high strength and elasticity, outstanding 
resilience, good corrosion resistance, and a near-
perfect elastic behavior. For example, a typical BMG 
based on zirconium yields at 2000 MPa after it has 
elastically deformed by 2%.95 Crystallization of a 
BMG must be avoided during any kind of processing, 
since it degrades the properties of the alloy. One 
FIGURE 5.22 An artistic rendition of a carbon-based 
microelectromechanical system fractal garden (see also 
Chapter 9, this volume).

[Page 271]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   271
consequence of the sluggish crystallization kinetics in 
BMG forming alloys is the presence of a supercooled 
liquid region (SCLR). In this temperature region, 
the amorphous BMG first relaxes into a viscous 
liquid before it eventually crystallizes. This behavior 
results in a large window of material processing 
opportunities, where the BMG, in its supercooled 
liquid state, can be processed under pressures and 
temperatures similar to those used for plastics,96 with 
several minutes of processing time allowed before 
crystallization sets in and starts degrading the alloy 
properties. Thus, thermoplastic forming (TPF) is 
carried out by reheating the BMG into its supercooled 
liquid region, and a relatively small forming pressure 
is sufficient to fill even the smallest and most 
complicated features while avoiding crystallization.97 
In other words, we can process the metal as if it were 
a polymer, as demonstrated in Figure 5.23.
Thermoplastic forming with BMGs has a strong 
potential as a technology for MEMS and NEMS 
fabrication.99−100 The amorphous structure of a BMG 
makes it an ideal material for small geometries, 
since it lacks an intrinsic limitation like the grain 
size in crystalline materials or the large molecular 
weight of polymers. The BMG is homogeneous and 
isotropic down to the atomic scale. The absence of 
crystallization during solidification and the low 
processing temperature during TPF dramatically 
reduce solidification shrinkage to levels below 0.2% 
for most BMGs of technical relevance.97 This low 
shrinkage, together with the fact that fast cooling 
is not required after TPF, allows one to precisely 
replicate mold features. 
The supercooled liquid state of the BMG can be 
utilized for other processes, one of which is hot 
separation.98 Thermoplastic forming into a mold 
cavity results in precise replication of micro fea-
tures, which, however, are connected to a typi-
cally large reservoir of amorphous material. For 
MEMS fabrication and also for three-dimensional 
microparts, this reservoir must be separated from 
the part. Hot separation, where a scraper separates 
reservoir from part as shown in Figure 5.23, is car-
ried out in the SCLR. This leaves a plain surface 
on which further fabrication steps can be carried 
out or a three- dimensional part after the mold is 
etched. The low-viscosity supercooled liquid state 
of the BMG can also be used to erase features in 
the BMG,101 as shown in Figure 5.24. This is accom-
plished through surface tension forces alone. Such 
a process has potential for use as a rewrite mecha-
nism for data storage, as well as to smooth the sur-
face of microparts (where the finish is limited by 
the surface roughness of the mold).
20 µm  
10 µm  
×1, 000
100 µm  
(a)
(c)
20 µm  
(d)
(b)
FIGURE 5.23 Examples of structures created by thermoplastic forming of bulk metallic glass (BMG). The top images 
depict precise replication of typical microelectromechanical system features with zirconium-based BMG (a) and a micro-
porous membrane (b). Separation of the microparts from the BMG reservoir using a hot-separation technique results in 
three- dimensional microparts (c and d).98 (Courtesy of Dr. Jan Schroers, Yale University.)

[Page 272]
272   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Because of favorable chemical selectivity in BMGs, 
sacrificial etching and patterning can be performed 
without damaging the amorphous material.98 For 
example, Zr- and Pt-based BMGs are resistant to 
most acids and bases, making them good candidates 
for postprocessing (selective wet-etching) of silicon 
after the TPF process.
Not only can BMGs be used to replicate a mold, 
but they can also be used as the mold material itself 
from which various materials are replicated. Even 
other BMGs can be replicated on a BMG mold, as long 
as they soften at lower temperatures than the mold 
material. BMGs typically lose their strength gradually 
with increasing temperature, but once the glass 
transition temperature is reached, where the glassy 
BMG relaxes into a metastable liquid, the strength 
significantly drops. Consequently, clever use of 
BMGs with decreasing Tg values allows the processing 
sequence depicted in Figure 5.25, where a BMG is used 
to replicate a conventional mold, and when processed 
at a lower temperature, as a mold itself.98
MEMS and microstructure applications are dic-
tated by the BMG properties, processability, and 
process compatibility. Mechanical properties and 
processing temperature ranges for a few selected 
BMGs are summarized in Table 5.10. Their very high 
yield strength values, which by far exceed those of 
any other metal used for MEMS, are beneficial for 
almost every application. In particular, medical 
probes, skin-based drug delivery patches, sensors 
and actuators in high-shock environments, and 
microthrusters can all benefit from high strength. 
The high yield strength also implies a high hardness. 
This leads to less wear and is particularly interesting 
for MEMS relays and RF dielectric switches, which 
require robust performance after 10+ million contact 
cycles. The absence of dislocations also results in a 
very large elastic strain limit. Within the elastic region 
the material approaches perfect elastic behavior, 
reflected in low losses upon cyclic loading, which is 
particularly useful for resonators. Together, the high 
yield strength and large elastic strain limit suggest 
an outstanding resilience. For example, the 17-MPa 
resilience of a Zr-based BMG is about 1000 times 
higher than the resilience of nickel. Even the best 
conventional metallic spring material, high-carbon 
2 µm
2 µm
2 µm
20 µm
10 µm
2 µm
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 5.24 Forces exerted by surface tension alone can be used to erase features (a) or smoothing of the surface (b) in 
bulk metallic glass while processing it in the supercooled liquid region.101

[Page 273]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   273
spring steel, possesses a resilience below 2 MPa. 
Obviously, their outstanding resilience makes 
BMGs excellent materials for any spring application 
involving energy storage and harvest, as well as for 
valve applications.
BMGs are available in a wide range of densities. 
The high density of Pt57.5Cu14.7Ni5.3P22.5, 15.3 g/cm3, 
makes it an attractive candidate for improving the 
sensitivity of accelerometers.
The ability to use BMGs as a material to replicate 
parts on a mold and as a mold material itself suggests 
an alternative to the LIGA process (see Volume II, 
Chapter 10) for the mass production of microparts. 
BMG molds could supplant disposable molds.
Summarizing, BMGs are an entirely new class 
of material best described as an ultrahigh-strength 
material that can be processed like a plastic. There 
are many reasons why this class of materials might 
become an important MEMS/NEMS material: 
 
◾No intrinsic size limitation (like grain bound-
aries in crystalline materials)
 
◾Perfectly isotropic
 
◾Very large strength and strain
 
◾Perfectly elastic (high Q factor)
 
◾Some are very inert in most environments
 
◾Very low processing temperature (60–400°C 
for various BMGs)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 5.25 Sequential use of various bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) with different softening behavior as mold and 
molded material. The nickel master (a) is replicated at 450°C with a Zr-based BMG (b). This structure is then used as a 
mold for a Pt-based BMG  formed at 280°C (c). A Au-based BMG with an even lower glass transition temperature of 130°C 
(softening behavior) is used to replicate the Pt-based BMG structure. The Au-based BMG is processed at 160°C, and 
 perfect replication of the Pt-based BMG mold can be achieved (d).102 
TABLE 5.10 Selected Properties and Processing Temperatures for BMGs with Potential for 
Microelectromechanical System and Microstructural Applications
BMG Material
Density 
(g/cm3)
Yield Strength 
(MPa)
εel (%)
Y (GPa)
G (GPa)
B (GPa)
Eel (MPa)
ν
Thermoplastic 
Forming 
Temperature (°C)
Au49Ag5.5Pd2.3 
Cu26.9Si16.3
11
1200
1.5
66.38
23.43
132.3
7.5
0.41
150–190
Pt57.5Cu14.7Ni5.3P22.5
15.3
1470
1.3
94.8
33.3
243
8
0.42
250–300
Zr44Ti11Cu10Ni10Be25
6.1
1860
1.9
96.7
35.6
114
17
0.36
380–470
Source: Jan Schroers, Yale University.

[Page 274]
274   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 
◾Very low flow stress
 
◾Features as small as 30 nm can be replicated
 
◾Molding process reduces internal stresses and 
porosity to an undetectable level
Fast Microfluidic CD Prototyping
In Volume I, Chapter 6, we analyzed CD-based 
microfluidics.103 Here we detail some simple meth-
ods to implement fast prototyping of microfluidic 
CDs in a research laboratory setting. 
Many microfluidic applications utilize relatively 
large volumes (on the order of 20 µL to several mil-
liliters) that are not always compatible with typical 
microfabrication techniques. This holds especially 
true for biological applications, including sam-
ple preparation and nucleic acid analysis (see also 
Chapter 10, this volume, under sample preparation). 
Centrifugal platforms in which microfluidic CDs 
are used for biological analysis require these larger 
volumes and may feature small conduits and DNA 
analysis chambers, which means that a combination 
of macro- and microfabrication techniques must be 
used to create these devices.
Computer numerical control (CNC) machining 
can be used to create most macro features (>100 µm) 
on a microfluidic CD. Inexpensive plastics, such as 
polycarbonate (PC) or ABS, are used as substrates 
in which channels down to ∼1 mm in width can 
be machined using standard endmill and drill bits 
(Figure 5.26, CNC machine, Quick Circuit 5000). 
The polymer substrate thicknesses can be as small 
as 200 µm. Using a layering approach, different 
sheets of thin machined plastic CDs can be lami-
nated together using pressure-sensitive adhesive 
(PSA) layers (PSA-FLEX mount DFM 200 clear V-95). 
The PSA layers may be as thin as 100 µm and are 
cut using a CNC cutter-plotter (Figure 5.27, CNC 
plotter, Graphtec CE-2000-60). The use of PSA lay-
ers allows for channels as narrow as 250 µm. When 
sandwiched between two plastic sheets, these chan-
nels in the PSA connect the larger CNC machined 
reservoirs in the PC discs. 
Even the simplest standard microfluidic CD con-
sists of no fewer than five layers, as illustrated in 
Figure 5.28. Usually the fluidic compact discs made 
in our lab are composed of three optically clear 
polycarbonate disks held together by two pressure-
FIGURE 5.26 A computer numerically controlled milling machine. Quick Circuit 5000 machine cuts fluidic design in a 
polycarbonate disc.
FIGURE 5.27 A roll-feed cutter plotter cuts out the pressure-sensitive adhesive layer designs. Graphtec CE-2000–60.

[Page 275]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   275
sensitive adhesive layers. The top plate (including 
venting holes), the middle plate (containing all flu-
idic chambers), and the bottom plate contain the 
alignment holes at the same positions. Specifically, 
the five layers shown in Figure 5.28 are as follows: 
1) top polycarbonate CD with CNC-machined 
sample loading, sample removal, and air venting 
holes; 2) pressure-sensitive adhesive with channel 
features cut using a plotter; 3) middle polycarbon-
ate CD with machined channel features; 4) pressure-
 sensitive adhesive with channel features cut using a 
plotter; 5) solid bottom polycarbonate CD to seal 
off the channels. Microfluidic CD platforms can 
involve more layers to accommodate more complex 
fluidics. Moreover, different devices and substances 
can be placed inside the CD during fabrication, such 
as beads, lyophilized reagents, or filters. The CDs 
also can be exposed to O2 plasma treatment or func-
tionalized with bovine serum albumin to create 
hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces, respectively. 
Once the appropriate pieces have been designed and 
machined, they are aligned centrally and radially and 
laminated together using the PSA layers. The fabri-
cation process ends with running the CDs through 
an industrial press to ensure excellent adhesion and 
sealing between all CD layers. After the assembled 
layers are pressed together, they are fed through a 
laminator to press the layers together tightly and 
ensure a good seal (Figure 5.29).
While the majority of CD platforms developed 
in our laboratory utilize standard macromachining 
processes as described above, microfabrication is 
easily integrated onto the CD platform. Integration 
usually takes the form of creating microfluidic poly-
dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) molds on 6-in. Si wafers 
using multilevel, thick-resist lithography (Figure 
5.30). Briefly, thick photoresist is spun on a Si wafer, 
prebaked to remove solvents, exposed to ultraviolet 
(UV) to catalyze cross-linking, postbaked to finish 
cross-linking, and developed to remove unexposed 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 5.28 Computer numerical control (CNC) machined compact disc (CD) assembly. (a) Illustration showing five 
 layers fabricated by a CNC machine and vinyl cutter: 1, top plate (1.2 mm); 2, pressure-sensitive adhesive layer (100 µm); 
3, middle plate (1.2 mm); 4, pressure-sensitive adhesive layer (100 µm); 5, bottom disc (1.2 mm). (b) Schematic illustration 
of assembled CD structure.
FIGURE 5.29 A laminator is used to press CNC machined 
discs together with pressure-sensitive adhesive layers.
0.5kV 13.8mm×110 9/25/03 12:42
500um
FIGURE 5.30 A scanning electron microscope image of 
a typical two-level polydimethylsiloxane flow cell struc-
ture. The microchannel is 25 μm deep, and the chamber is 
250 μm deep.

[Page 276]
276   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
photoresist. This creates the master mold (a negative 
of the desired channel features), upon which PDMS 
(a biocompatible elastomer) can be poured and 
cured. This process, termed soft lithography (see 
Volume II, Chapter 2), can be used to make many 
PDMS parts from a single Si mold.
Sample loading and venting holes can then be 
punched using small-gauge syringes, and the soft 
lithography PDMS parts (either 6-in. round entire 
PDMS CDs or individual microfluidic units) can be 
placed onto a polycarbonate CD, or in some cases 
bound to glass slides and secured with a specially 
designed slide holder CD. Most often, the passive 
binding properties of PDMS on glass/plastic are 
enough to prevent leakage during use. However, an 
O2 plasma treatment process can be used to create a 
permanent bond with PDMS. Almost all processes 
and materials used to create the microfluidic CD 
platforms are relatively inexpensive, with the excep-
tion of the initial Si mold needed when incorporat-
ing microfabrication. 
Micro Glass Blowing
Eklund and Shkel developed a wafer-level glass 
 blowing process for the formation of three-dimen-
sional glass microstructures.104 In contrast to con-
ventional glass blowing, where relatively large glass 
structures are shaped one at a time, the micro glass 
blowing process allows for parallel fabrication of 
thousands of microscopic glass parts.
The micro glass blowing fabrication process is 
illustrated in Figure 5.31. In a first step (Figure 5.31a), 
deep cylindrical cavities are dry etched in a silicon 
wafer. The etch mask (not shown) is removed, and a 
borosilicate glass wafer is anodically bonded to the 
silicon wafer (Figure 5.31b). Next, the parts are rap-
idly heated inside a furnace to a temperature above 
the softening point of the glass. This elevated tem-
perature causes the pressure of the gas trapped inside 
the sealed cavities to increase. The glass deforms into 
spherical shapes because of the combination of the 
increased gas pressure and the low viscosity of the 
heated glass (Figure 5.31c). 
The size of the blown glass spheres depends on 
the dimensions of the etched cavity, the furnace tem-
perature, and the pressure and temperature at which 
the cavities are sealed. The total volume of the etched 
cavity and the blown glass sphere is proportional to 
the volume of the etched cavity, with the proportion-
ality constant being the ratio between the final and 
initial temperatures. For example, if a cavity is sealed 
in atmospheric pressure and at room temperature and 
the furnace temperature is 900°C, the final volume is 
approximately four times as great as the volume of 
the etched cavity (1173 K vs. 295 K). The volume 
enclosed by only the glass sphere is therefore three 
times as great as the volume of the etched cavity.
In Figure 5.32 we show fabricated glass spheres, 
all with a diameter of approximately 900 µm. A layer 
of AZ P4620 photoresist was used as the etch mask 
during the deep reactive ion etching of the cylindri-
cal cavities. For the sample shown in Figure 5.32a, 
a silicon wafer with a thickness of 450 µm was 
used, and the etched cavities were 350 µm deep and 
750 µm in diameter. For the parts in Figure 5.32b 
and 5.32c, cavities with a depth of 750 µm and a 
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 5.31 Micro glass blowing process sequence. 
(a) Step 1: etching of deep cavities in a silicon wafer. 
(b) Step 2: anodic bonding of glass wafer to the silicon 
wafer. (c) Step 3: blowing of glass spheres by heating 
sample inside furnace.

[Page 277]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   277
diameter of 500 µm were etched in silicon wafers 
with a thickness of 1 mm. Pyrex 7740 glass wafers 
with an initial thickness of 100 µm were used for the 
anodic bonding of all samples, and the spheres were 
formed inside a furnace set to 850°C. This technol-
ogy may be utilized for several different types of 
MEMS devices, including microfabricated glass 
lenses, three-dimensional microfluidic networks, 
and spherical gas confinement chambers for atomic 
MEMS.105
Biocompatibility and Surface Modification
Definition
Before new materials or devices can be used in 
conjunction with a biological system, whether cells 
or organisms, their effect on that system must be 
tested. In the simplest terms, a substance or device 
that has no effect on the time scale tested is said 
to be biocompatible. This can be verified at first by 
observing whether the material or device under 
study forms a suitable substrate for the growth 
of cultured cells. Such preliminary screening 
eliminates materials that have direct, harmful 
effects. To fully test the biocompatibility of a new 
material or device, one needs to test it on a wide 
range of different types of cells; for applications in 
humans, it also has to be tested on animals for any 
less direct effects. Biocompatibility is obviously a 
complex phenomenon. Some materials and devices 
are immediately toxic to all cells or organisms; 
some are toxic only to specific animals; others are 
harmful in the long term (e.g., carcinogens); others, 
while not toxic, may cause marked changes in the 
normal behavior of the system.106 The definition of 
biocompatibility of a material or device also varies 
depending on how the material or device is to be 
used. If a device is to be implanted into a tissue, 
one may want the cells of the tissue to treat it as 
part of the tissue to stick to it and grow on it (not 
an advisable strategy for a chemical-type sensor 
where membranes might become blocked). But if 
a device is injected into the bloodstream, it is vital 
that the blood cells not stick to it, as this results in 
a clot, which could be fatal to the biological system. 
In the case of a medical nanorobot (perhaps a 
future version of a pharmacy-on-a-chip shown in 
Volume II, Figure  4.100) floating or swimming in 
the circulation, cell and tissue adhesion is again 
undesirable. The term biocompatibility evolved over 
time, and today an accepted working definition is 
the ability of a material or device to perform with an 
appropriate host response in a specific application.
History
Biocompatibility work has a long history. Two 
thousand years ago, gold was already used in den-
tal applications; glass eyes and wooden teeth were 
introduced next, and plastics were developed in the 
early 1900s. After World War II, parachute cloth was 
used as vascular prosthesis. Finally, over the last 
two decades, active implants (implants providing 
more than a mechanical support function), such as 
(a) 
(b)  
(c) 
FIGURE 5.32 Fabricated glass structures. (a) Diced chip on 
US quarter coin. (b) Close-up of  fabricated glass sphere. (c) 
Array of fabricated glass spheres.

[Page 278]
278   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
biosensors and drug delivery systems, have further 
challenged our understanding of biocompatibil-
ity issues. Indeed, in many of these active devices 
an efficient transport of chemicals to and from the 
device is essential, something that was not an issue 
for more traditional implants. Clogging of the pores 
or membranes in such active devices will render the 
device useless, though the device may remain per-
fectly harmless to the functioning of the biological 
system itself. Over the last fifteen years, considerable 
work has been directed to create nano- and micro-
textured surfaces that are cell-friendly and promote 
controlled cell growth. This promises to become 
another important application area for MEMS. One 
envisions substrates for cell culturing, the growth 
of nerves for neural implants, textures that encour-
age neural regeneration and the acceptance of pros-
theses, and microsubstrates for bioartificial organs 
and as a medium for the regeneration of tissues such 
as bone and tendon. Typical materials used or pro-
posed, with or without nano- or microtexturing, 
include titanium, niobium, carbon, some ceramics, 
polyimide, some polyurethanes, Teflon, Parylene, 
Makrolon, polystyrene, PMMA, PEEK, polycarbon-
ate, polypropylene, and silicone. Often, there are 
conflicting views (remember the breast implant con-
troversy), and in vivo sensor applications remain 
so elusive that many companies have abandoned 
implantable devices all together and are focusing 
on ex vivo systems instead.107 The field where per-
haps the most progress has been made in terms of 
biocompatible materials evaluation is in the area of 
biomedical materials for drug delivery systems (see, 
e.g., Chapter 8, this volume, Table 8.20).108−110 The 
biocompatibility of silicon was discussed in Volume I, 
Chapter 4.
Mechanism
A foreign material implanted in a host tissue causes 
a cascade of events to occur at the tissue/material 
interface. It starts with a noncovalent adsorption 
of plasma protein from blood onto the surface. 
This protein adsorption is quite a bit faster than 
the transport of host cells to the foreign surface. 
By the late 1960s, several researchers already knew 
that within 10 s of exposure to blood or plasma, 
a uniform ∼6-nm layer of fibrinogen forms on 
surfaces such as Si, Pt, Ge, and Ta. Fibrinogen is a 
340- kilodalton soluble plasma glycoprotein about 
47.5 nm in length. It is the major surface protein. 
The protein-coated surface, in turn, mediates the 
types of cells that may adhere to the surface, which 
ultimately determines the type of tissue that forms 
in the vicinity of the implant. The type and state of 
adsorbed proteins, including their conformational 
changes, initiate coagulation via platelet adhesion, 
and subsequent collagen deposition leads to the 
encapsulation of the microdevice by fibrous tissue. 
Excessive fibrosis may cause tissue necrosis, granulo-
mas, or tumor genesis.111 The adsorption and dena-
turation of adsorbed fibrinogen molecules actually 
is commonly used as a biocompatibility indicator; 
the amounts of denatured fibrinogen accumulated 
on a surface correlates closely to the extent of biom-
aterial-mediated inflammation. Adsorbed amounts 
of denatured fibrinogen on surgical implants that 
are regarded “biocompatible” (such as titanium and 
stainless steel) are about ∼2.1 mg/m2 (the same as 
for CVD diamond).
There are two important viewpoints from which 
to approach biocompatibility:
 
1. The implant perspective: the protection of 
implanted devices against the corrosive effects 
of body fluids and tissue, their sterilizability, 
and continued operation.
 
2. The biological system perspective: the avoid-
ance of blood clotting and long-term cytotoxic-
ity, and the continued health of the host. 
The former has been named sensocompatibil ity.107 
An important aspect of senscompatibility is bio-
fouling, the adhesion of proteins and other organic 
matter on the sensor surface. As pointed out above, 
biofouling is a special concern for active implants 
such as biosensors (see, e.g., Volume II, Figure 4.92 
for an in vivo pH, CO2, and O2 sensor), where an 
efficient transport of chemicals to and from the 
device is essential. Immune rejection during organ 
transplants may be prevented by pharmacologi-
cally depressing the immune system by the admin-
istration of cyclosporine. Such a strategy is, of 
course, not applicable for the long-term biocom-
patibility of implants, whether they are biosensors 

[Page 279]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   279
or  cell-transplant-based therapeutics—for example, 
Langerhans or pancreatic islets for type I diabetes,112 
cochlear implants, or heart pacemakers. Perhaps 
a pharmacy-on-the-chip, as shown in Volume II, 
Figure 4.100, could also monitor for biofouling and 
release anti-clotting chemicals such as heparin or 
herudin as required to maintain the function of 
the sensor. It should be kept in mind that biofoul-
ing occurs both for invasive and noninvasive sen-
sors, but obviously intervention is easier with the 
latter. In Figure 5.33, we show a schematic of an 
amperometric invasive glucose sensor, perhaps the 
most widely studied and most “successful” implant-
able sensor to date.107 It is assumed that the needle-
type glucose sensor is embedded in tissue and in 
contact with blood (for details on the operation of 
amperometric glucose sensors, see Chapter 1, this 
volume).113 Failure modes (many packaging related) 
include the following:
 
◾Lead detachment (could be avoided with a tele-
metric device)
 
◾Electrical short
 
◾Membrane delamination
 
◾Membrane biofouling
 
◾Electrode passivation
 
◾Enzyme degradation
 
◾Membrane biodegradation
 
◾Fibrous encapsulation
 
◾Electrode fouling
Surface Modifications 
Surface Modifications for Biocompatibility
Most success today for control of protein and 
cell adhesion on surfaces has been achieved by 
surface immobilization of polyethylene oxide or 
polyethylene glycol (PEG; one refers to a “pegylated 
surface”) forming a water-soluble, nontoxic, and 
nonimmunogenic polymer film.114,115 Zhang et al. 
modified silicon surfaces by covalent attachment 
of a self-assembled PEG film and demonstrated 
an effective suppression of both plasma protein 
adsorption and cell attachment to such modified 
silicon surfaces.116 A pegylated surface may cut the 
amount of protein adsorbed down by a factor of 
ten. Glow-discharge plasma-deposited tetraethylene 
glycol dimethyl ether can reduce the fibrinogen 
adsorption to ∼0.2 mg/m2 (∼350 molecules/µm2) on 
many different types of substrates. A specific strategy to 
fabricate biocompatible ion-selective electrodes of the 
type shown in Volume I, Figure 7.45, implemented 
by Brooks et al.,117 involves covalent attachment of 
heparin to the surface of derivatized cellulose tri-
acetate membranes, which are subsequently impre-
gnated with the potassium-selective iono phore 
valinomycin. The resulting ion-selective electrodes 
respond to potassium and have selectivity coeffi-
cients on the same order of magnitude as those of 
conventional poly(vinyl chloride)-based electrodes. 
Membrane biofouling
Membrane
biodegradation
+
–
Delamination
of membranes
Enzyme
degradation
Fibrous encapsulation
Electrode passivation
Electrical
failure
FIGURE 5.33 Schematic illustration of a blood-borne analyte exiting capillary and traversing to a needle-type glucose 
biosensor embedded in tissue. In addition to normal component failure—electrical failure, enzyme degradation, and 
membrane delamination—the sensor can fail for several physiologically related reasons, such as membrane biodegra-
dation, electrode passivation, and reduction of analyte access due to fibrous encapsulation and membrane biofouling. 
(Based on Wisniewski, N., F. Moussy, and W. M. Reichert. 2000. Characterization of implantable biosensor membrane 
biofouling. Fresenius J Anal Chem 366:611–21.107)

[Page 280]
280   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
It was found that the heparin layer does not alter 
significantly the response characteristics of the 
electrodes. The biological activity of the immo-
bilized  heparin was measured in terms of its 
inactivation of blood coagulation factor Xa; the 
covalently anchored heparin was able to inactivate 
factor Xa. 
Other approaches that have worked well to avoid 
protein adsorption are based on biomimetics. 
This involves the development of membranes that 
mimic the surface of biological membranes, that 
is, the design of “stealth” materials. The external 
region of a cell membrane, the glycocalyx, is 
studded with glycosylated molecules, which direct 
specific interactions such as cell-cell recognition 
and contribute to the steric repulsion that prevents 
undesirable nonspecific binding of other molecules 
or cells. By modifying a pyrolitic graphite surface 
with oligosaccharide surfactant polymers, which, 
like glycocalyx, provide a dense and confluent 
layer that mimics the nonadhesive properties of 
a cell layer, spontaneous adsorption on diverse 
hydrophobic surfaces is suppressed by at least 
∼90%.118 The highly hydrated dextran in these 
layers protrudes into the aqueous phase and sup-
presses nonspecific adsorption of plasma proteins. 
Coating surfaces with phosphorylcholine groups 
to mimic red blood cell surfaces also leads to 
diminished protein adsorption. One such material is 
poly(methacryloyloxyethyl  phosphorylcholine-co-
n-butylmethacrylate) (see Figure 5.34). This polymer, 
which behaves as a hydrogel, shows very low 
protein and cell adsorption. Studies have revealed 
that sensors coated with this hydrogel demonstrate 
excellent sensor response characteristics, while 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the surface 
of the sensors indicates no platelet adhesion. The 
antifouling characteristics are  again believed to 
be due to the extreme hydrophilic nature of the 
surface layer; proteins have difficulty adsorbing on 
the surface because of the layer of bound water.119 
For a further review of in vivo biosensors, consult 
Frasier;120 for surface modification strategies, see 
Wisniewski and Reichert.121
Questions
Questions by Dr. Marc Madou assisted by Mr. Omid 
Rohani, UC Irvine
 5.1:  What properties make silicon a good mechan-
ical sensor/actuator substrate?
 5.2:  What has prevented Si-MEMS oscillators from 
becoming a serious alternative to quartz so 
far?
 5.3:  What are the possible applications of GaAs in 
general and GaAs MEMS in particular?
 5.4:  What are the two most suitable diamond vari-
ations for MEMS application? Explain briefly.
 5.5:  What method would you suggest for pattern-
ing convex hollow structures?
 5.6:  What are the main advantages of ceramics 
MEMS compared to other materials?
 5.7:  NASA’s space shuttle has a long manipulator 
robot arm, also known as the Shuttle Remote 
Manipulator System or SRMS (see figure 
below), that permits astronauts to launch and 
retrieve satellites. It is also used to view and 
monitor the outside of the space shuttle using 
a mounted video camera. Select a suitable 
material for the arm.
 5.8:  List some of the applications of nonphotosen-
sitive and photosensitive polyimides in micro-
technology.
CH3
(C-CH2)a
C=O
CH3
(C-CH2)b
C=O
OCH2CH2OPOCH2CH2N+(CH3)3
OCH2CH2CH2CH3
O
O-
FIGURE 5.34 Structure of poly(methacryloyloxyethyl 
phosphorylcholine-co-n-butylmethacrylate).

[Page 281]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   281
 5.9:  How does an increase in Si content in silicon 
nitride change the following parameters?
 
(a) Tensile film stress
 
(b) Film transparency
 
(c) HF etch rate
5.10:  In the micro glass blowing method, what are 
the parameters on which the sizes of blown 
glass spheres depend?
5.11:  Describe the merits and problems associated 
with micromachining in GaAs, Si, diamond, 
and 3C-SiC.
5.12:  (a) Detail the C-MEMS process. 
 
(b)  What advantages might a C-MEMS world 
have compared to a Si-world?
5.13:  What are bulk metallic glasses (BMGs)? What 
are their properties? How would you use them 
in MEMS and NEMS?
5.14:  Present a definition of biocompatibility of a 
MEMS structure.
5.15:  A thermistor is a device used to measure tem-
perature by taking advantage of the change in 
electrical conductivity when the temperature 
changes. Select a material that might serve as a 
thermistor in the 500 to 1000°C temperature 
range.
5.16:  Describe the ionic bonding between magne-
sium and chlorine. What are the consequences 
for the projected strength of the compound 
that forms and the electronic/ionic conductiv-
ity of such a compound?
5.17:  Silica (SiO2) is often given as an example of a 
covalently bonded material. In reality, silica 
exhibits both ionic and covalent bonding. 
What fraction of the bonding is covalent? 
Give some example applications in which sil-
ica is used. To answer this question first find 
a figure that plots electronegativity vs. atom 
type.
5.18:  Silica is used for making long lengths of opti-
cal fibers (see figure below). Being a covalently 
and ionically bonded material, the strength of 
the Si-O bonds is expected to be high. Other 
factors such as susceptibility of silica surfaces 
to react with water vapor in atmosphere have 
a deleterious effect on the strength of silica 
fibers. Given this, what design strategies can 
you think of such that silica fibers could still 
be bent to a considerable degree without 
breaking?
5.19:  Define each of the following terms: stress, 
strain, elastic modulus, Young’s modulus of 
typical materials (ceramics, glasses, semi-
conductors, metals, and polymers), Poisson’s 
ratio, and yield strength. 
5.20:  Why are p-type piezoresistors most commonly 
used in Si pressure sensors?
5.21:  In the context of using piezoresistivity to sense 
strain, what are the advantages/disadvantages 
of using silicon versus silicon nitride for pres-
sure sensor diaphragms? How does residual 
stress affect the sensitivity?
References
 
1. Senturia, S. D., and R. T. Howe. 1990. Mechanical proper-
ties and CAD Lecture notes. Boston: Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology.
 
2. Studer, B., and W. Zingg. 1990. In 4th European Frequency 
and Time Forum. Neuchatel, Switzerland, pp. 635–58.
 
3. Tellier, C. R., and F. Jouffroy. 1983. Orientation effects in 
chemical etching of quartz plates. J Mater Sci 18:3621−32.
 
4. Ueda, T., F. Kohsaka, T. Lino, and D. Yamazoki. 1987. 
Theory to predict etching shapes in quartz and applications 
to design devices. Trans Soc Inst Control Eng 23: 1−6.
 
5. Chuang, S. S. 1983. In Proceedings: 37th Annual Frequency 
Control Symposium 1983, 248−54. Philadelphia: IEEE.
 
6. Dufour, M., M. T. Delaye, F. Michel, J. S. Danel, B. Diem, 
and G. Delapierre. 1991. A comparison between microma-
chined pressure sensors using quartz or silicon vibrating 
beams. 6th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, June 24–27, 
1991, pp. 668–71.
 
7. Editorial. 1994. Concord, CA: BEI Systron Donner.
 
8. Hjort, K., G. Thornell, R. Spohr, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 1996. 
Heavy ion induced etch anisotropy in single crystalline 
quartz. Ninth Annual International Workshop on Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems. San Diego, February 11–15, 1996, pp. 
267–71.

[Page 282]
282   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 
9. Ericson, F., S. Johansson, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 1988. Hardness 
and fracture toughness of semiconducting materials stud-
ied by indentation and erosion techniques. J Mater Sci Eng 
A105/106:131−41.
 10. Takebe, T., T. Yamamoto, M. Fujii, and K. Kobayashi. 
1993. Fundamental selective etching characteristics of 
HF+H2O2+H2O mixtures for GaAs. J Electrochem Soc 
140:1169−80.
 11. Zhang, Z. L., and N. C. MacDonald. 1993. Fabrication of sub-
micron high-aspect-ratio GaAs actuators. J Microelectromech 
Syst 2:66−73.
 12. Tarui, Y., Y. Komiya, and Y. Harada. 1971. Preferential etching 
and etched profile of GaAs. J Electrochem Soc 118:119−122.
 13. Ribas, R. P. 1998. Maskless front-side bulk micromachining 
compatible to standard GaAs IC technology. Grenoble, France: 
TIMA Laboratory.
 14. Hjort, K. 1996. Sacrificial etching of III-V compounds 
for micromechanical devices. J Micromechanics Microeng 
6:370−375.
 15. Collins, S. D. 1997. Etch stop techniques for micromachin-
ing. J Electrochem Soc 144:2242−2262.
 16. Karam, J. M., B. Courtois, M. Holjo, J. L. Leclercq, and P. 
Viktorotovitch. 1996. Collective fabrication of gallium 
arsenide based microsystems. SPIE: Micromachining and 
Microfabrication Process Technology II. Austin, TX, October 
14–15, 1996, pp. 315–26.
 17. Hjort, K., J.-Å. Schweitz, and B. Hok. 1990. In Proceedings: 
IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’90). Napa 
Valley, CA, pp. 73–76.
 18. Hjort, K., J.-Å. Schweitz, S. Andersson, O. Kordina, and E. 
Janzen. 1992. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’92). Travemunde, Germany, February 4–7, 
1992, 83–86.
 19. Morkoc, H., H. Unlu, H. Zabel, and N. Otsuka. 1988. 
Gallium arsenide on silicon: A review. Solid State Technol 
March: 71−76.
 20. Ramdani, J., R. Droopad, Z. Yu, J. A. Curless, C. D. 
Overgaard, J. Finder, K. Eisenbeiser, J. A. Hallmark, W. J. 
Ooms, V. Kaushik, P. Alluri, and S. Pietambaram. 2000. 
Interface characterization of high-quality SrTiO3 thin films 
on Si(100) substrates grown by molecular beam epitaxy. 
Applied Surface Science 159−160:127−133.
 21. Singer, P. 2001. GaAs-on-silicon, finally! Semiconductor 
International October.
 22. LaPedus, M., and P. Clarke. 2003. Motorola closes GaAs-
on-silicon wafer subsidiary. EETimes.
 23. Yeh, H. J., and J. S. Smith. 1994. Fluidic self-assembly of 
microstructures and its application to the integration of 
GaAs on Si. IEEE International Workshop on Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan, January 
25–28, 1994, pp. 279–84.
 24. Yeh, H. J., and J. S. Smith. 1994. Integration of GaAs verti-
cal-cavity surface-emitting laser on Si by substrate removal. 
Appl Phys Lett 64:1466−68.
 25. Teraji, T., S. Mitani, C. Wang, and T. Ito. 2002. High-rate 
deposition of high-quality homoepitaxial diamond films 
(review). New Diamond Front Carbon Tech 12:355.
 26. Wang, C., M. Irie, K. Kimura, T. Teraji, and T. Ito. 2001. 
Boron-doped diamond film homoepitaxially grown on 
high-quality chemical-vapor deposited diamond (100). Jpn 
J Appl Phys 40:4145.
 27. Herb, J. A., M. G. Peters, S. C. Terry, and J. H. Jerman. 1990. 
PECVD diamond films for use in silicon microstructures. 
Sensors Actuators A A23:982−87.
 28. Spear, K. E., and J. P. Dismukes. 1994. Synthetic diamond: 
Emerging CVD science and technology. New York: Wiley-
Interscience.
 29. Obermeier, E. 1995. In 8th International Conference on Solid-
State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, 
Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, pp. 178–81.
 30. Auciello, O., J. Birrell, J. A. Carlisle, J. E. Gerbi, X. Xiao, 
B. Peng, and H. D. Espinosa. 2004. Materials science and 
fabrication processes for a new MEMS technology based 
on ultrananocrystalline diamond thin films. J Phys Condens 
Matter 16:R539−52.
 31. Webster, J. R., C. W. Dyck, J. P. Sullivan, T. A. Friedmann, 
and A. J. Carton. 2004. Performance of amorphous dia-
mond RF MEMS capacitive switch. Electron Lett 40:43–44.
 32. Kohn, E., P. Gluche, and M. Adamschik. 1999. Diamond 
MEMS: A new emerging technology. Diamond Relat Mater 
8:934−40.
 33. Irie, M., S. Endo, C. L. Wang, and T. Ito. 2003. Fabrication 
and properties of lateral p-i-p structures using single-crys-
talline CVD diamond layers for high electric field applica-
tions. Diamond Relat Mater 12:1563−68.
 34. Lari, T., A. Oh, N. Wermes, H. Kagan, M. Keil, and W. 
Trischuk. 2005. Characterization and modeling of non-
uniform charge collection in CVD diamond pixel detectors. 
Nuclear Instruments Methods Phys Res Sec A Accel Spectrom 
Detect Associated Equip 537:581−93.
 35. Muller, R., M. Adamschik, D. Steidl, E. Kohn, S. Thamasett, 
S. Stiller, H. Hanke, and V. Hombach. 2004. Application of 
CVD-diamond for catheter ablation in the heart. Diamond 
Relat Mater 13:1080−83.
 36. Achard, J., F. Silva, H. Scheider, R. S. Sussmann, A. Tallaire, 
A. Gicquel, and M. C. Castex. 2004. The use of CVD dia-
mond for high-power switching using electron beam exci-
tation. Diamond Relat Mater 13:876−80.
 37. Krotz, G., W. Legner, C. Wagner, H. Moller, H. Sonntag, 
and G. Muller. 1995. Silicon carbide as a mechanical 
material. 8th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 
25–29, 1995, 186–89.
 38. Fleischman, A. J., S. Roy, C. A. Zorman, M. Mehregany, and 
L. G. Matus. 1996. Polycrystalline silicon carbide for sur-
face micromachining. 9th Annual International Workshop on 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems. San Diego, CA, February 
11–15, 1996, pp. 234–38.
 39. Roy, S., A. K. McIlwain, R. G. DeAnna, A. J. Fleischman, R. 
K. Burla, C. A. Zorman, and M. Mehregany. 2000. In Solid-
State Sensor and Actuator Workshop 22–25. Hilton Head 
Island, SC: Transducers Research Foundation.
 40. Mardilovich, P., D. Routkevitch, and A. Govyadinov. 2000. 
Hybrid micromachining and surface microstructuring of 
alumina ceramic. Electrochem Soc Proc 200-19:33−42.
 41. Tan, S., M. Reed, H. Han, and R. Boudreu. 1995. High 
aspect ratio microstructures on porous anodic aluminum 
oxide. Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS-95). Amsterdam, 
January 1995, pp. 267–72.
 42. Routkevitch, D., A. Govyadinov, and P. Mardilovich. 2000. 
High aspect ratio, high resolution ceramic MEMS. 2000 
International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition. 
Orlando, FL, November 5–10, 2000, pp. 1−6.
 43. Li, A., F. Muller, A. Birner, K. Nielsch, and U. Gosele. 1999. 
Fabrication and microstructuring of hexagonally ordered 
two-dimensional nanopore arrays in anodic alumina. Adv 
Materials 11:483−87.

[Page 283]
Selected Materials and Processes for MEMS and NEMS   283
 44. Govyadinov, A., P. Mardilovich, K. Novogradecz, S. Hooker, 
and D. Routkevitch. 2000. Anodic alumina MEMS: 
Applications and devices. In 2000 International Mechanical 
Engineering Congress and Exposition, Orlando, FL, November 
5−10, 2000, pp. 1−6.
 45. Mardilovich, P., D. Routkevitch, and A. Govyadinov. 
2000. New approach for surface microstructuring. In 2000 
International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition. 
Orlando, FL, November 5–10, 2000, pp. 1−5.
 46. Govyadinov, A., P. Mardilovich, and D. Routkevitch. 
2000. Field emission cathode from aligned arrays of car-
bon nanotubes. Electrochem Soc Abstracts 2000-2:Abstract 
553.
 47. Sugiura, T., T. Yoshida, and H. Minoura. 1998. Designing a 
TiO2 nano-rhoneycomb structure using photoelectrochem-
ical etching. Electrochem Solid-State Lett 1:175−77.
 48. Sugiura, T., S. Itoh, T. Ooi, T. Yoshida, K. Kuroda, and H. 
Minoura. 1999. Evolution of a skeleton structures TiO2 
surface consisting of grain boundaries. Electroanal Chem 
473:204–08.
 49. Schubert, P. J., and J. H. Nevin. 1985. A polyimide-based 
capacitive humidity sensor. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 
ED-32:1220−24.
 50. Ralston, A. R. K., C. F. Klein, P. E. Thoma, and D. D. Denton. 
1995. A model for the relative environmental stability of 
a series of polyimide capacitance humidity sensors. 8th 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ‘95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, 
pp. 821–24.
 51. Latham, W. J., and D. W. Hawley. 1988. Color filters from 
dyed polyimides. Solid State Technol 31:223−26.
 52. Suh, J. W., S. F. Glander, R. B. Darling, C. W. Storment, and 
G. T. A. Kovacs. 1996. Combined organic thermal and elec-
trostatic omnidirectional ciliary microactuator array for 
object positioning and inspection. Proceedings: Solid-State 
Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head, SC, June 2–6, 
1996, pp. 168–73.
 53. Darling, R. B., J. W. Suh, and G. T. Kovacs. 1998. Ciliary 
microactuator array for scanning electron microscope posi-
tioning stage. J Vac Sci Technol A 16:1998−2002.
 54. Makino, D. 1994. In Polymers for microelectronics: Resists 
and dialectrics (eds. Thompson, L. F., C. G. Willson, and S. 
Tagawa) Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.
 55. Studt, T. 1992. Polyimides: Hot stuff for the ‘90s. Res Dev 
August: 30−31.
 56. Ando, S., T. Matsuura, and S. Sasaki. 1994. Polymers 
for microelectronics: Resists and dielectrics, ed. L. F. 
Thompson, C. G. Willson, and S. Tagawa. ACS Symposium 
Series 537:304–22.
 57. Pool, R. 1988. Microscopic motor is a first step. Res News 
October: 379−80.
 58. Rosler, R. S. 1991. The evolution of commercial plasma 
enhanced CVD systems. Solid State Technol June: 67−71.
 59. Wu, T. H. T., and R. S. Rosler. 1992. Stress in PSG and 
nitride films as related to film properties and annealing. 
Solid State Technol May: 65−71.
 60. Adams, A. C. 1988. In VLSI technology, ed. S. M. Sze. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 259–60.
 61. Sinha, A. K., and T. E. Smith. 1978. Thermal stresses 
and cracking resistance of dielectric films. J Appl Phys 
49:2423−26.
 62. Retajczyk, T. F. J., and A. K. Sinha. 1980. Elastic stiffness and 
thermal expansion coefficients of various refractory silicides 
and silicon nitride films. Thin Solid Films 70:241−47.
 63. Sakimoto, M., H. Yoshihara, and T. Ohkubo. 1982. Silicon 
nitride single-layer x-ray mask. J Vac Sci Technol 21:1017−21.
 64. Ibid.
 65. Chang, S., W. Eaton, J. Fulmer, C. Gonzalez, B. Underwood, 
J. Wong, and R. L. Smith. 1991. Micromechanical structures 
in amorphous silicon. 6th International Conference on Solid-
State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, 
June 24–27, 1991, pp. 751–54.
 66. Spear, W. E., and P. G. Le Comber. 1975. Substitutional 
doping of amorphous silicon. Solid State Commun 
17:1193−96.
 67. Lee, J. B., Z. Chen, M. G. Allen, A. Rohatgi, and R. Arya. 
1995. A miniaturized high-voltage solar cell array as an 
electrostatic MEMS power supply. J Microelectromech Syst 
4:102−08.
 68. Crowley, J. L. 1992. Plasma enhanced CVD for flat panel 
displays. Solid State Technol February: 94−98.
 69. Holbrook, D. S., and J. D. McKibben. 1992. Microlithography 
for large area flat panel display substrates. Solid State Technol 
May: 166−72.
 70. Bohm, M. 1988. Advances in amorphous silicon based thin 
film microelectronics. Solid State Technol September.
 71. Bruno, G., P. Capezzuto, and A. Madan, Eds. 1995. Plasma 
deposition of amorphous silicon-based materials. Boston: 
Academic Press.
 72. Wang, C., and M. Madou. 2005. From MEMS to NEMs with 
carbon. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 20:2181−87.
 73. Wang, C., G. Jia, L. H. Taherabadi, and M. J. Madou. 2005. 
A novel method for the fabrication of high-aspect ratio 
C-MEMS structures. J MEMS 14:348−58.
 74. Schueller, O. J. A., S. T. Brittain, C. Marzolin, and G. M. 
Whitesides. 1997. Fabrication and characterization of 
glassy carbon MEMS. Chem Mater 9:125−39.
 75. Madou, M., A. Lai, G. Schmidt, X. Song, K. Kinoshita, M. 
Fendorf, A. Zetl, and R. White. 1997. Carbon micromachin-
ing (CMEMS). In Chemical and biological sensors and analyti-
cal electrochemical methods, ed. A. Ricco, M. B., P. Vanysck, 
G. Horvai, and A. Silva. Pennington, NJ: Electrochemical 
Society Proceedings Series, pp. 61.
 76. Kim, J., X. Song, K. Kinoshita, M. Madou, and R. White. 
1998. Electrochemical studies of carbon films for pyro-
lyzed photoresist. J Electrochem Soc 145:2314−19.
 77. Ranganathan, S., R. McCreery, S. M. Majji, and M. Madou. 
2000. Photoresist derived carbon for microelectromechan-
ical systems and electrochemical applications. J Electrochem 
Soc 147:277−82.
 78. Wang, C., L. Taherabadi, G. Jia, M. Madou, Y. Yeh, and B. 
Dunn. 2004. C-MEMS for the manufacture of 3D micro-
batteries. Electrochem Solid-State Lett 7:A435−38.
 79. Hart, R. W., H. S. White, B. Dunn, and D. R. Rolison. 2003. 
3D microbatteries. Electrochem Commun 5:120−23.
 80. McCreery, R., J. Dieringer, A. O. Solak, B. Snyder, A. M. 
Nowak, W. R. McGovern, and S. Duvall. 2003. Molecular 
rectification and conductance switching in carbon-
based molecular junctions by structural rearrangement 
accompanying electron injection. JACS 125:10748−58.
 81. Hebert, N. E., B. Snyder, R. L. McCreery, W. G. Kuhr, and 
S. A. Brazill. 2003. Performance of pyrolyzed photoresist 
carbon films in a microchip capillary electrophoresis 
device with sinusoidal voltammetric detection. Anal Chem 
75:4265−71.
 82. Park, B. Y., R. Zaouk, C. Wang, and M. J. Madou. 2007. A 
case for fractal electrodes in electrochemical applications. J 
Electrochem Soc 154:1−5.

[Page 284]
284   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 83. Park, B. Y., and M. J. Madou. 2005. 3-D electrode design 
for flow-through dielectrophoretic systems. Electrophoresis 
26:3745.
 84. Inoue, A., T. Zhang, and T. Masumoto. 1990. Zr-Al-Ni 
amorphous-alloys with high glass-transition tempera-
ture and significant supercooled liquid region. Materials 
Transactions Jim 31:177−83.
 85. Peker, A., and W. L. Johnson. 1993. A highly processable 
metallic-glass: Zr41.2ti13.8cu12.5ni10.0be22.5. Appl Phys 
Lett 63:2342−44.
 86. Ponnambalam, V., S. J. Poon, and G. J. Shiflet. 2004. 
Fe-Mn-Cr-Mo-(Y,Ln)-C-B (Ln = lanthanides) bulk metal-
lic glasses as formable amorphous steel alloys. J Mater Res 
19:3046−52.
 87. Lu, Z. P., C. T. Liu, J. R. Thompson, and W. D. Porter. 2004. 
Structural amorphous steels. Phys Rev Lett 92:245503.
 88. Zhang, Q. S., W. Zhang, and A. Inoue. 2006. New Cu-Zr-
based bulk metallic glasses with large diameters of up to 
1.5 cm. Scripta Materialia 55:711−13.
 89. Xu, D. H., G. Duan, W. L. Johnson, and C. Garland. 2004. 
Formation and properties of new Ni-based amorphous 
alloys with critical casting thickness up to 5 mm. Acta 
Materialia 52:3493−97.
 90. Lin, X. H., and W. L. Johnson. 1995. Formation of Ti-Zr-
Cu-Ni bulk metallic glasses. J Appl Phys 78:6514−19.
 91. Inoue, A., A. Kato, T. Zhang, S. G. Kim, and T. Masumoto. 
1991. Mg-Cu-Y amorphous-alloys with high mechanical 
strengths produced by a metallic mold casting method. 
Materials Transactions Jim 32:609−16.
 92. Nishiyama, N., and A. Inoue. 1999. Supercooling investi-
gation and critical cooling rate for glass formation in P-Cu-
Ni-P alloy. Acta Materialia 47:1487−95.
 93. Schroers, J., and W. L. Johnson. 2004. Highly processable 
bulk metallic glass-forming alloys in the Pt-Co-Ni-Cu-P 
system. Appl Phys Lett 84:3666−68.
 94. Schroers, J., B. Lohwongwatana, W. L. Johnson, and A. 
Peker. 2005. Gold based bulk metallic glass. Appl Phys Lett 
87:61912.
 95. Johnson, W. L. 1999. Bulk glass-forming metallic alloys: 
Science and technology. MRS Bull 24:42−56.
 96. Schroers, J., and N. Paton. 2006. Amorphous metal alloys 
form like plastics. Adv Materials Processes 164:61−63.
 97. Schroers, J. 2005. The superplastic forming of bulk metallic 
glasses. JOM 57:35−39.
 98. Schroers, J., Q. Pham, and A. Desai. 2007. Thermoplastic 
forming of bulk metallic glass—A technology for MEMS 
and microstructure fabrication. J MEMS 16:240−47.
 99. Saotome, Y., K. Imai, S. Shioda, S. Shimizu, T. Zhang, and 
A. Inoue. 2002. The micro-nanoformability of Pt-based 
metallic glass and the nanoforming of three-dimensional 
structures. Intermetallics 10:1241−47.
 100. Jeong, H. W., S. Hata, and A. Shimokohbe. 2003. 
Microforming of three-dimensional microstructures from 
thin-film metallic glass. J MEMS 12:42−52.
 101. Kumar, G., and J. Schroers. 2008. Write and erase mecha-
nism on bulk metallic glass. Appl Phys Lett 92:031901.
 102. Schroers, J., Q. Pham, and A. Desai. 2007. Thermoplastic 
forming of bulk metallic glass—A technology for MEMS 
and microstructure fabrication. J MEMS 16:240−47.
 103. Madou, M., J. Zoval, G. Jia, H. Kido, J. Kim, and N. Kim. 
2008. Lab on a CD. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 8:601−28.
 104. Eklund, E. J., A. M. Shkel, S. Knappe, E. Donley, and J. 
Kitching. 2008. Glass-blown spherical microcells for chip-
scale atomic devices. Sensors Actuators A 143:175–80.
 105. Eklund, E. J., and A. M. Shkel. 2007. Glass blowing on a 
wafer level. J MEMS 16:232−39.
 106. Von Recum, A., ed. 1998. Handbook of biomaterials evalua-
tion: Scientific, technical, and clinical testing of implant materi-
als. New York: Hemisphere.
 107. Wisniewski, N., F. Moussy, and W. M. Reichert. 2000. 
Characterization of implantable biosensor membrane bio-
fouling. Fresenius J Anal Chem 366:611−21.
 108. Kaetsu, I. 1995. Biocompatible and biofunctional mem-
branes by means of radiation techniques. Nucl Instrum 
Methods Phys Res B 105:294−301.
 109. Schlosser, M., and M. Ziegler. 1997. Biocompatibility 
of active implantable devices. In Biosensors in the body: 
Continuous in vivo monitoring, ed. D. M. Frasier. New York: 
Wiley.
 110. Reichert, W. M., and A. A. Sharkawy. 1999. Biosensors. In 
Handbook of biomaterials evaluation (ed. von Recum, A.) 
439−60. Philadelphia: Taylor and Francis.
 111. Park, J. B., and R. S. Lakes. 1993. Biomaterials: An introduc-
tion. New York: Springer.
 112. Desai, T. A., D. Hansford, and M. Ferrari. 1999. 
Characterization of micromachined silicon membranes for 
immunoisolation and bioseparation applications. J Membr 
Sci 159:221−31.
 113. Madou, M. J., and S. R. Morrison. 1989. Chemical sensing 
with solid state devices. New York: Academic Press.
 114. Mrksich, M., and G. M. Whitesides. 1996. Using self-assem-
bled monolayers to understand the interactions of man-
made surfaces with proteins and cells. Annu Rev Biophys 
Biomol Struct 25:55−78.
 115. Ratner, B. D., and A. S. Hoffman. 1996. Thin films, grafts, 
and coatings. In Biomaterials science: An introduction to 
materials in medicine, eds. B. D. Ratner, A. S. Hoffman, F. J. 
Schoen, and J. E. Lemons. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 
p. 105.
 116. Zhang, M., T. Desai, and M. Ferrari. 1998. Proteins and 
cells on PEG immobilized silicon surfaces. Biomaterials 
19:953−60.
 117. Brooks, K. A., J. R. Allen, P. W. Feldhoff, and L. G. Bachas. 
1996. Effect of surface-attached heparin on the response of 
potassium-selective electrodes. Anal Chem 68:1439−43.
 118. Holland, N. B., Y. Qiu, M. Ruegsegger, and R. E. Marchant. 
1998. Biomimetic engineering of non-adhesive glycocalyx-
like surfaces using oligosaccharide surfactant polymers. 
Nature 392:799−801.
 119. Ishihara, K., N. Nakabayashi, M. Sakakida, N. Kenro, and 
M. Shichiri. 1998. In American Chemical Society Annual 
Meeting. Orlando, FL.
 120. Frasier, D. M., ed. 1997. Biosensors in the body: Continuous in 
vivo monitoring. New York: Wiley.
 121. Wisniewski, N., and W. Reichert. 2000. Methods for reduc-
ing biosensor membrane biofouling. Colloids Surf B: 
Biointerfaces 18:197–21.

[Page 285]
285
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Metrology
Tools to See and Size: Dimensional 
Metrology
Tools to Measure Materials 
Properties: Property Metrology
Compositional Metrology
Summary: Microscope 
Comparisons
MEMS Based Metrology: In Situ 
Stress-Measuring Techniques
Biaxial Measurements of 
Mechanical Properties of Thin 
Films: Suspended Membrane 
Methods
Other Surface Micromachined 
Structures to Gauge Intrinsic 
Stress
Stress Nonuniformity Measurement 
by Cantilever Beams and 
Cantilever Spirals
Modeling
Finite Element Analysis
CAD for MEMS
Questions
Further Reading
References
6
Metrology and 
MEMS/NEMS 
Modeling
Introduction
This chapter is divided into two parts; one deals with metrology of 
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical 
systems (NEMS), the other with their modeling. Metrology is the science 
that deals with measurements. Tools for MEMS and NEMS metrology 
are either analytical techniques derived from analytical chemistry or size 
measuring techniques borrowed from the semiconductor industry. We 
start the metrology section by exploring techniques to visualize MEMS 
and NEMS devices and to measure sizes such as film thickness and critical 
dimensions (CDs), i.e., dimensional metrology. Dimensional metrology 
tools we cover are light microscopes (including dark-field, bright-field, 
phase contrast, and fluorescence), scanning confocal and two-photon 
microscopes, white light interferometers, ellipsometers, scanning electron 
 (~λ)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Superlens
DNA
object
DNA
image
Diﬀraction limit
From (a) microscopes to (b) superlenses. (c) Model of microelectromechanical 
system heat exchanger. (From http://www.comsol.com/showroom/gallery/252.
php.) In a new field such as nanotechnology it is often the consultants and confer-
ence organizers making the only money. Another group often cashing in early are 
measuring instrument or metrology developers. Edwards compared this to the 
hardware stores and whorehouses making more money in the gold rush of 1849 
than the actual gold miners. (Steven A. Edwards, in The Nanotech Pioneers, 2006.)
Steven A. Edwards

[Page 286]
286   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
microscopes (SEMs), and a set of scanning proximal 
probe microscopes (SPMs) including scanning near-
field optical microscopes (NSOMs or SNOMs), 
scanning tunneling microscopes (STMs), and atomic 
force microscopes (AFMs).
In the category of material property measur-
ing equipment, we start with a review of special-
ized SPMs for material property determination. 
SPMs are used not only to visualize structures (see 
SNOM, STM, and AFM, above) but also to analyze 
a wide variety of material properties such as mag-
netic, thermal, and mechanical behavior. We then 
consider tools used to measure conductivity and 
carrier type of a material. MEMS devices often are 
mechanically dynamic by nature, hence the need 
to measure dynamic motion of MEMS devices. We 
study mechanical properties using interferometry 
with a stroboscopic light-emitting diode (LED) to 
freeze device motion and laser Doppler vibrometry 
to measure contactless velocity and displacement of 
vibrating structures.
Next are examples of metrology techniques to 
 analyze structure of samples (e.g., crystallinity, 
defects, and surface roughness) and finally ana-
lytical techniques for chemical composition. In the 
structural metrology category, we review stylus pro-
filometry, which can be used for surface roughness 
and transmission electron micro scopy (TEM) with 
utility for crystallinity determination. As examples 
of elemental analysis of surfaces, we discuss energy 
dispersive analysis of x-rays (EDAX), a standard pro-
cedure for identifying and quantifying elemental 
composition of specimen surfaces to shallow depths, 
and scanning Auger microscopy (SAM), which can 
identify every atom from lithium on up.
We close off the metrology section by looking at 
MEMS approaches to metrology. This includes on-
chip MEMS devices to measure physical properties 
such as stress, Young’s modulus, Poisson ratio, natu-
ral frequency, etc.
Modeling is the use of mathematical equations 
to simulate and predict real events and processes. 
In the modeling section, we introduce finite ele-
ment analysis and review software packages help-
ful in the design phase of miniaturized devices, 
that is, software for computer-aided design (CAD) 
in MEMS. The emphasis in this modeling section is 
on MEMS modeling. NEMS and BIONEMS require 
molecular and quantum effect modeling. These 
techniques are used to construct, display, manipu-
late, simulate, and analyze molecular structures and 
to calculate their properties. The topic is beyond 
the scope of the current work, and only some use-
ful software packages will be referred to.
Metrology
Introduction
The history of the last two industrial revolutions—
first the machine revolution (1800–1920) and 
second the semiconductor revolution (1950–
2010)—reveals that a nanotechnology revolution 
might not happen until the considerable lag of new 
nanometrology technologies has been remedied. 
During the machine revolution, the milli-inch 
(1 mil = 25 µm) was the measuring stick, and it could 
be gauged by vernier calipers. The semiconductor 
industry today has as a dominant measure 50 nm, 
accessible through electron imaging and SPMs. The 
nanometer revolution is centered at the 1 nm length-
scale, for which we do not yet have the appropriate 
high-throughput tools. Today, high-throughput 
imaging or measuring sub-30-nm features, using a 
conventional SEM or SPMs (say, an AFM or an STM), 
results in fuzzy, noisy images. Fast, sharp, low-noise 
images at the nanoscale will take Herculean efforts. 
This does not bode well for the swift arrival of 
so-called nanomanufacturing, where rapid, accurate, 
high-resolution measurements are essential for 
profitability. On the positive side, in research 
settings, measurements, images, and motion can be 
controlled to within 10 picometers (10−11 m).
MEMS and NEMS metrology includes CD mea-
surements of metal lines on an accelerometer, estab-
lishing surface roughness of a pressure sensitive 
membrane, determining compositional profiles of a 
pn-junction, and measuring magnetic, mechanical, 
electrical, and optical properties (see Figure  6.1). 
Accordingly, metrology equipment is divided into 
dimensional metrology (I), material property studies 
(electrical, optical, magnetic, mechanical, etc.) (II), 
structure identification (surface roughness, defects, 
crystallinity) (III), and chemical composition 

[Page 287]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   287
analysis (IV). In Table 6.1, we group metrology tech-
niques in these four categories and list examples of 
typical tools.
Several metrology tools are used for different 
types of metrology. For example, scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) can be used for dimensional 
metrology [e.g., to measure the CD of an integrated 
circuit (IC)] as well as in structural metrology (e.g., 
to measure defects in an IC). If the SEM comes 
equipped with EDAX, which it often does, chemical 
composition information can be collected as well. 
Similarly, SPMs may image MEMS, measure their 
size, or establish important material properties.
The measurement tools in Table 6.1, when used 
in IC, MEMS, or NEMS manufacturing, are further 
described as being stand-alone or integrated with the 
manufacturing line.1 A stand-alone tool is a separate 
piece of equipment that is either off-line, at-line, or 
in-line. Off-line is an instrument that is available 
only outside the fab (usually involves destructive or 
contaminating testing). An at-line piece of equipment 
is one that is available in the fab itself, and in-line 
tools are used during production to measure, for 
example, processed Si wafers. An integrated tool is 
one that is combined with a manufacturing line and 
is either on-line or in situ. An on-line tool is available 
at the process workstation to measure patterned 
wafers but is not able to measure during wafer 
processing. In the sections below, we select some of 
these techniques for further scrutiny. In Table 6.2 
additional characteristics of the most important 
metrology techniques from Table 6.1 are listed, and 
in Figure 6.2 we compare this most important set of 
analytical tools in terms of detection limit, sampling 
depth, and spot size.
Tools to See and Size: Dimensional 
Metrology
Introduction
An important category in metrology equipment 
comprises seeing and sizing tools, for example, 
to image an etched profile in a MEMS structure, 
to measure film thickness, or to determine a criti-
cal dimension (CD) on an IC. From Table 6.1, see-
ing tools range from optical microscopy (OM), to 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and scanning 
proximal probe microscopes (SPMs), including 
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), atomic force 
microscopy (AFM), and scanning near-field optical 
micro scopy (NSOM or SNOM). Film thickness is 
accessible, for example, through ellipsometry, pho-
toacoustic measurements, x-ray fluorescence (XRF), 
reflection spectroscopy, and interferometry. CD in 
ICs and MEMS and NEMS are typically measured 
using a scanning electron microscope (CD-SEM) or 
an atomic force microscope (CD-AFM) with sub-
nanometer resolution and accuracy. In the sub-
100-nm IC generations, CDs are becoming harder 
and harder to control. With 65-nm features, for 
example, one typically has an error budget of only 
±5 nm and current CD-SEM metrology techniques 
offer about ±2 nm precision. An AFM, in theory, 
should provide better resolution, but unfortunately 
AFM scanning is slow and suffers from probe tip 
wear. Another entry in CD measurements is the 
use of scatterometry that involves measurements 
on IC wafers by diffraction from grating test pat-
terns. Scatterometry is a faster and more economic 
way to characterize periodic patterns on a wafer to 
relieve/bypass the heavy workload of CD-SEM and 
CD-AFM in a typical fab. Scatterometry involves 
flood exposure of a field, the measurement of 
changes in the polarization state of the reflected 
light, and calculation of IC-structure character-
istics via real-time or library-based regression 
 software algorithms. With visible light, scatter-
ometry affords a resolution, R, of about 0.15 nm 
and can deliver multiple measurements, including 
Structure
Properties
Composition
Crystallinity
Defects
Mechanical
Electrical/optical
Magnetic
Termal
Atomic species
Diﬀusion
segregation
Tensile
strength
Hardness
Yield
Modulus of
elasticity
Conductivity
Electron
states
Carrier density
Band
gap
Conductivity
Seebeck
coeﬃcient
Speciﬁc heat
Magneto-
resistance
Dielectric
constant
Surface roughness
FIGURE 6.1 Characterizing integrated circuits, micro-
electromechanical systems, and nanoelectromechanical 
systems.

[Page 288]
288   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 6.1 Metrology Equipment for Integrated Circuits, Microelectromechanical Systems, and 
Nanoelectromechanical Systems
Examples
Abbreviation
Dimensional metrology 
(e.g., film thickness, CD) (I)
High-resolution microscopy (R = diffraction limit, ~150 nm)
HM
Phase contrast microscope 
PCM
Scanning tunneling microscope
STM
Scanning electron microscope (lateral resolution, R = 35 Å)
SEM
Ellipsometer for thickness of transparent films
Scanning proximal probe microscope
SPM
Stylus profilometer for sample surface roughness
Reflection spectroscopy for thickness of opaque films 
X-ray fluorescence for film thickness
XRF
Photoacoustic technology for film thickness
Scatterometer for analysis of periodic structures. CD measurement
Vernier alignment scales (on-chip)
Metrology for material 
properties (II)
Mechanical properties
Micro/nanoindentation with scanning proximal probe
SPM
Residual stress measurements with interferometry
Vibrational analysis with laser Doppler 
 
Electrical properties
Capacitance
Resistance with a four-point probe
Electron energy loss spectroscopy
EELS
Carrier type with hot probe
Dopant concentration with thermal wave system 
Optical properties 
Ellipsometer
Photoelectron spectroscopy 
XPS, UPS
Ultraviolet/visible spectroscopy
UV/VIS
Scanning near-field optical microscopy 
NSOM/SNOM
Magnetic properties
Secondary electron microscopy with polarization analysis
SEMPA
Scanning magnetic force microscopes
SFM
Metrology for structural 
properties (III)
Scanning electron microscope, R = 35 Å (lateral)
SEM
Transmission electron microscope, R = 2 Å
TEM
Scanning probe microscopies
SPMs such as 
STM and AFM
High-resolution microscopy (R = diffraction limit, ~150 nm)
HM
Field ion microscope
FIM
Phase contrast microscope 
PCM
X-ray microscope (Synchrotron radiation and x-ray optics; R = ~1 Å)
Low energy electron emission microscopy (low energy e-beam; R = 
20 nm) 
LEEM
Focused ion beam 
FIB
X-ray diffraction spectroscopy 
XRD
Scanning x-ray photoelectron microscopy
SXPEM

[Page 289]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   289
CDs, feature shapes (i.e., CD profiles), overlay, and 
film thickness on patterned structures, including 
stacked films. Because scatterometry tools are dif-
fraction based, the target must be a periodic struc-
ture that consists of a single feature repeated with 
a well- defined pitch. The technique cannot mea-
sure isolated single lines or more complex three-
 dimensional (3D) shapes.
There is a need not only for sizing metrology with 
faster throughput but also for more equipment that 
provides 3D information, not only in ICs but par-
ticularly for the newer areas of MEMS and NEMS, 
which add a more prominent z-dimension to parts. 
These three-dimensional parts require metrology 
tools that can measure in three dimensions. Most 
available tools are two-dimensional (2D) in nature, 
and measurements are made on the top or bottom 
of the microcomponent and use an algorithm to pro-
vide a pseudo-3D image (2.5D in reality), as often 
no sidewall information is available.
We cannot detail all tools that are available for 
dimensional metrology and limit ourselves to a 
review of light microscopes (including dark-field, 
light-field, phase contrast, and fluorescence), scan-
ning confocal and two-photon microscopy, white 
light interferometry, scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM), NSOM, STMs, AFMs, and ellipsometry.
Light Microscopy
Since the resolution of the human eye is limited to 
about 100 micrometers, microscopes have always 
been the engines for new discoveries. Optical 
microscopy (OM) is usually what one thinks of 
when studying microscopy; this is also where we 
are starting our discussion. It was in 1590 that the 
Dutch spectacle-makers Hans Janssen and his son 
Zacharias Janssen invented a compound micro-
scope with a magnification of ×3 to ×9. Robert 
Hooke, in 1665, published Micrographia, a collection 
of biological micrographs and he coined the word 
cell for the structures he observed in cork bark. In 
1674 Anton van Leeuwenhoek improved on a sim-
ple microscope for viewing biological specimens 
and discovered bacteria (from tooth scrapings), pro-
tozoans (from pond water—he called them animal-
cules), sperm (his own, we presume), and blood cells 
(magnification of × 270). In Table 6.3, a brief history 
of microscopy is provided. The table includes light 
microscopy as well as electron microscopy, proxi-
mal probe microscopy, and near field superlenses.
TABLE 6.1 Metrology Equipment for Integrated Circuits, Microelectromechanical Systems, and 
Nanoelectromechanical Systems (Continued)
Examples
Abbreviation
Metrology for chemical 
composition (IV)
Auger electron spectroscopy
AES
Energy dispersive analysis of x-rays
EDAX or EDS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
XPS
Photoemission electron microscopy: lateral R = ~100 nm
PEEM
Secondary ion mass spectroscopy 
SIMS
Mass spectrometry
MS
Rutherford back scattering
RBS
X-ray fluorescence 
XRF
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
NMR
Photoluminescence spectroscopy 
PL
Cathodoluminescence spectroscopy 
CL
Raman spectroscopy 
RAMAN
Infrared spectroscopy
IR, FTIR
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
NMR
Photoluminescence spectroscopy 
PL
Neutron activation analysis
NAA
Ultraviolet / visible spectroscopy
UV/VIS
R, resolution.

[Page 290]
290   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 6.2 Metrology for Integrated Circuits (ICs), Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS), and 
Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS)
Spot Size or 
Probe Area
Resolution/ 
Magnification
Thickness 
Range
Applications
Remarks  
(n = Refractive 
Index)
Reflection 
spectroscopy 
(visible: 400–900 
nm)
3.5–50 μm
40 Å to 
5 μm
Nonabsorbing 
films.
Limit measures 
below 100 Å, n 
measures only 
above 700 Å. Fast.
Reflection 
spectroscopy 
(UV: 200–400 nm)
10 μm
25 Å to 
2 μm
Transparent very 
thin films on 
metals.
Limit measures 
below 50 Å, n 
measures only 
above 100 Å.
Ellipsometry (632.8 
nm standard), 790, 
830, 1,300, and 
1,500 nm (optional)
12–100 μm
1–2 μm
10–1,000 Å
Nonabsorbing 
films.
Automated, highest 
accuracy. Thickness 
and n 
measurements.
Optical microscopes
Magnification 10–1,000
0.3–0 5 μm
Universal tool for 
all dimensions > 
0.29 μm.
Poor depth of field.
Scanning electron 
microscope (SEM)
Spots down 
to 10–30 Å
Lateral: –35 Å (standard 
SEM); –9 Å (field-
emission SEM); –150 Å 
(low-voltage SEM); 
magnification is 
20–150,000
SEM pictures, CD 
measures below 
0.8 μm.
Good for surface 
topography. Large 
depth of focus. 
Needs vacuum. 
Can be destructive.
Transmission 
electron 
microscope (TEM)
10 Å
1–2 Å (resolving power 
104 times better than 
optical microscope). 
Magnification is 
500–500,000
10 Å to 
1 μm
Atomic structure 
defect analysis 
nanoprobe.
Requires thin 
sample 
preparation.
Scanning acoustic 
microscopy
1.3 mm 
(50 MHz)
Lateral: 10 nm to 2 mm 
Depth: 10 nm to 5 mm
Signal 
pene 
trates 1λ
Inspection inside a 
ceramic 
packaged IC. 
Interface 
inspection, wide 
range of samples.
Nondestructive. 
Subsurface 
information. 
Needs liquid 
medium.
Stylus profilometer
Tip size limits 
bandwidth
Resolution of better 
than 1 Å and lateral 
resolution of ~0.03 mm
Measures sharp 
steps from a 
few angstroms 
to several 
micrometers. 
Materials and 
process R&D, 
low volume QC.
Measures surface 
profile using a 
contact stylus. May 
damage soft 
samples.
Nomarski 
microscope 
(differential 
interference 
contrast)
0.3 μm
Separation of 
images of 
different layers. 
Sample 
roughness 
inspection.
Pseudo-three-
dimensional 
image.
Confocal laser 
scanning 
microscope (CLSM)
0.3 μm
0.3 μm
<1 μm
Cross-sectioning. 
Independent 
layer imaging.
Nondestructive. No 
vacuum. Diffraction 
limit resolution.
Atomic force 
microscope (AFM)
Radius of 
curvature of 
probe tip: 
50–100 Å
Atomic imaging (one 
atom)
<1 Å
Surface 
roughness. 
Tribology.
Slow scan. Probe 
tip wear. Non-
destructive.

[Page 291]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   291
TABLE 6.2 Metrology for Integrated Circuits (ICs), Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS), and 
Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS) (Continued)
Spot Size or 
Probe Area
Resolution/ 
Magnification
Thickness 
Range
Applications
Remarks  
(n = Refractive 
Index)
Total integrated 
scattering
With visible light 0.15 
μm is possible
Lithography 
control, etch 
structure 
monitoring and 
metal grain size 
determination.
Nondestructive, 
rapid quantitative 
process monitor.
Scanning tunneling 
microscope
50–100 Å
Lateral: 0.1–1 nm  
Depth: 0.1 nm
Atomic 
resolution. 
measurement of 
chemical 
properties.
Sample must be 
conduct. Slow 
scan. Probe wear. 
Cannot measure 
surfaces larger 
than a few μm2.
Optical interference 
microscope
Lateral: 0.2–2 μm 
Depth: 400 μm to 2 cm
Cross-sectioning.
Lateral resolution 
limited by 
diffraction.
Near-field scanning 
optical microscope
0.02–4 μm 
Depth: 10 nm
Lateral: 1–200 nm
General imaging. 
Lithography.
No vacuum.
See also http://www.mwrn.com/product/product.htmt
Auger electron spectroscopy
10
(%)
1
1
1000
(ppma)
Concentration
Depth
Analytical spot size
(ppba)
100
100
10
10
Analytical spot size
AES
1000
100
100
10
10
1Å
XPS
AES
TEM
SIMS
R
B
S
TXRF
XRF
FTIR
NAA
EMP
RAMAN
SAM
1Å
10
10
100
100
1000
1000
1000
100
10
10
1Å
1 m
1000
100
1 cm
1 m
1 m
1000
Electron microprobe
Fourier transform infrared
Neutron activation analysis
Raman spectroscopy
Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
Secondary ion mass spectrometry
Scanning auger microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy
Total reﬂection x-ray ﬂuorescence
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
X-ray ﬂuorescence
EMP
FTIR
NAA
RAMAN
RBS
SIMS
SAM
TEM
TXRF
XPS
XRF
FIGURE 6.2 Comparison of analytical techniques: detection limits, sampling depth, and spot size. (Courtesy of 
Dr. Shaffner, National Institute of Standards and Technology.)

[Page 292]
292   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 6.3 Seeing Better and Better
Year
Researcher
Discovery/Instrument
1590
Hans and Zacharias Janssen
First compound microscope, magnification × 3 and × 9
1590–1609
Galileo
One of the earliest microscopists; came up with the term 
microscope
1660
Marcello Malpighi
Father of embryology and early histology-observed blood 
capillaries
1665
Robert Hooke 
Publishes the book Micrographia with the study of thin 
slices of cork 
1674
Anton van Leeuwenhook
Microscope with ×275 magnification
 
Location of
specimen
Lens
CENTIMETERS
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1827
Robert Brown
While examining pollen grains and the spores of mosses 
suspended in water under a microscope, Brown observed 
minute particles within vacuoles in the pollen grains 
executing a continuous jittery motion.
1860s
Ernst Abbe
(1840-1905)
The Abbe sine condition: intrinsic diffraction limit
1926
Jean Baptiste Perrin
After Albert Einstein published his theoretical explanation 
of Brownian motion in terms of atoms (1905), Perrin did 
the experimental work to test Einstein’s predictions, 
thereby settling the century-long dispute about John 
Dalton’s atomic theory.
1931
Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll
The first electron microscope [a transmission electron 
microscope (TEM)]
1935
Frits Zernike
The phase contrast microscope
1936
Erwin Müller
The field emission microscope (FEM)
1951
Erwin Müller
The field ion microscope (FIM). Müller published his historic 
first FIM paper describing the significant improvement in 
contrast and resolution brought about by imaging with 
positive (hydrogen) ions compared with imaging by FEM 
and presenting the first evidence that atomic resolution 
was achieved.

[Page 293]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   293
The first lenses were made in about 1000 AD, 
and spectacles came about around 1200 AD. From 
Table 6.3, it is obvious that optical microscopes 
have come a long way since van Leeuwenhoek’s 
animalcules (1674), Brown’s observation of mov-
ing pollen grains (Brownian motion) (1827), and 
Jean Perrin’s demonstration of Einstein’s proof that 
atoms really do exist (1926 Nobel Prize for Physics) 
by observing the distribution of particles undergo-
ing Brownian motion. Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll 
invented the electron microscope in 1931, interest-
ingly; at first they were working with the electron 
as a particle concept. But as de Broglie showed, the 
wavelength of an electron is 100,000 times smaller 
than the smallest wavelength of light, small enough 
to allow for 2.2-Å resolution. That type of resolu-
tion was only achieved forty years after Ruska and 
Knoll’s breakthrough, and by the 1970s, research-
ers were able to visualize individual proteins and 
DNA molecules.
Microscopy helps to describe the size and struc-
ture of samples. This information is often critical for 
understanding the mechanisms of forming the sam-
ple or of the observed performance of the material. 
A very important question to ask regarding a micro-
scope is about its ultimate resolution: what is the 
smallest feature size that it can resolve? Resolution is 
usually different when comparing lateral resolution 
(resolution in the plane of the sample) and vertical 
resolution. One also needs to know the dynamic 
range of the instrument. Techniques that have a high 
resolution often are not able to image large objects 
or feature sizes that vary over several orders of mag-
nitude (they have a small field of view).
Roughly speaking, the lateral resolution of an opti-
cal microscope is limited to Abbe’s limit, about 1/2 of 
the wavelength of the light being diffracted through 
the optical lensing elements of the microscope [i.e., 
Abbe’s formula: R = λ/2NA, with NA
n
max
=
sinθ
 (see 
Volume I, Equations 5.6 and 5.3)]. In theory, the R 
using visible light (shortest wavelength is 400 nm) 
and the best numerical aperture (NA) (1.4) is about 
200 nm, but in practice it is challenging to get good 
optical resolution down to the 1-µm range. Based 
on Abbe’s formula, the lateral R of a microscope can 
be improved by working at shorter wavelengths, 
λ, by using a higher aperture lens (Figure 6.3) and 
TABLE 6.3 Seeing Better and Better (Continued)
Year
Researcher
Discovery/Instrument
1957
Marvin Minsky
Confocal microscope
1967
Erwin Müller (the same Müller)
The first atom probe, also known as the atom probe field 
ion microscope, incorporates FIM capability to give an 
atomic map of the specimen surface, by means of which 
the user selects atoms for chemical identification by 
time-of-flight mass spectrometry.
1981
G. Binnig, H. Rohrer
The scanning tunneling microscope (STM)
1984
Pohl
Near-field optical microscope
1986
Binnig, Quate, Gerber
The atomic force microscope (AFM)
1988
A. Cerezo, T. Godfrey, G. Smith
Added a position-sensitive detector to the atom probe → 3D
1988
Kingo Itaya
The electrochemical scanning tunneling microscope
1991
M. Nonnenmacher, 
M. P. O’Boyle, and 
H. K. Wickramasinghe
Kelvin probe force microscope is the Kelvin mode of 
scanning probe microscopy; it measures contact potential 
difference between the probe and the sample.
2003
Zhang 
Silver near-field superlens
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 6.3 Increasing numerical aperture (NA) of the 
lens from (a) to (c). As NA increases, the acceptance angle 
increases and the Airy disc decreases.

[Page 294]
294   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
in a medium with a higher index of refraction (n) 
(Figure 6.4). A larger NA means that the lens has a 
larger acceptance angle, so it can collect higher orders 
of diffracted light enhancing the resolution of the 
image. Working with oil between sample and objec-
tive lens, in so-called oil immersion microscopy, ensures 
a better capture of all diffracted wavelengths. The 
refractive index n (1.0 in air, 1.33 in water, and 1.55 
in immersion oil) is the light-bending ability of a 
medium. The light coming from a sample under the 
microscope may bend in air so much that it misses 
the small, high-magnification lens. Immersion oil is 
used to keep light from bending too far.
The Abbe imaging resolution is a theoretical limit. 
Light passing through a circular aperture interferes 
with itself, creating ring-shaped diffraction patterns, 
known as Airy patterns, that blur the image (Volume I, 
Figures 5.13 and 5.14), and the Rayleigh crite rion, which 
takes these Airy patterns into account, yields a mini-
mum spatial resolution as follows:
 
R
0.61 
NA
=
λ  
(Volume I, Equation 5.13)
Objective lenses in a microscope are designed 
to correct for aberrations: achromats are the lowest 
level of correction, and apochromats, are the highest 
and most sophisticated. Eyepieces can have a reti-
cle (graticle) etched inside to impose a scale on an 
image for measurement purposes. Light microscopy 
often is divided up into bright-field, dark-field, phase 
contrast, and fluorescence microscopy. In Figure 6.5 
we illustrate bright-field (Figure 6.5a), dark-field 
(Figure 6.5b), and phase-contrast microscopy (Figure 
6.5c). In bright-field microscopy, dark objects are 
Unrefracted
light
Oil immersion
objective lens
Without immersion o
most light is refracted
and lost
Glass slide
Air
Condenser
lenses
Iris diaphragm
Light source
Condenser
Immersion oil
FIGURE 6.4 Oil immersion microscopy: increasing the 
refractive index of the medium (n).
Eye
Eye
Eye
Ocular lens
Diﬀraction plate
Undiﬀracted light
(unaltered by specimen)
Objective lens
Refracted or diﬀracted
light (altered by
specimen)
Specimen
Condenser lens
Annular diaphragm
Only light reﬂected
by the specimen is
captured by the
objective lens
Unreﬂected light
Opaque disc
Ocular lens
Objective lens
Specimen
Condenser lens
Light
Light
Light
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 6.5 Comparison of (a) bright-field, (b) dark-field, and (c) phase-microscopy of a protozoa. 

[Page 295]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   295
made visible against a bright background, and in 
dark-field microscopy, light objects are made visible 
against a dark background. In bright-field illumina-
tion, light reflected off the sample does not enter the 
objective lens, whereas in dark field it does.
The human eye does not see phase changes in a 
light beam directly. This is unfortunate, as phase 
changes carry a large amount of additional infor-
mation about a sample. To make a phase change 
visible, one needs to combine the light passing 
through the sample with a reference so that the 
resulting inter ference reveals the phase informa-
tion of the sample. In phase-contrast microscopy, 
one uses an annular transparent phase plate* so that 
the change in phase of light that passes through the 
sample is increased by shifting back ¼ wavelength 
relative to the background, while background light 
is shifted forward ¼ wavelength. When the waves 
recombine they produce a ½-wavelength shift, 
resulting in excellent contrast. The phase con-
trast microscope converts these phase changes to 
changes in brightness that the eye can see. A dif-
ferential interference contrast (DIC) microscope, 
also known as a Nomarski microscope, is similar to 
a phase contrast microscope in that imaging again 
produces amplitude difference from phase differ-
ences in the specimen. The Nomarski microscope 
uses polarized light and emphasis differences in 
the refractive index of transparent samples. This 
gives relief to a sample corresponding to the varia-
tion of optical density. In Figure 6.6, we show a 
standard light microscope (Olympus BH2).
In Table 6.4, we compare the resolution of vari-
ous types of optical microscopes. For a discussion of 
NSOM, see below.
Vibration is a fundamental problem in all micros-
copy experiments. Buildings vibrate because of 
motors, air conditioners, passing vehicles, etc. Vibra-
tions blur images since the excitation, detection, and 
sample regions of the microscopes may move with 
respect to each other during the course of the experi-
ment. Most  buildings have vibrational resonances in 
the 1–100 Hz range and feature amplitudes in the 
* Rings in a phase plate can include attenuating layers (absorption but 
no phase shift), phase-shifting layers (phase shift but no absorp-
tion), or any combination of the two. 
micro meter range. The effect of vibrations is mitigated 
by constructing the microscope on stages connected 
to each other either very rigidly or very loosely. The 
rigid connections permit the transmission of only 
high-frequency vibrations, while the loose connec-
tions permit only low-frequency vibrations. Compare 
this with the implementation of high-pass and low-
pass filters in optics or electronics. Often, this filter-
ing is achieved by building the microscope to be as 
small and rigid as possible and then mounting the 
entire system on pneumatically supported legs that 
couple only loosely to the building. Sometimes an 
additional stage using soft springs is included. While 
these procedures reduce mechanical vibration, acous-
tical vibrations may still couple to the microscope and 
circumvent these vibration isolation stages. Including 
a surrounding of acoustic-absorbing material is often 
necessary for the best microscopy work.
Light Microscopy Summary
Optical microscopes have the great advantages of 
being fast, in situ,† and nondestructive. Test parts 
usually do not have to be modified [e.g., coated with a 
conductive material, as in scanning electron micros-
copy (SEM)] from their original form/ condition. 
Quantitation in light microscopy may be achieved 
with a reticle etched into one of the eyepieces. 
Images can be registered on film or, better, recorded 
electronically to a charge-coupled device (CCD) 
camera. Optical microscopes tend to be repeatable 
for features as small as 0.25 µm. Optical metrology 
hardware has a resolution that is diffraction limited, 
and it has a poor ability to produce images with 
clear intensity changes to accurately detect edges. 
Often locating the edge of a part is quite difficult, as 
location varies with lighting condition, noise, and 
assumptions made in the edge position algorithm.2 
Other significant errors of optical techniques typi-
cally stem from interference, resonance, shadow-
ing, secondary reflections, and lens distortions. 
Perhaps the most important limitation of optical 
† In situ experiment: an experiment performed on a sample while it 
is still located in its native environment. With an in situ measure-
ment, there is less risk of altering the sample’s true properties. Ex situ 
experiment: an experiment performed on a sample after it has been 
removed from the location wherein it was formed. A wider range of 
experimental techniques are available.

[Page 296]
296   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
microscopes for MEMS inspection is the inability 
to acquire true three-dimensional data. Some opti-
cal microscopes are integrated with software that 
uses image-processing techniques to determine the 
z-height at which the image is taking place. The cur-
rent state-of-the-art software uses a projected grid (a 
Ronchi grid) to determine the height at which the 
microscope is focused in one region of the image. 
If the region selected has multiple focus points (i.e., 
the region selected is not all on one plane), the algo-
rithm assigns the average value for the z-height. 
Further edge detection algorithms are run to extract 
x and y data from the microscope image. This tech-
nique, in theory, produces three-dimensional data 
from an image; however, the algorithms used after 
finding the z-height in one location of the image 
assume that all of the data are on the same plane. 
Thus, the data acquired from vision systems such as 
these can be characterized as 2.5D data sets.2
A good Web site for an introduction to opti-
cal microscopes can be found at http://www. oly 
 mpusmicro.com/primer/opticalmicroscopy.html. 
Also visit http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/index.html 
and go through the tutorials—they are excellent!
Fluorescence Microscopy
In BIOMEMS, fluorescence microscopy is a most 
important tool by which to study cells, DNA arrays, 
tissue, etc. It is used to study properties of samples 
TABLE 6.4 Resolution of Various Types of Optical 
Microscopes
Objective 
(Magnification/
Numerical Aperture)
Illumination
Resolution 
(μm)
×10/0.25
White light
1.34
×20/0.40
White light
0.84
×100/0.95
White light
0.35
×100/0.95
488 nm, confocal
0.22
×100/1.35 (with 
glycerin immersion)
248 nm (UV)
<0.16 
Optical fiber 
(scanning near-field 
optical microscopy; 
values down to 10 
nm have been 
reported)
488 nm
0.05
Automatic
rewind
camera
back
Focusing
reticule
Focusing
telescope
Eyepiece Extension
tube
Measuring
reticule
Beamsplitter
Objectives
mounted in
revolving
nosepiece
Mechanical
X-Y stage
Condenser
Field lens
Field diaphragm
Base
Arm
Prisms
Trinocular
head
Projection
eyepiece
Light sensor
Automatic
exposure
metering
system
Electrical
contacts
Film
plane
Stand
Coarse/ﬁne
focusing
knobs
Lamphouse
Reﬂector
Lamp
Collector
lens
Heat
ﬁlter
Diﬀuser
Stabilizing
foot
(a)
(b)
Mirror
Color
balance
ﬁlter
FIGURE 6.6 (a) A standard light microscope (Olympus BH2 research microscope). (b) First place winner, Nikon’s Small 
World 2005 competition: Charles B. Krebs, muscoid fly (house fly) (× 6.25), reflected light.

[Page 297]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   297
using the phenomena of fluorescence and phos-
phorescence (see Volume I, Chapter 7). Samples 
are labeled with dyes that emit visible light when 
bombarded with shorter ultraviolet (UV) rays (see 
Volume I, Figure 7.93). A fluorescence microscope is 
an optical microscope with an ultraviolet radiation 
source and a filter that protects the viewer’s eye. The 
filter that the microscope uses is a special dichroic 
mirror (or more precisely, a dichromatic mirror). 
This mirror reflects light shorter than a certain wave-
length and passes light longer than that wavelength. 
Thus the observer sees only the emitted red light 
from the fluorescent dye, rather than seeing scat-
tered purple light. Most fluorescence microscopes 
are epifluorescence, i.e., excitation and observation 
of the fluorescence is from above (epi). In reflected 
light fluorescence, the intensity of the image, I, varies 
directly as the fourth power of the numerical aper-
ture (NA) of the objective in use, as well as inversely 
as the square of the magnification, M:
 
I
(NA)
(M)
4
2

 
(6.1) 
e.g., a ×40 objective with an NA of 1 will yield 
images more than a five times brighter than a ×40 
objective with a NA of 0.65. Electronic sensors (e.g., 
a CCD) are typically used to measure the intensity, 
as they give a much higher sensitivity than film. To 
avoid fading of the fluorophore labels, a phenome non 
known as photobleaching, the UV light intensity and 
duration need to be carefully chosen. In Figure 6.7 
we show a typical fluorescence microscope.
Confocal Microscopy
Normally, in fluorescence microscopy, the sample is 
completely illuminated by the excitation light, so that 
the whole sample is fluorescing at the same time. The 
highest intensity of the excitation light is at the focal 
point of the lens, but nonetheless, the other parts 
of the sample do get some of this light and they do 
fluoresce as well.* This contributes to a background 
haze in the resulting fluorescence image. To get rid of 
this haze and make for a sharper image, one resorts 
to confocal microscopy. In such a microscope, pat-
ented in 1957 by Marvin Minsky (see inset in Figure 
6.9), one places a small pinhole in a conjugate opti-
cal plane in front of the detector to eliminate out-
* From introductory optics, we remember the formula 1/s + 1/s’ = 1/f 
for locating the image formed by a lens: points do not need to be at 
the focal point of the lens in order for the lens to form an image.
Film plane
Electrical contacts
Automatic
exposure
monitor
Light
sensor
Projection
eyepiece
Trinocular
head
Prisms
Vertical
illuminator
Apertures
Shutter
Cooling
vents
Episcopic
lamphouse
Lamp
Collector
lens
Fan
Microscope
control
circuit
board
Diascopic
lamphouse
Line
cord
Transformer
Collector
lens
Focus
knob
Filters
Mirror
Illumination
intensity
adjustment
(a)
Base
Field
diaphragm
Condenser
Mechanical
stage
Objective
Nose-
piece
Breathshield
Dichroic filters
Filters cube
turret
Beamsplitters
Eyepiece
(ocular)
Rubber
eyecup
Shutter
Lenses
Extension
tube
Camera
black box
Focusing
telescope
Olympus
BX 51
transmitted
and
reflected light
microscope
equipped
for
epi-fluorescence
illumination
(b)
FIGURE 6.7 (a) Typical epifluorescence microscope. (b) Olympus Fluoview 300 LSM.

[Page 298]
298   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
of-focus light (Figure 6.9). Because the focal point of 
the objective lens of the microscope forms an image 
where the pinhole is, these two points are known 
as conjugate points. The pinhole is conjugate to the 
focal point of the lens; thus, it is a confocal pinhole 
(or alternatively, the sample plane and the pinhole/
screen are conjugate planes). Only light from the plane 
of focus will pass through the pinhole, so that the 
image quality is much better than that of wide-field 
images. Since only one point is illuminated at a time, 
2D or 3D imaging requires that a focused laser beam 
be scanned across the field of view and the image be 
reconstructed electronically. This type of microscopy 
is called confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM), as it 
combines a confocal microscope with a scanning sys-
tem in order to image an entire specimen. Although 
scanning can be performed in several different ways, 
it is most often done by moving the beam, which 
alleviates focus problems caused by objective lens 
scanning and is faster than specimen scanning. With 
a scanning system added, the system has the ability 
to scan multiple times on different imaging planes, 
resulting in a three- dimensional data set.
In confocal microscopy, the background rejec-
tion is thus substantially improved and the method 
allows for optical sectioning; moreover, the lat-
eral and axial extent of the point spread function 
(see Volume I, Figure 5.12) is reduced by about 30% 
compared with that in a wide-field microscope. 
As a consequence, focal plane lateral resolution 
is improved by a factor of 1.5 over ordinary micro-
scopy for incoherent imaging (Rayleigh limit or 
R = 0.61 λ/NA; Volume I, Equation 5.13), as follows:
 
R
NA
xy
emission
= 0 4
. λ
 
(6.2)
The vertical depth resolution of a confocal micro-
scope enables optical sectioning and is poorer than 
the lateral resolution:
 
R
n
NA
z
emission
2
= 1 4
. λ
 
(6.3)
For typical objectives (NA ≤ 1.4) and visible light 
(λ ≥ 400 nm), the best lateral resolution is Rxy = 
0.13 µm and the vertical resolution is Rz = 0.43 µm, 
so that the depth discrimination is not comparable 
to the focal plane resolution.
Work has been done to use CLSM to perform 3D 
analysis of microstructures such as micro end mills 
and hot embossing tools, both with overall dimen-
sions on the order of 1 mm3. One of the most impor-
tant advantages of confocal microscopy found is the 
ability of this microscope to measure steep slopes, 
up to almost 90° on a part with minimal surface 
roughness. This measurement requires a high-reso-
lution, high-NA objective, which has a limited lateral 
measuring field unsuitable for measuring the entire 
sample. Because of this, a stitching procedure is used 
to combine scans taken with several objectives.
Two-Photon Microscopy
Using two-photon confocal microscopy further 
enhances the resolution of fluorescence microscopy. 
Multiphoton fluorescence microscopy is a relatively 
novel imaging technique that relies on the quasisi-
multaneous absorption of two or more photons (of 
either the same or different energies) by a  molecule 
(see also quantum lithography in Volume  II, 
Chapter 2). Two-photon microscopy was pioneered 
by Winfried Denk in the laboratory of Watt Webb at 
Cornell University.4 He combined the idea of two-
photon absorption with the use of a laser scanner.
The use of two-photon absorption has several 
important advantages. First, the probability of two-
photon absorption increases quadratically with illu-
mination intensity, essentially limiting excitation 
to a tiny focal volume (see Figure 6.8). This limits 
automatically out-of-focus background excitation 
and provides innate confocality, since only fluoro-
phores in the plane of the focused beam are excited. 
One obvious benefit of this is to obviate the need for 
the confocal aperture in front of the detector used 
in one-photon confocal microscopy, maximizing the 
amount of light detected. Second, the use of longer 
wavelength excitation light slows the rate of photo-
bleaching of the fluorescent labels on the sample, 
allowing the use of higher magnification objectives. 
Third, longer wavelength light is scattered less as it 
passes through a sample such as biological tissue, 
resulting in a greater penetration depth into the 
sample. These factors increase both the resolution 
and duration of measurement available with this 
technique. Fourth, the fact that two-photon excita-
tion microscopy does not require a pinhole to obtain 

[Page 299]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   299
three-dimensional resolution allows more flexibility 
in detection geometry. Two-photon microscopy is 
thus a novel form of laser-based scanning micros-
copy that allows three-dimensional imaging and 
avoids many of the problems inherent in confocal 
microscopy.
In Figure 6.9 we compare confocal  microscopy with 
laser scanning two-photon microscopy. Res olution 
limits of quantum lithography were analyzed in 
Volume II, Chapter 2. The results derived there directly 
apply to two-photon microscopy discussed here.
Interferometry
Another powerful method for MEMS part inspec-
tion is scanning white light interferometry (SWLI), 
also called noncontact profilometry. Interferometry, a 
method to determine a point in space on the basis 
of phase differences between a reflected probe 
beam and an isolated reference beam, has long 
been used by various industries as one of the most 
accurate ways to profile a surface. In Figure 6.10 
and the example below, we illustrate how a typical 
interferometer can be used to measure distances in a 
number of wavelengths or to mea sure wavelengths. 
A Michelson interferometer, the particular two-path 
interferometer shown here, is constructed using a 
beam-splitter, i.e., a partially silvered mirror that 
transmits and reflects half of the incident intensity. 
This is useful because the reflected and transmitted 
beams are coherent, i.e., they have a definite common 
phase, even when the incident light has a time-
varying random phase. This interferometer allows a 
1-photon excitation
(a)
(b)
2-photon excitation
1
Z2
Z
Constant
FIGURE 6.8 One-photon (a) and two-photon (b) excitation.
Detector
(position not
critical)
Illuminating
aperture
Illuminating
aperture
Scan engine
Scan engine
Specimen
stage
Specimen
stage
CW
laser
Mode-locked
ti:sapphire
laser
Beamsplitter
Beamsplitter
In-focus light
Out-of-focus light
Confocal setup
2-photon setup
Confocal aperture
(position critical)
Detector
Prof. Marvin Minsky:
This is what I remember about inventing the confocal scanning microscope in 1955. When I read the following account,
the plot seems more coherent now than it ever did in those times of the past. Perhaps, though, those activities  which
seemed to me the most spontaneous were actually those which unconsciously were managed the most methodically.
The story actually begins in childhood …
Inset
FIGURE 6.9 Comparison of a confocal microscope with a two-photon microscope. Inset, Marvin Minsky remembering 
the confocal microscope.

[Page 300]
300   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
beam of light to be sent along two paths, reflected, 
and recombined so that it can interfere. Reflection 
from a surface produces a “phase-flip” of 180° in the 
reflected light. However, when light is reflected at 
an angle other than 180°, the phase change in the 
reflected light is the same as the reflection angle. 
Thus, light reflected at 90° has a 90° change in 
phase. If the interferometer is set for an interference 
maximum, a new maximum will occur each time 
one of the arms is moved by λ/2.
Example 6.1 (Dr. J. G. Cramer): 
Measuring Wavelengths
Question: An experimenter uses the Michelson 
interferometer shown in Figure 6.10 to measure 
one of the wavelengths of light emitted by elec-
trically excited neon atoms. She slowly moves the 
mirror M2 and uses a photo-detector and a com-
puter to determine that 10,000 new bright central 
spots have appeared. She then determines with a 
micrometer that the mirror has moved 3.164 mm. 
What is the wavelength of the light?
 Answer: λ =
=
=
2
2 0 003164
632 8
Δ
Δ
L
m
m)
(10,000)
nm
2
( .
.
If the wavelength is known, then of course a dis-
tance can be determined.
In SWLI, recombined light is directed to image 
plane of a CCD camera. Points on a surface that are 
separated from the lens by an integer number of wave-
lengths are bright and those a half-integer apart are 
dark. Interference is strong only when the reflected 
light is in focus i.e., the sample-lens distance is at the 
focal position. The sample-lens distance is scanned 
around the focal length and ach pixel of the CCD will 
show a strong intensity change when the lens reaches 
the focal position corresponding to each point on the 
surface. High-resolution position information comes 
from a linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) 
connected to the lens scanning drive.
SWLI has the ability to quickly measure step 
heights changes and deflections (see also mechani-
cal property measurements, below): it is possible to 
resolve step height changes greater than λ/4. Using 
white light increases the dynamic range of the mea-
surement and allows for higher resolution by com-
paring data from multiple wavelengths. In addition, 
when integrated with an image processing system, 
SWLI can provide lateral dimensions. By using image 
processing, line widths, diameters, and feature posi-
tions can be measured as well. However, the lateral 
resolution of commercially available systems is poor, 
except when equipped with high-power objectives 
that severely limit the field of view. Moreover, these 
tools are limited in their ability to measure sloped 
surfaces. Indeed, interference can occur only if light 
is reflected back into the objective lens. If the surface 
angle is inclined beyond the acceptance angle of the 
lens, no interference is observed. The largest slope 
that can be identified is typically around 30° with 
a × 100 objective. As the objective power decreases, 
the identifiable slopes also decrease.
In practice, white light interferometers have sub-
nanometer resolution in the scanning direction, at 
best submicrometer resolution in the lateral direc-
tions, and can be used on a multitude of parts with 
different surface finishes. A typical instrument, from 
Wyko, is shown in Figure 6.11. The equipment shown 
measures surface features with 0.45–11.8-μm lateral 
resolution and an approximately 0.10-nm vertical 
resolution. Although initially developed mostly for 
surface characterization, such as surface roughness, 
SWLI is currently used to make a wide variety of 
other measurements on MEMS parts.
Mirror M1
Mirror M2
Source
Beam splitter
Adjustment
screw
L2
L1
1. Te wave is
 divided at
 this point.
2. Te returning
 waves recombine
 at this point.
3. Te detector measures
 the superposition of the
 two waves that have
 traveled diﬀerent paths.
FIGURE 6.10 A Michelson interferometer. John G. Cramer, 
Professor of Physics, University of Washington.

[Page 301]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   301
Ellipsometry
Introduction
Fresnel derived the equations that determine the 
reflection/transmission coefficients of light at inter-
faces in the early nineteenth century, and Paul Drude 
invented ellipsometry, based on these equations, in 
1887. Ellipsometry is a noncontact optical technique 
used for analysis and metrology and became very 
important in the 1960s, as it was demonstrated to 
have the sensitivity required to measure nanometer-
scale thin films used in microelectronics. 
Ellipsometry allows one to establish very accu-
rately and with high reproducibility the complex 
dielectric function of a given material. In Volume 
I, Chapter 3, we saw how the dielectric function is 
dependent on both frequency (ω) and wave-vector 
k: ε (ω,  k). In ellipsometry, one determines the 
change in polarization state of light reflected from 
a sample. This polarization change is represented 
as an amplitude ratio, Ψ, and a phase difference, Δ. 
Since ellipsometry is measuring the ratio (or differ-
ence) of two values (rather than the absolute value 
of either), it is very robust, accurate, and reproduc-
ible. For instance, it is relatively insensitive to scatter 
and fluctuations and requires no standard sample 
or reference beam. The measured response depends 
on optical properties and thickness of individual 
materials. Transparent films from subnanometers 
up to several micrometers can be measured, and the 
surface upon which the film is measured can be a 
semiconductor, dielectric or metal. The film can be 
transparent or absorbing on a transparent or opaque 
substrate as long as there is enough contrast between 
substrate and film. It is a model-based technique 
that, besides being used to determine film thickness 
and optical constants, can be employed to charac-
terize composition, crystallinity, roughness, and 
doping level—in short, all material properties that 
can change the optical characteristics. In Figure 6.12 
we illustrate a typical ellipsometer setup.
FIGURE 6.11 Optical Wyko white-light profilometers with 
dynamic microelectromechanical system capability. This 
capability enables both in-plane and out-of-plane reso-
nant frequency measurements.
Detector
Analyzer
Sample
Polarizer
Interferometer
Elliptically-polarized light
rs
rp
Ψ
1. Relative attenuation of s- and p-polarized
 
light determines tilt of ellipse
2. Relative phase shift of s- and p-polarized
 
light is related to ellipcicity of ellipse
(a)
Synchrotron
Light source
(b)
FIGURE 6.12 Schematic (a) and photograph (b) of an ellipsometer. The ellipsometer measures polarization changes in 
terms of two parameters: Δ (sometimes cosΔ) and Ψ.

[Page 302]
302   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
From the schematic in Figure 6.12a, we see that a 
first polarizer linearly polarizes incident light with 
finite field components in the directions parallel 
(p-component) and perpendicular (s-component) 
to the plane of incidence of the light. The plane of 
incidence of light is the plane containing the sur-
face that is normal to the sample and the incident 
direction of light. The wavelength of the measuring 
polarized light can range from the ultraviolet to the 
far- infrared. (In Figure 6.12a, a synchrotron light 
source is used in order to obtain a high-enough 
intensity of far-infrared light.) Upon reflection, the 
s- and p-components of the light undergo different 
attenuations and phase shifts, resulting in ellip-
tically polarized reflected light, giving the tech-
nique its name. The ellipse of polarization of the 
reflected light is measured with a second polarizer 
(called the analyzer), as illustrated in Figure 6.12a.
Theory
When light interacts with a material, the Maxwell 
equations remain satisfied by imposing the proper 
boundary conditions at the interface (see Volume I, 
Table 5.2). At an interface a portion of light reflects, 
and the remainder transmits at the refracted angle 
(see Volume I, Figure 5.36). It is relatively easy to 
measure reflectance, R, of a material, and from this 
the more difficult-to-access complex refractive index, 
nc, can be derived. The values for the refractive index, 
n, and extinction coefficient, κ, which make up the 
complex refractive index nc, are not independent but 
are linked by the Kramers-Kronig relations. Either 
of these equations, plus a knowledge of R(ω) at all 
frequencies, permits one to disentangle the separate 
values of n(ω) and κ(ω).
With reference to Volume I, Figure 5.38, we 
obtained the four amplitude coefficients (the Fresnel 
equations) as follows:
 
r(ω)|| = 
E
E
tan (
tan (
m
r
m
i
i
t
i
t
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
−
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
||
θ
θ
θ
θ
)
)
|| 
(Volume I, Equation 5.140)
 
r(ω)⊥ = 
E
E
sin (
sin (
m
r
m
i
i
t
i
t
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
−
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
⊥
⊥
 
θ
θ
θ
θ
)
)
(Volume I, Equation 5.141)
 
t(ω)|| = E
E
m
t
m
i
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
||
θ
θ
θ + θ
θ −
2sin cos
sin(
)
t
i
i
t
i
cos(
θ
||
t)
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
(Volume I, Equation 5.142)
 
t(ω)⊥ = 
E
E
2sin cos
sin(
m
t
m
i
t
i
i
t
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
⊥
⊥
θ
θ
θ
θ )
(Volume I, Equation 5.143)
where r(ω) is the dimensionless reflectivity coeffi-
cient defined as the ratio of the reflected electric field 
to the incident electric field, and t(ω) is the dimen-
sionless transmission coefficient.
Reflection and transmission, we saw, are related 
by the following equation.
 
t(ω) = 1 + r(ω) 
(Volume I, Equation 5.144)
A complex r(ω) [or t(ω)] means that a phase shift 
is introduced at the interface upon reflection (or 
transmission). The link between reflectivity at nor-
mal incidence and the complex refractive index was 
calculated in Volume I, Chapter 5 as follows:
 
r
E
E
n
i
n
i
n
n
m
r
m
i
c
c
( )
ω
κ
κ
=
=
+
−
+
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
−
+
1
1
1
1
(Volume I, Equation 5.147)
The quantity that is actually measured in experi-
ments is not reflectivity, r, but reflectance, R, defined 
as the ratio of the reflected intensity to the incident 
intensity, as follows:
 
R
E
E
n
n
(n
1)
(n
1)
m
r
m
i
c
c
2
2
2
2
( )
ω
κ
κ
=
=
−
+
=
−
+
+
+
2
2
2
1
1
 
(Volume I, Equation 5.148)
The phase, θ(ω), of the reflected wave, it can be 
shown, may be calculated from the measured reflec-
tance, R(ω), if known over all frequencies (Kramers-
Kronig). With both R(ω) and θ(ω) known, we can 
use Volume I, Equation 5.147 to calculate n(ω) and 
κ(ω); as we saw earlier, n(ω) and κ(ω) are related to 
the complex dielectric function, εr, as follows:
 
n
n( )+i
i
c
r
r
( )
( )
( )
( )
ω
ω
κ ω
ε ω
ε
ω
=
=
ʹ
+
ʹʹ
 
(Volume I, Equation 5.115)

[Page 303]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   303
Plugging the values for n(ω) and κ(ω) into 
Equation 5.115, we thus obtain the complex dielec-
tric function.
We now need to explain how the Fresnel equa-
tions are linked to the experimental parameters 
obtained from ellipsometry. The reflectivity coeffi-
cients r(ω)| | and r(ω)⊥ in what follows are symbol-
ized more simply as rp (p for parallel) and rs (s for 
senkrecht: German for normal or perpendicular). 
Using Snell’s law (Volume I, Equation 5.19), the 
expressions for rs and rp (Volume I, Equations 5.140 
and 5.141) can be rewritten as follows:
 
r
E
E
n cos
n
n cos
n
s
m
r
m
i
t
i
t
t
i
t
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
−
+
⊥
θ
θ
θ
cos
t
i
cosθ
⊥
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥ 
(6.4)
 
r
E
E
n cos
n
n cos
p
m
r
m
i
t
i
i
t
i
t
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
−
+
||
θ
θ
θ
cos
nt
i
cosθ
||
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥ 
(6.5)
In these expressions we now see the explicit 
appearance of the refractive index of the two 
media (ni and nt; see Volume I, Figure 5.38). Thin-
film and multilayer structures involve multiple 
interfaces, with Fresnel reflection and transmission 
coefficients applicable at each. The superposition of 
multiple waves introduces interference that depends 
on the relative phase of each light wave. To track 
the relative phase of each light component so as to 
correctly determine the phase of the overall reflected 
or transmitted beam, a film phase thickness is 
introduced as follows (see Figure 6.13).
 
β
π
λ
θ
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
d
n cos
2
2 
(6.6)
The reflectivity coefficients rp and rs for this case 
are given as the following.
 
r
r
r
exp(
i2 )
1
r
r
p
p (1,2)
p(2,3)
p(1,2) p(2,3
=
+
−
β
+
)exp(
i2 )
−
β
 
(6.7)
 
r
r
r
exp(
i2 )
1
r
r
s
s (1,2)
s(2,3)
s(1,2) s(2,3
=
+
−
β
+
)exp(
i2 )
−
β
 
(6.8)
Ellipsometry determines how p- and s- compo nents 
of the light change upon reflection or transmission 
in relation to each other. A known polarization is 
reflected or transmitted from the sample, and the out-
put polarization is measured. The ellipsometer mea-
sures this polarization change of the light reflected 
from the sample in terms of two parameters: Δ (some-
times cosΔ) and Ψ (see Figure 6.12a). These values are 
related to the ratio of the Fresnel amplitude reflection 
coefficients for p- and s-polarized light as follows:
 
r ( )
r( )
r
r
tan exp(i )
p
s
ω
ω
||
⊥
=
=
Ψ
Δ  
(6.9)
This ratio is complex, with tanΨ measuring the 
relative attenuation of s- and p- polarized light (which 
determines the tilt of the ellipse in Figure 6.12a) and Δ 
measuring the phase difference between p- and s-po-
larized reflected light (related to the ellipticity). In the 
case of an ideal bulk material, the result in Equation 
6.9 can be directly converted to give the complex 
dielectric constant and complex refractive index as:
 
ε
φ
φ
r
c
2
p
s
p
s
n
sin
r
r
r
r
=
=
+
−
+
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎞
⎠
2
2
1
1
1
( )
tan ( )
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
 (6.10)
This equation is an oversimplification implying 
that there are no surface layers of any type. A real-
istic bulk material comes with a surface oxide and 
at least some roughness, and Equation 6.10 would 
include these as part of the bulk optical constants. 
As a consequence, ellipsometry is used as an indirect 
method/model based technique, i.e., in general the 
measured Ψ and Δ cannot be converted directly into 
the optical constants of the sample. From Ψ, Δ, and 
an optical model, the desired information can be 
n2
d
n1
n3
FIGURE 6.13 Light reflects and refracts at each interface, 
which leads to multiple beams in a thin film. Interference 
between beams depends on relative phase and amplitude 
of the electric fields. Fresnel: reflection and transmission 
can be used to calculate the response from each contribut-
ing beam.

[Page 304]
304   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
extracted, as illustrated in Figure 6.14. After a sample 
is measured, a model is constructed and is used to 
calculate the predicted response from the Fresnel’s 
equations, which describe each material layer in 
the sample with its own thickness and optical con-
stants. If these values are not all known, an estimate 
is made for a preliminary calculation. The calculated 
values are then compared with the experimental 
data, and any unknown material property can be 
varied to improve the match between experiment 
and calculation. Finding the best match between 
the model and the experiment is typically achieved 
through regression. An estimator, such as the mean 
squared error (MSE), is used to quantify the differ-
ence between curves. The unknown parameters are 
allowed to vary until the minimum MSE is reached.
Ellipsometers may be single-wavelength or spec-
troscopic and may be have single or multiple angles 
of incidence. They may also operate with a rotating 
element or as nulling ellipsometer, and they may be sin-
gle-point or imaging. Spectroscopic ellipsometer allows 
the accurate characterization of a range of proper-
ties, including the layer thickness, optical constants, 
composition, crystallinity, anisotropy, and unifor-
mity. Thickness determinations ranging from a few 
angstroms to tens of micrometers are possible for 
single layers and complex multilayer stacks.
Ellipsometry measures the ratio of two values, so it 
is highly accurate and reproducible, it does not need 
a reference sample, and it is not very susceptible to 
light source fluctuation. Since it measures phase, it is 
highly sensitive to the presence of thin films (down 
to submonolayer coverage). The sampling region 
ranges from 30 µm to 10 mm, and the depth of sam-
pling, which depends on the absorption of the light 
in the sample, is typically 100 Å or more. For further 
reading we refer to the Handbook of Ellipsometry.5
Scanning Electron Microscopy
In ICs, MEMS, and NEMS, scanning electron micro-
scopes (SEMs) like optical microscopes, are fabrica-
tion line workhorses. Scanning electron microscopy 
is one of the primary tools used for analysis of MEMS 
and NEMS devices, one that was used long before 
the development of scanning probe techniques. 
Ernst Ruska, the inventor of the electron microscope 
(1931),* received his Nobel in 1986, at age of 80, 
and shared the prize with Gerd Binnig and Heinrich 
Rohrer for the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) 
(see below), invented in 1981.
In an SEM, the surface or microvolume to be 
examined is irradiated with a finely focused elec-
tron beam; the beam may be swept in a raster† across 
the surface of the specimen, which is contained in a 
vacuum, to form images or can be static to obtain 
an analysis at just one position. The electrons are 
produced in an electron gun that accelerates them at 
the operating voltage. The operating voltage ranges 
from 0 to between 30 and 60 kV, depending upon 
the type of SEM.
Scanning electron microscopy requires a vacuum 
system so that the electrons can make the trip from 
the source in the electron gun, e.g., a thermal field 
emitter to the sample and to the detector (an electron 
multiplier). Insulating samples have traditionally 
required pretreatment in the form of coating with 
a conductive film, typically gold or carbon, before 
SEM examination. Nonconductive samples are sub-
ject to a buildup of electrons on their surface. This 
buildup of electrons, or charging, eventually causes 
scattering of the incoming electron beam, which 
interferes with imaging and analysis. Furthermore, 
samples that contain substantial water or other 
materials that volatilize in high vacuum also pres-
ent challenges for SEM examination. These samples 
require controlled drying to allow the SEM chamber 
to reach high vacuum and to prevent deformation of 
the sample at the SEM vacuum. Coating with gold or 
* There are two major types of electron microscopes: SEMs and TEMs. 
In the former, electrons scattered from a thick analyzed sample; in 
the latter, electrons transmitted through a very thin specimen are 
utilized. The first electron microscopes that were developed were 
actually TEMs (see “Transmission Electron Microscopy”).
† The beam is scanned over the specimen in a series of lines and frames 
called a raster, just like the (much weaker) electron beam in an ordi-
nary television.
Optical model to extract the desired information Ψ and Δ
Film thickness
Refractive index
Surface roughness
Interfacial regions
Crystallinity
Anisotropy
FIGURE 6.14 From Ψ, Δ, and an optical model the desired 
information can be extracted.

[Page 305]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   305
carbon and drying are not needed if an environmen-
tal scanning electron microscope (ESEM) is used 
(see below). The focusing of electrons in an SEM is 
achieved magnetically instead of with a polished 
and shaped lens. Electron beams (probes) of sizes 
down to ∼6 nm are attainable with conventional 
thermionic emission sources, although smaller 
probes, ∼2 nm, can be achieved using field emission 
sources (for a listing of different electron sources, see 
Volume II, Figure 2.17). The SEM also does not have 
lenses to magnify the image as in the optical micro-
scope; instead, magnification results from the ratio 
of the area scanned on the specimen to the area of 
the television screen [cathode ray tube (CRT)] (× 25 
to × 250,000 or more). Increasing the magnifica-
tion in an SEM is therefore achieved quite simply by 
scanning the electron beam over a smaller area of 
the specimen. The raster movement is accomplished 
by means of small coils of wire carrying the control-
ling current (the scan coils), and magnification is 
therefore controlled by the current supplied to the 
x, y scanning coils and not by objective lens power. 
A schematic drawing of an electron microscope is 
shown, together with a photograph of a commercial 
machine in Figure 6.15.
We remember that the resolution, R, of a light 
microscope can be calculated as 0.61λ/NA (Raleigh 
criterion; Volume I, Equation 5.13). In this expres-
sion, NA
nsin
D
2f
F#
max
=
θ
=
=
1
2
, with F# being the 
effective F-number, which equals f/D, or focal length 
over lens diameter. The assumption here is a large 
F#, which implies θ <<< 1 and NA = sin θ ∼ tan θ ∼ θ; 
this is called the paraxial approximation (see Volume I, 
Chapter 5). A good light microscope objective has 
an f/D (effective F-number) of about 2, so with λ = 
∼500 nm, a typical optical microscope R is about 
1  µm. This resolution can be much improved by 
using a scanning electron microscope. The matter 
wave of an electron (accelerated at 1,000,000 V) is 
0.001 nm (see de Broglie wavelength; Volume I, 
Equation 3.96) versus 450 nm for a light microscope; 
in other words, electron waves are 100,000 times 
shorter than the waves of visible light. So electrons 
have tremendous power to resolve minute structures 
because the resolving power is a function of wave-
length. Moreover this wavelength depends on the 
applied voltage and increasing the voltage leads 
to  faster electrons with yet shorter de Broglie 
Electron
beam
Electron gun
Anode
Magnetic
lens
To TV
scanner
Scanning
coils
Backscattered
electron
detector
(a)
Secondary
electron
detector
Stage
Specimen
FIGURE 6.15 (a) Schematic of scanning electron microscope (SEM). (b) Carl Zeiss SEM. Scanning electron microscopy 
provides detailed three-dimensional view.

[Page 306]
306   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
wavelengths. The effective F-number (also F# or f/D) 
for an electron microscope, on the other hand, is 
about 100 (quite large). The much shorter wave-
length despite the poorer f/D gives an SEM a resolu-
tion 1000-fold better than that of the best light 
microscope. This improved resolution is dramati-
cally illustrated in Figure 6.16, where we compare an 
image from an optical microscope (OM) with that of 
a SEM of the same Trochodiscus longispinus.
As the rastered focused electron beam irradiates 
the sample, secondary electrons are ejected from 
the sample. Secondary electrons are specimen elec-
trons that obtain energy by inelastic collisions with 
beam electrons. They are defined as electrons emit-
ted from the specimen with energy less than 50 eV 
and are predominantly produced by the interac-
tions between energetic beam electrons and weakly 
bonded conduction-band electrons in metals or the 
valence electrons of insulators and semiconductors. 
With a flux amplitude that depends on the nature of 
the material and on the angle that the feature’s sur-
face makes with the incident beam, these secondary 
electrons are counted and used to create an image 
of the sample. The accuracy of the images captured 
is highly dependent on machine capability and the 
specific part being examined. An electron multiplier 
is used to detect and amplify the secondary electron 
intensity as a function of beam position to create the 
SEM image (see more on SEM detectors on page 308). 
The output generated from the electron detector 
is displayed on a CRT rastered in synchronization 
with the electron beam. The final result is a two-
 dimensional image on a screen. Since no coordinate 
data are directly output from the SEM, performing 
any analysis other than line width measurements 
directly with the SEM software becomes difficult. 
Thus, SEMs are ideal for visualizing MEMS parts but 
are inadequate tools for quantitative analysis.2
The type of particles produced from the inter-
action of an electron beam with a solid sample is 
not limited to secondary electrons but may include 
backscattered electrons (BSEs), elastically scattered 
electrons, characteristic x-rays, and other photons 
of various energies. One of the main features of the 
SEM is that, in principle, any radiation emitted from 
the specimen or any measurable change in the speci-
men can be used to provide the signal to modulate 
the CRT and thus provide the contrast.
From Figure 6.17, it is obvious that several pro-
cesses occur when electrons bombard a solid sur-
face and that different emission mechanisms arise 
from different depths within the sample. The two 
basic types of electron scattering events that take 
place in an SEM are elastic scattering, which causes 
backscattering of electrons without loss or little loss 
of kinetic energy, and inelastic scattering, which 
results in transfer of energy from the beam elec-
trons to the sample. The inelastic scattering leads 
to the generation of secondary electrons but also to 
Auger electrons, x-rays (continuous and character-
istic), electron-hole pairs in conductors and insula-
tors, long wavelength electromagnetic radiation or 
cathodoluminescence [visible, UV, and infrared (IR) 
light], lattice vibrations (phonons), and electron 
oscillations in metals (plasmons, specimen current). 
The penetration depth of an electron into a solid 
depends on the beam energy, which in turn depends 
on the accelerating voltage, usually between 30 and 
60 kV in a typical SEM and on the atomic number, 
Z, of the bombarded material. The probability of an 
incident electron being scattered varies, with larger 
atoms (large Z) having a higher probability of pro-
ducing an elastic collision, so low-Z materials have a 
greater depth of penetration.
When a 20 KV e-beam is used, say for Ni (Z = 
28), Auger electrons originate from very close to 
FIGURE 6.16 Trochodiscus longispinus in optical micro-
scopy (a) and scanning electron microscopy (b). Note 
improved depth of field and resolving capability of the 
scanning electron microscopy experiment. (Taken from 
Goldstein, J., D. Newbury, D. Joy, C. Lyman, P. Echlin, 
E. Lifshin, L. Sawyer, and J. Michael. 2003. Scanning 
electron microscopy and x-ray microanalysis. New York: 
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.6)

[Page 307]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   307
the surface (10–30 Å), secondary electrons from 
100 Å deep, backscattering electrons from 1–2 
µm deep, and x-rays from 5 µm deep (the depth 
to which the incoming electrons may penetrate). 
Cathodoluminescence (CL), which arises from the 
recombination of electron-hole pairs generated by 
the incident beam, consists of visible photons (light). 
These can escape the sample only when emitted 
close to the surface, making cathodoluminescence 
very surface specific.
The interaction volume of the e-beam with the 
sample (pear shape shown in Figure 6.17) can 
be made visible in photoresist materials such as 
PMMA. Molecular bond damage (scission) dur-
ing electron bombardment renders these materials 
sensitive to etching in a suitable solvent revealing 
the exposed volume. This phenomenon is the basis 
for e-beam lithography as detailed in Volume II, 
Chapter 2. The interaction volume as a function of 
beam energy can be estimated from Monte Carlo 
calculations (see also Volume II, Figure 2.15).
In Figure 6.18 the relative intensity versus abun-
dance of the various emission phenomena under 
e-beam radiation are indicated. Whereas surface 
topography is obtained when low energy secondary 
electrons are collected, atomic number or orienta-
tion information is obtained from higher-energy 
 backscattered electrons and elastically scattered elec-
trons. The latter may be used to differentiate between 
surface roughness, porosity, granular deposits, stress-
related gross microcracks (often used in conjunction 
with microsectioning), and the observation of grain 
boundaries in unetched samples.
Elastically scattered electrons have the same energy 
as the incident electron beam and retain orientation 
and phase information. These electrons are used, for 
example, in diffraction imaging experiments, such 
as low-energy electron diffraction (LEED). In surface 
Incident
electron beam
Light
Auger
electrons
Backscattered
electrons
Secondary
electrons
X-rays
(a) Continuous
(b) Characteristic
5 nm
5 nm
150 nm
1000 nm
Bulk
sample
‘Pear shaped’
volume of
interaction
dia
Specimen
current
Element
Depth t1 (µm)
t1
Al
Cu
Ag
Au
1.5
0.58
0.49
0.26
FIGURE 6.17 Interaction mechanism of electrons with a solid. A bulk specimen showing the spread of the beam and the 
activated volume, giving rise to backscattered, secondary, and Auger electrons (i), characteristic x-rays (ii), and electron 
current (iii). Typical values given for the depth of electron penetration and the excited volume for a 30-keV, 100-nm-
diameter electron probe.
Inelastically scattered
Fraction of incident beam energy
Secondary electron emission
Backscattered
Elastically scattered
Relative intensity
FIGURE 6.18 Relative intensity versus abundance of 
various emission phenomena under e-beam radiation.

[Page 308]
308   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
science, well-ordered single- crystal surfaces are often 
investigated this way. Electrons penetrate (energy 
50–300 eV) only a few monolayers into the sample; 
therefore, they are surface sensitive (for comparison, 
x-rays are more bulk sensitive). The observed diffrac-
tion pattern is the reciprocal lattice of the geometric 
surface lattice. Well-ordered surfaces exhibit sharp 
bright spots and low background intensity. The pres-
ence of surface defects and crystallographic imper-
fection results in broadening and weakening of the 
spots and increased background.
The backscattered electrons (BSEs) have an energy 
of about 80% of the incident beam. They are emitted 
more or less specularly. These electrons, just like sec-
ondary electrons, can be used to form topographic 
SEM images, but they have a higher energy than 
secondary electrons and also yield compositional 
information. Larger atoms (large atomic number, Z) 
have a higher probability of producing an elastic col-
lision because of their greater cross-sectional area. 
Consequently, the number of BSEs reaching a BSE 
detector is proportional to the mean atomic number 
of the sample. Thus, a “brighter” BSE intensity corre-
lates with greater average Z in the sample, and “dark” 
areas have lower average Z. BSE images are very help-
ful for obtaining compositional maps of a sample 
and for quickly distinguishing different phases. BSE 
images are limited to a grayscale range, though, 
because they only record one variable, average Z (a 
combination of all the elements in a sample). Thus, 
they do not convey as much information as can be 
obtained by elemental composition mapping using 
EDS* x-ray detectors (see “EDAX (EDX or EDS)”).
SEM electron detectors can be based on different 
principles and oriented and operated differently to 
preferentially detect either secondary or backscat-
tered electrons. A scintillator-photomultiplier system 
known as the Everhart-Thorny (E-T) detector detects 
the secondary electron signal, which is much more 
dependent on the sample topography than other 
electrons emitted from the sample. Topographic 
images obtained with secondary electrons actu-
ally look remarkably like images of solid objects 
* EDAX (EDX or EDS): Energy dispersive analysis of x-rays (EDAX) is 
also called EDX and, more and more frequently, EDS. See “EDAX 
(EDX or EDS)”.
viewed with light. A typical E-T detector consists 
of a Faraday cage in front of a scintillator, which in 
turn is coupled to a light pipe leading to a photo-
multiplier tube. The Faraday cage is kept at a positive 
potential of a few hundred volts so as to efficiently 
collect most of the secondary electrons emitted from 
the sample (remember they have an energy less than 
50 eV). The scintillator typically has a positive volt-
age of several kilovolts applied to its surface, so that 
the electrons that pass the Faraday cage are acceler-
ated onto the scintillator. When the electrons strike 
the scintillator they produce light, which is directed 
to the photomultiplier by a light pipe.
Using BSEs to construct topographical images 
either relies on a simplified scintillator–light 
pipe–photomultiplier (E-T), as used for second-
ary electrons, or uses solid state detectors. This 
stripped-down version of the E-T detector consists 
of scintillator coupled to a photomultiplier by a light 
pipe. Because there is no collection potential, the 
collection efficiency of these detectors is directly 
related to the scintillator size and its proximity to 
the sample. The simplest solid-state detector is a p-n 
junction with electrodes on the front and back of 
the sample. When hit by electrons, the holes tend to 
migrate to one electrode while the electrons migrate 
to the other, producing a current, the total of which 
is dependent on the electron flux and the electron 
energy. Response time of the detector is, unfortu-
nately, slow but can be improved by putting a poten-
tial across the diode but this comes at the expense 
of increased noise in the signal. Often a set of solid-
state detectors for simultaneous collection of back-
scattered electrons in different directions is used.
Detectors above the sample collect electrons scat-
tered as a function of sample composition, whereas 
detectors placed to the side collect electrons scattered 
as a function of surface topography. BSE images can 
be obtained nearly instantly, depending on scan rate, 
and at any magnification within the instrument range.
The composition of samples is sensitive to the 
backscattered coefficient (η), which varies mono-
tonically with Z. It has been shown that the coef-
ficient can be expressed as follows.
 
η
×
×
= −
+
−
+
−
−
0 254
0 016
1 86
10
8 3 10
4
2
7
3
.
.
.
.
Z
Z
Z  
(6.11)

[Page 309]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   309
The magnitude of the compositional or atomic 
number contrast, C, from two phases of backscattered 
coefficients, η1 and η2, is readily calculated as follows.
 
C =
−
η
η
η
1
2
1
 
(6.12)
This method is not recommended for phases with 
similar atomic number, as the resolution may be 
poor.
The inelastically scattered electrons have inter-
acted strongly with the substrate electrons, and in the 
process they have lost all information of their initial 
direction and phase. These include Auger electrons, 
photoelectrons, and e-h pair recombination pro-
cesses. These have mainly spectroscopic value but can 
also be used for imaging (see SAM, “Auger Electron 
Spectroscopy and Scanning Auger Microscopy”).
In general, a high vacuum is required in SEM, as 
the sample environment and the samples have to be 
clean, dry, and electrically conductive. An environ-
mental SEM (ESEM) offers high-resolution secondary 
electron imaging in a gaseous environment of practi-
cal any composition, at pressures as high as 50 Torr 
and temperatures as high as 1500°C. In this case wet, 
oily, dirty, nonconductive samples may be examined 
in their natural states without modification or prepa-
ration. An immediate concern is that the gas mole-
cules will scatter the electrons and degrade the beam. 
To avoid this, instead of using a single pressure-limit-
ing aperture as used in conventional SEM, the ESEM 
uses multiple pressure limiting apertures to separate 
the sample chamber from the vacuum. This leaves 
the column still at very high vacuum, but the sample 
chamber may sustain pressures as high as 50 Torr.
An ESEM uses a special type of detector that can 
function in a nonvacuum environment. The detector 
uses the principle of gas ionization. A positive poten-
tial of a few hundred volts is applied to the detector, 
which attracts the secondary electrons emitted by 
the sample. As the electrons accelerate in the detector 
field, they collide with gas molecules, creating addi-
tional electrons, amplifying the original secondary 
electron signal, and generating more positive ions. 
The detector collects the amplified secondary elec-
tron signal and passes it on to an electron amplifier.
In nonconductive samples, the positive ions cre-
ated in the gas ionization process are attracted to the 
sample surface, and they effectively suppress charg-
ing artifacts.
A short review of environmental scanning elec-
tron microscopy by Krisada Kimseng and Marcel 
Meissel can be found at http://www.calce.umd.edu/
TSFA/ESEM.pdf.
Scanning Proximal Microscopes
Introduction
A scanning proximal microscope (SPM) is a mechani-
cal imaging instrument in which a small (<1 µm) probe 
is scanned over a sample surface. All SPMs owe their 
ultimate existence to the scanning tunneling micro-
scope (STM), invented by IBM research scientists Gerd 
Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer in the early 1980s.
By monitoring the motion of a tiny probe tip, the 
surface topography and/or images of surface physi-
cal properties are measured with an SPM. Because 
close proximity or contact between the specimen 
and probe is a general requirement, SPMs need a 
feedback system that precisely controls the physi-
cal separation between probe and sample. Several 
methods are available to monitor the z-position of 
the probe tip at all times:
 
◾Interferometric 
measurement 
of 
the 
tip 
amplitude
 
◾Electron tunneling (limited to conductive 
specimens)
 
◾Detection of the light emitted through the 
probe tip
 
◾Constant force (atomic force feedback) is the 
most common method; it can be further sub-
divided as follows:
• Diffraction of a separate light source by the 
tip
• Mechanical sensor attached to the tip (e.g., 
a quartz tuning fork)
 
◾Capacitance detection
The two most commonly used mechanisms of tip 
positioning are optical methods that monitor the tip 
vibration amplitude (usually interferometric), and 
nonoptical tuning fork techniques.
In addition to the z-axis feed-back control, an 
x-y-z scanner (usually driven piezoelectrically) con-
trols the movement of the probe over the sample 

[Page 310]
310   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
surface. The x-y-z scanner moves either the sample 
or the proximal probe. With the sample attached 
to the scanner, the sample moves under the fixed 
probe tip in a raster pattern, and an image is gener-
ated from the interaction of the tip and the sample. 
The size of the area that can be imaged depends 
on the  maximum displacement of the scanner 
used. The  typical size scale of features measured 
ranges from the atomic level (less than 1 nm) to 
more than 100 µm. A computer monitors the probe 
position and gathers data from the feedback system 
to control both the scanning of the tip (or sample) 
and the separation of the tip from the sample sur-
face. The information generated by sensing the 
interaction between the probe and sample surface 
is collected and recorded by the computer point-by-
point during the raster movement, and the computer 
renders the data into two-dimensional data sets 
(lines). The interactions between probe and sample 
used for imaging in scanning probe microscopes 
include electron tunneling, magnetic forces, electri-
cal forces, electrochemical interactions, mechani-
cal interactions, capacitance, ion conductance, Hall 
coefficient, thermal properties, and optical proper-
ties. SPMs offer an alternative to noncontact tech-
niques and are characterized by their potential for 
very high resolution (subangstrom), limited only 
by the probe size and the property probed.
As illustrated in Table 6.5, SPMs are used in a 
wide range of applications. The three most used 
SPMs are the near-field scanning optical micro scope 
(NSOM), the STM, and the atomic force micro-
scope (AFM). In this section, we analyze the poten-
tial of these three SPMs for geometrical metrology. 
The utility of other specialized SPMs in property 
metrology is surveyed below (see “Tools to Measure 
Materials Property: Property Metrology”).
NSOM or SNOM
To attain resolution beyond Abbe’s diffraction limit 
of 200 nm, the textbook knowledge used to be that 
a complicated and costly SEM (0.1 nm resolution) or 
STM was required. Although these instruments do 
have a better resolution, they sacrifice many of the 
advantages of an optical microscope, such as nonde-
structiveness, low cost, high speed, reliability, versatil-
ity, accessibility, and ease of use. Thus, it would be very 
attractive to miniaturize a light microscope and have 
it operate below Abbe’s diffraction limit. This objec-
tive is met by combining a scanning proximal probe 
technique with optical microscopy (OM) in so-called 
scanning near-field OM, a technique developed in the 
mid-1980s. We encountered NSOM first in Volume I, 
Chapter 5; here we give some additional background 
supplementing the information presented there.
The idea of using a subwavelength aperture to 
improve optical resolution was first proposed by E. 
H. Synge7 in a letter to Einstein in 1928 and again, 
independently, in 1956 by John A. O’Keefe.8 These 
ideas were realized only much later. First results were 
TABLE 6.5 Scanning Proximal Microscopes and Their Applications
Scanning Proximal Microscopes
Examples of Applications
Scanning tunneling microscopy
Topography, density of states
Atomic force microscopy
Topography, force measurement
Lateral force microscopy
Friction
Magnetic force microscopy
Magnetism
Electrostatic force microscopy
Charge distribution
Scanning near-field optical microscopy
Optical properties
Scanning capacitance microscopy
Dielectric constant, doping
Scanning thermal microscopy
Temperature
Ballistic electron emission microscopy
Interface structure
Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy
Spin structure
Kelvin probe force microscope is the Kelvin 
mode of scanning probe microscopy 
Measures contact potential difference 
between the probe and the sample
Scanning electrochemical microscopy
Electrochemistry
Photon emission scanning tunneling microscopy
Chemical identification

[Page 311]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   311
achieved in 1972, by Ash and Nicholls,9 in the micro-
wave region of the spectrum, and in 1984, in the visi-
ble, by D. W. Pohl et al.10 During image acquisition in 
NSOM, the point light source must be scanned over 
the surface, without touching it, and the optical sig-
nal from the surface must be collected and detected. 
To realize a constant probe-sample distance, a feed-
back mechanism that is unrelated to the NSOM/
SNOM signal is utilized. Harootunian et al.11 were 
the first to demonstrate SNOM microscopy in fluo-
rescence mode. This result led eventually to single-
molecule detection experiments by several groups.
During image acquisition in NSOM, a point light 
source is scanned very close to the surface, without 
touching it, and the optical signal from the surface 
is detected. In order to achieve an optical resolution 
better than Abbe’s diffraction limit (the resolution 
limit of conventional OM), the probe tip must be 
brought within the near-field region, with the illumi-
nation source closer to the specimen than the wave-
length of the illuminating radiation. For NSOM, the 
separation distance between probe and specimen 
surface is typically on the order of a few nanome-
ters. Radiation near the source is highly collimated 
within the near-field region, but after propagation 
of a few wavelengths’ distance from the specimen, 
the radiation experiences significant diffraction and 
enters the far-field regime. To make a point light 
source, laser light is fed to a microscopic aperture 
via an optical fiber. The aperture can be a tapered 
fiber with its shaft coated with a metal, a microfabri-
cated probe, or a tapered pipette (see  example aper-
ture SNOM implementations in Volume I, Chapter 
5). The aperture-based resolution is limited to about 
λ/10. With careful probe design and sample prepa-
ration a resolution of ∼30 nm has been achieved.
One challenge for aperture based SNOM is the 
small aperture resulting in a very low light through-
put. Scattering SNOM or apertureless SNOM, devel-
oped in the 1990s, is an alternative that avoids this 
low light intensity problem. Apertureless near-field 
optics, as we saw in Volume I, Chapter 5, uses a 
sharp, metallic subwavelength tip instead of an 
optical point source. The sharp metal tip acts as a 
nanoscopic light scatterer when placed in near-field 
distance to the sample. Oblique incident light is scat-
tered at the tip, and the resulting strongly enhanced 
local plasmonic field is used for excitation of the 
sample. The resulting optical response signal is col-
lected via an objective in far field and can be used 
for imaging and chemical analysis. The tip radius in 
this case is the only factor determining resolution. 
The best resolution attained today is 10 nm, and it 
is expected that this can be reduced to atomic level 
resolution. A significant problem with the scattering 
SNOM approach is that the light scattered by the tip 
carrying the information on tip-sample interaction is 
easily overwhelmed by background light. Therefore 
the method is particularly suitable for light-matter 
interaction processes where the light detected has a 
different wavelength from the excitation light (e.g., 
Raman scattering, fluorescence, second harmonic 
generation). Consider tip-enhanced Raman spec-
troscopy as an example. In tip-enhanced enhanced 
Raman spectroscopy (TERS), a silver-coated tip 
is scanned across the illuminated area, acting as 
a Raman signal enhancer. As we saw in Volume I, 
Chapter 5, Raman signals of molecules deposited on 
silver or in close proximity to silver nanoparticles can 
be increased by a factor of 1014. It is believed that this 
enhancement results principally from the resonant 
enhancement of the surface plasmon mode localized 
at the apex of the sharp metallic tip. This technique 
represents an elegant combination of two Nobel 
Prize-winning discoveries: the Raman effect and the 
scanning tunneling microscope. TERS has created a 
new tool that achieves a long-awaited goal in surface 
science, namely the correlation of topographic and 
chemical information of the same sample region at 
nano meter scale. Although the enhancement pro-
cesses allowing for TERS are still not fundamentally 
 understood, the use of an illuminated scanning 
probe tip to greatly enhance Raman scattering from 
the sample underneath the tip is one of the most 
exciting developments in optical spectroscopy.
In the rest of this discussion, we focus on aper-
ture-based SNOM only.
In an aperture-scanning NSOM instrument, the 
quantitative point-spread function in the near field 
can be approximated by a Gaussian profile whose 
1/e intensity value is of the same order as the radius 
of the aperture at the tip of the NSOM probe. The 
mode of light propagation is primarily evanescent 
(and parallel to the specimen surface) when the 

[Page 312]
312   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
radius of the illuminating source is less than one-
third of the imaging light wavelength as shown in 
Figure 6.19. The NSOM configuration illustrated 
here positions the objective in the far field, in the 
conventional manner, for collection of the image-
forming optical signal.
A schematic illustrating the control and informa-
tion flow of an inverted optical microscope-based 
NSOM system is presented in Figure 6.20a. A laser 
source is coupled to a fiber optic probe for near-field 
specimen illumination. In the NSOM setup shown, 
the probe tip movements are controlled through an 
optical feedback loop incorporating a second laser 
that is focused on the tip. Two-dimensional data sets 
gathered by the NSOM instrument are registered 
and displayed as a 3D reconstruction on a computer 
monitor. Figure 6.20b is a photograph of an actual 
near-field scanning optical microscope set-up.
To improve signal-to-noise ratios for the feedback 
signal, the NSOM tip is oscillated at its resonance 
frequency. This allows for more sensitive lock-in 
 detection techniques, eliminating positional detec-
tion problems associated with low-frequency noise 
and drift. As the oscillating tip approaches the 
sample surface, forces between the tip and speci-
men change both the peak resonance and the 
quality factor. These changes can be monitored by 
several techniques, classifiable in two broad groups: 
1)  shear-force mode and 2) tapping mode. In the 
shear-force mode, to control the tip-specimen gap 
during imaging, one utilizes lateral oscillation shear 
forces generated between a straight optical fiber and 
the sample (Figure 6.20a). The fiber is drawn to a 
sharp point and coated on the sides with an opaque 
material (usually Al). A small (∼50-nm) hole is 
formed in the coating at the apex of the fiber and 
the evanescent field associated with this aperture is 
used to image the sample. In the optical feedback 
approach, illustrated in Figure 6.20a, a second laser 
is tightly focused as close to the end of the NSOM 
probe as possible. With the laser feedback estab-
lished, the probe is then vibrated, at a known fre-
quency, utilizing a dither piezo. A split photodiode 
collects the laser light, and the difference between 
the signals from each side of the detector is deter-
mined. The main problem associated with such 
an optical type of feedback mechanism is that the 
light source, which is used to detect the tip vibra-
tion frequency, phase, and amplitude, becomes a 
Tip
Near ﬁeld
Detector
Surface
FIGURE 6.19 Light source is held in near-field to the surface.
NSOM
conﬁguration
schematic
X-Y Scanner
Acquisition
and
control
Feedback
control
Lock-In
ampliﬁer
X-Y-Z
translational
stage
Objective
Digital
camera
HeNe
laser
Excitation
source
(a)
(b)
Fiber
Oscillator
Quadrant photodiode
Dither and Z-motion
piezo tube
Probe tip
Specimen
Near-ﬁeld scanning optical microscope conﬁguration
NSOM head
Electronic
control unit (ECU)
Photo
tube
ECU
interface
connection
CPU
Monitor
Keyboard
External
laser
Inverted optical
microscope
FIGURE 6.20 A schematic (a) illustrating the control and information flow of an inverted optical microscope-based 
 scanning near-field optical microscopy system. (b) Actual photo of an Olympus NSOM system (http://www.olympusmicro.
com/primer/techniques/nearfield/ near fieldintro.html).

[Page 313]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   313
potential source of stray photons that can interfere 
with the detection of the NSOM signal. To realize a 
constant probe sample distance, a feedback mecha-
nism that is unrelated to the NSOM signal is obvi-
ously preferred. This is the primary reason why the 
nonoptical feedback method based on the tuning-
fork technique, illustrated in Figure 6.21, has become 
increasingly popular. Tuning forks are incorporated 
into the NSOM to serve as inexpensive and simple, 
nonoptical excitation and detection devices. When 
quartz tuning forks are utilized for regulation in a 
feedback loop, their very high mechanical quality 
factor, Q (as high as approximately 10,000), and cor-
responding high gain provide the system with high 
sensitivity to small forces, typically on the order of 
piconewtons. The fiber is typically fixed to one leg 
of a tuning fork, which is caused to oscillate. 
Interaction between the tip and the sample (due 
to shear forces—hence the name shear-force mode) 
leads to damping of this oscillation, and the height is 
adjusted to maintain a constant oscillation frequency.
In the tapping mode, to generate the feedback 
signal, one relies on atomic forces modulating the 
oscillation of a cantilever probe. In this case, a bent 
optical fiber, effectively functioning as an AFM canti-
lever probe, may be used as the light source. The non-
optical feedback method based on the tuning-fork 
technique, illustrated in Figure 6.21, is also applica-
ble here. It is also possible to use an AFM-type canti-
lever probe, in which the cantilever has an aperture 
at its apex; a lens focuses light into the aperture and 
an AFM-type feedback mechanism is used.
For the best image quality, shear-force feedback 
techniques are restricted to specimens that have low 
surface relief, and longer scan times are required com-
pared with operation in tapping mode. Moreover, the 
interactions that underlie shear force imaging are not 
very well understood. However, the straight probes 
employed in shear-force feedback techniques are eas-
ier to fabricate, are lower cost, and have a higher light 
throughput than their bent probe counterparts.
Previously developed high-resolution scanning 
techniques, such as scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), 
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and atomic 
force microscopy (AFM), do not benefit from the 
wide array of contrast mechanisms available to an 
OM such as SNOM and, in most cases, are limited to 
the study of specimen surfaces only. Aside from the 
available contrast-enhancing techniques of stain-
ing, fluorescence, polarization, phase contrast, and 
differential interference contrast, optical methods 
have inherent spectroscopic and temporal resolu-
tion capabilities.
Advantages and disadvantages of SNOM and a list 
of applications are provided in Volume I, Chapter 5, 
“NSOM Applications.”
Scanning Tunneling Microscope
The scanning tunneling microscope (STM) was 
the first and remains the most famous of the scan-
ning probe microscope techniques. As detailed in 
Volume  I, Chapter 3, scanning tunneling micros-
copy measures topography of surface electronic 
states using a tunneling current that is dependent 
on the separation between the probe tip and a con-
ductive sample surface (metals or semiconductors). 
The violation of classical physics in tunneling is 
allowed by the quantum mechanical uncertainty 
principle. On the basis of this principle, a particle 
can violate classical physics by tunneling inside and 
even through an energy barrier, ΔE, for a short time, 
Δt ∼ /ΔE (see Volume I, Equation 3.107). The expo-
nential decay of the wave function inside a rectan-
gular energy barrier that stretches from x = 0 to x = 
L and has a height of V0 is given as follows:
 
ψ
=
−α
(x)
Ae
x 
(Volume I, Equation 3.185)
Electrical
contacts
Optical
ﬁber
Probe
tip
Dither
piezo
Tuning
fork
Specimen
Near-ﬁeld
illumination
FIGURE 6.21 Tuning fork feedback (http://www.olympus 
micro.com/primer/techniques/nearfield/nearfieldintro.html).

[Page 314]
314   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
with α2 =
−
2m(V
E)
0
2
ℏ
 (Volume I, Equation 3.165). If 
the barrier is narrow enough (L is small), there will 
be a finite probability, P, of finding the particle on 
the other side of the barrier, as follows:
 
P
x)|
A e
2
2
2 L
=|
(
ψ
=
−α  
(Volume I, Equation 3.186)
where A is a function of the energy, E, of the particle 
and the barrier height, V0. The probability of finding 
an electron on the other side of a barrier of width 
L can be probed with a fine needle tip from a STM. 
The tunneling current, picked up by the sharp nee-
dle point of an STM, based on Volume I, Equation 
3.186, is given by the following equation:
 
I
f (E)A e
w
2
2 L
=
−α  
(Volume I, Equation 3.187)
where fw(E) is the Fermi-Dirac function, which con-
tains a weighted joint local density of electronic 
states (DOS) in the solid surface that is being probed 
and those states in the needle point (see Figure 6.22). 
Tunneling occurs between states of the same energy 
and the electron’s energy does not change during 
the tunneling event. From Volume I, Equation 3.187, 
when L changes by 1 Å, the current changes by a 
factor of about 10. Obviously, the tunneling current 
is very sensitive to the gap distance. The size of the 
gap in STM experiments is kept on the order of a 
couple of angstroms. The DOS can vary as a func-
tion of position on the sample, which means that 
one can define a local density of states (LDOS). 
LDOS depends on both energy and on position. An 
intuitive way to think about LDOS is that it gives 
the density of electrons of a certain energy at that 
particular spatial location [LDOS (x, y, E)]. An STM 
measures and controls the current that flows between 
the tip and the sample (I), the bias voltage between 
the tip and the sample (V), the xy (in sample plane) 
position of the tip, and the z (perpendicular to 
sample plane) distance between the tip and sample. 
Using these variables, an STM is able to measure the 
LDOS of a material as function of position on the 
surface (controlled by where the tip is above the sur-
face) and as a function of energy (controlled by the 
bias voltage between the tip and sample). The LDOS 
is proportional to the differential increase in tun-
neling current given a differential increase in bias 
voltage; in other words, one can measure the LDOS 
by measuring dI/dV. This was illustrated in Volume I, 
Figure 3.135, for a metallic and semiconducting car-
bon nanotube where singularities (sharp peaks) in 
the density of states function are observed directly 
in scanning tunneling microscopy images.
An STM may be viewed as an electron microscope 
that uses a single atom on a tip to attain atomic res-
olution. In a bit less lofty way, it may be described 
as a glorified phonograph needle, as illustrated in Figure 
6.23. Resolution is determined by  manufacturing a 
probe whose tip is of the same dimension we seek to 
resolve. If one can get a single atom at the tip, the vast 
majority of the current will run through it and thus 
give us atomic resolution. Tungsten is commonly used 
for the tip because one can use electrochemical-etch-
ing techniques to create very sharp tips like the one 
shown in Figure 6.24. This tip is brought to within a 
few angstroms of the surface that we wish to probe, 
and a small bias voltage (10 mV to 2 V) is applied 
between the tip and the sample while an electrical 
Sample
Tip
Tunneling
electrons
FIGURE 6.23 Scanning tunneling microscope.
Sample
DOS
0
L
Tip
DOS
VBias
EF
EF
FIGURE 6.22 Density of state functions in sample and tip.

[Page 315]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   315
current flows by electrons tunneling across the gap 
between the two conductors. As we saw above, this 
tunneling current magnitude depends upon the gap 
voltage, the gap distance, and the local density of 
electron states (Volume I, Equation 3.187).
At its heart, a scanning probe microscope has a 
piezoelectric material (e.g., quartz) that expands 
or contracts slightly when a voltage is applied to it. 
These voltages can be carefully controlled and cause 
one end of the crystal to move with better precision 
than the width of a single atom. The needle or tip is 
brought very close to the surface and moved over it 
piezoelectrically and a tunneling current, resulting 
from the overlap of the tip’s electron wave functions 
with the conducting surface is measured. This tun-
neling current is generated, even though there is a 
break in the circuit. Using a feedback servo loop, 
the tip slowly scans across the surface and is raised 
and lowered in order to keep the signal constant and 
maintain a distance of a couple of angstroms, where 
the tunneling current is at a measurable level.
An STM does not measure nuclear position 
directly; rather, it measures the electron density 
clouds on the surface of the sample. In some cases, 
the electron clouds represent the atom locations 
pretty well, but not always. The trace from an STM 
(Figure 6.25A) can be interpreted as a grid (Figure 
6.25Ba) that can be shown as a grayscale picture 
(Figure 6.25Bb). The grayscale picture can be inter-
preted as a contour map (Figure 6.25Bc), which can 
then be averaged out to make it smooth (Figure 
6.25Bd) and finally can be colored (Figure 6.25C). 
This explains the color of the Kanji character, made 
by manipulation of individual iron atoms on a cop-
per surface with an STM, in Figure 6.26.
The vertical resolution of an STM is remarkably 
good because of the exponential dependence of the 
current on vertical height (L in Volume I, Equation 
3.187). This means that 1-Å change in height corre-
sponds to almost 1 order of magnitude difference in 
current. The noise floor is in the tens of femtometer 
FIGURE 6.24 Tungsten scanning tunneling microscope 
tip; magnification ×150.
(a)
(A)
(B)
(C)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Z-AXIS 200 mm
X-AXIS 1 mm
Y-AXIS 1 mm
FIGURE 6.25 (A) Trace of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM). Shown is a trace of an individual turn mark on a 
 diamond-turned aluminum substrate to be used for subsequent magnetic film deposition for a high-capacity hard disc 
drive. (B) The trace from an STM can be interpreted as a grid (a), which can be shown as a grayscale picture (b). The grayscale 
picture can be interpreted as a contour map (c) that can then be averaged out to make smooth (d) and finally colored (C).

[Page 316]
316   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
range. The lateral resolution depends on the tip 
radius as clarified in Figure 6.27. A tip with radius 
R = 1000 Å actually focuses 90% of the current in a 
circle of radius (Δx in Figure 6.27) of 45 Å. A 100-Å 
tip focuses 90% of the current in a circle of radius 
14 Å. In practice, a 2-Å lateral resolution is routine. 
These numbers can be ascertained by rewriting 
I
f (E)A e
w
2
2 L
=
−α  (Volume I, Equation 3.187) as:
 
I( x) 
 f
E)A e
w
2
2
x
2R
2
Δ
Δ
=
(
−α
 
(6.13)
There are two major modes of operation for an 
STM: constant current and constant height. In 
constant current mode one maintains a constant 
tunneling current by adjusting the height (separa-
tion between tip and sample). In constant height 
mode one, maintains the height and measures the 
current.
STMs can be used in solution, as there still is a vac-
uum gap, even in water. This mode of STM operation 
is called scanning electrochemical microscopy, which we 
encountered in Volume II, Chap ter 4. To minimize 
faradaic processes the tip shank must be shielded 
with melted wax or plastic to expose only the last 
few nanometers of metal. The tunneling current to 
the exposed metal tip must be large compared with 
faradaic current to the tip shank.
STMs are limited to imaging parts with conductive 
surfaces, and electronic inhomogeneities can have 
significant effects on the acquired topographical 
images. Vibrations in the probing mechanism lim-
its gap width stability, which, in turn, can affect the 
fidelity of the measurements. All SPMs are limited, 
in the same sense as white light interferometers, to 
a maximum measurable slope. When features with 
perpendicular sidewalls are scanned, the data typi-
cally exhibit a slope that is actually not present. The 
height of measurable features is also limited to the 
probe tip length, which is typically <10 µm in com-
mercial systems. This limitation severely prohibits 
the inspection of high-aspect ratio parts with dimen-
sions on the order of millimeters. Though these tools 
have extremely high resolution, it is unfeasible to 
collect scans that cover all of the surfaces of a part, 
given the limited scan range of the tools.
Gerd Binning and Heinrich Rohrer (Figure 6.28) 
invented the scanning tunneling microscope at IBM 
FIGURE 6.26 Kanji character for atom, by Lutz and 
Eigler (IBM Almaden). An example of manipulation/
mechanosynthesis of iron atoms on a Cu surface with a 
scanning tunneling microscope. (Courtesy of D. Eigler.) 
Lateral resolution
R
Δx
FIGURE 6.27 Lateral resolution of a scanning tunneling 
microscope.
FIGURE 6.28 The inventors of the scanning tunneling 
microscope. Nobel laureates in Physics, 1986.

[Page 317]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   317
Zürich in 1981. They shared the Nobel Prize for 
Physics in 1986 for their microscope (Figure 6.29).
Atomic Force Microscopy
Scanning force microscopy, also called atomic force 
microscopy (AFM), constitutes a major extension of 
the STM technique. The technique, first described 
in 1986, depends on forces (repulsive or attractive) 
between atoms of a sample and a probe (Figure 6.30). 
No current flows between sample and AFM tip, so 
the sample need not be conducting.
In a typical AFM, a cantilever with a tip (the 
probe; see Figure 6.31) is oscillated above the sample 
surface. The oscillation amplitude is less than10 nm, 
and in the so-called noncontact mode, the tip does not 
touch the sample. Constant oscillation amplitude is 
maintained and surface forces, which extend from 
1 to 10 nm above the surface, decrease the resonant 
frequency of the cantilever. This in turn changes the 
amplitude of oscillation. Typical surface forces range 
from the piconewton to the nanonewton [quantum 
mechanical (covalent, metallic bonds): 1–3 nN; 
Coulomb (dipole, ionic): 0.1–5 nN; polarization 
induced (dipoles): 0.02–0.1 nN].
A cantilever must now be designed to convert 
these very small mechanical forces into measurable 
deflection, δ.
A microfabricated cantilever beam and probe tip, 
as shown in Figure 6.32, deflects in response to an 
applied force and can be represented as a linear elas-
tic, Hookean spring:
 
F = –kδ  
(6.14)
where δ =  displacement at the end of cantilever (in 
meters) (this is what we actually measure 
in a force spectroscopy experiment)
F =  external force applied to cantilever (in 
newtons) (this we can calculate from δ)
k = cantilever spring constant
FIGURE 6.29 Binning and Rohrer’s original scanning 
tunneling microscope.
δ < 0
δ = 0
δ > 0
Surface force
Sample surface
Repulsive
Attractive
Rest
position
FIGURE 6.30 An atomic force microscope measures sur-
face forces.
Triangle
Rectangle
FIGURE 6.31 Cantilevers are either triangular or rectan-
gular. Material can be silicon on silicon nitride (plastic in 
development). Probes shapes can be pyramidal or conical 
and may be sharpened.

[Page 318]
318   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
For the cantilever in Figure 6.32 the spring constant 
(in N/m) is given as follows:
 
k
EW
4
T
L
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
3
 
(6.15)
where T = cantilever thickness (in meters)
W = cantilever width (in meters)
L = cantilever length (in meters)
E = Young’s (elastic) modulus of cantilever 
material (in pascals or N/m2)
For Si, E = 11 × 1010 N/m2.
We can calculate k independently, and typical val-
ues are 0.01–100 N/m. The resonance frequency f, of 
the cantilever is given as follows:
 
f
E T
L2
= 0 162
.
ρ
 
(6.16)
where ρ is the density of the cantilever material. 
Typical values for f are 7–500 kHz.
The interaction of surface forces with this canti-
lever can now be modeled as a spring in series with 
the cantilever spring, as pictured in Figure 6.32 or, 
remembering that ω =
k
m:
 
ω
−∂
∂
=
k
F
z
m
 
(6.17)
where ∂
∂
F
z
/
 is the force gradient (F′). For small 
amplitudes, a Taylor expansion of the force can be 
carried out, and a frequency shift proportional to 
the force gradient is found, as follows:
 
Δω
ω
∂
∂
= −1
2k
F
z
 
(6.18)
In practice one needs to compromise between 
a cantilever with a small k and a large resonance 
frequency f. The resonance frequency (f) should 
indeed be higher than the data acquisition rate and 
the noise level (kHz range). To increase the resonance 
frequency, the cantilever should be stiff (large k), short 
and thin. On the other hand, to maximize sensitiv-
ity, a soft cantilever (small k) is preferred. But making 
k too small, one might have a problem of cantilevers 
crashing into the sample. With a k value of ∼1 N/m, 
an AFM can measure forces of pN, and even fN is 
feasible. The force detection limit is the Brownian 
motion of the cantilever (thermal noise limited).
In Table 6.6 we list some example AFM cantilevers 
with their force sensitivity, Young’s modulus, spring 
constant, resonant frequency, density and type of 
material, and shape. For an excellent discussion and 
references on cantilever design, consult http://www.
asylumresearch.com/springconstant.asp.
Example 6.2
Exercise: In atomic force microscopy, an ultra-
sharp tip on the end of a silicon cantilever beam 
is used to probe a surface at the nanoscale. By 
how much is the beam deflected by thermal 
motion? The cantilever has a spring constant of 
∼10 N/m.
Answer: The energy required for deflection 
of the beam by a distance δ is E = ½ kδ2. At a 
temperature of 300 K, the thermal energy is on 
the order of kT = 6 × 10–21 J.
This energy will cause an average deflection of 
the beam by δ = (2E/k)0.5 = 1 × 10–7 m, or 100 nm.
A light lever is the most common deflection 
measurement (δ) sensor used in atomic force 
microscopes. In this approach, when the canti-
lever moves  up and down, the position of a laser 
spot on a photodetector moves up and down. As a 
δ
L
T
W
F
k
k
Tip
Tip
F
∂F
∂Z
∂F
∂Z
FIGURE 6.32 Atomic force microscope cantilever model. T = cantilever thickness (m), W = cantilever width (m), L = cantile-
ver length (m), and δ = deflection of the end of the cantilever.

[Page 319]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   319
position-sensitive photodetector, a four-quadrant 
photo diode (current in each quadrant changes with 
light intensity) is used, as illustrated in Figure 6.33.
In an alternative approach a piezoresistive sensor 
is embedded in the cantilever. This approach was 
discussed in Volume I, Example 4.1.
There are three main AFM techniques in use: con-
tact, noncontact, and tapping mode. In the “repul-
sive” contact AFM, the tip is in perpetual contact 
with the sample as it slides across the surface. The 
tip is attached to the end of a cantilever with a low 
spring constant, k, while the feedback keeps the ver-
tical deflection of the cantilever constant. In contact 
mode, the AFM measures hard-sphere repulsion 
forces between the tip and sample. Forces range from 
nano- to micronewtons in ambient conditions and 
even lower (0.1 nN or less) in liquids. This method 
provides the highest resolution but may damage the 
surface. It is the only AFM technique that can pro-
vide atomic-resolution images.
In noncontact mode, the AFM derives topographic 
images from measurements of the van der Waals 
attractive forces. The tip does not touch the sample; 
instead, the cantilever with the tip oscillates (ampli-
tude <10 nm) above the surface. The resonant fre-
quency of the cantilever is decreased by the attractive 
surface force, which extends from 1 to 10 nm above 
the surface (see Volume  I, Chapter 7, “Calculating 
Interaction Forces between Surfaces and Particles”). 
The noncontact mode has the lowest resolution of 
the three main AFM approaches.
Tapping mode AFM, the most commonly used 
of all AFM modes, is a patented technique (Veeco 
Instruments) that maps topography by lightly tap-
ping the surface with an oscillating probe tip. This 
eliminates the shear forces potentially damaging to 
soft samples. The AFM tip taps the sample surface 
during the closest point of approach in each oscilla-
tion cycle, the amplitude of which is kept unchanged 
by the feedback loop. In this intermittent tip con-
tact, force is measured with improved resolution 
over noncontact AFM. Surface forces again cause an 
oscillation frequency shift, but the tap also causes 
the cantilever/tip to lose energy, giving additional 
information about the surface. Another major 
advantage of tapping mode is related to limitations 
that can arise because of the thin layer of liquid that 
forms on most sample surfaces in an ambient imag-
ing environment, i.e., in air or some other gas. The 
amplitude of the cantilever oscillation in tapping 
mode is typically on the order of 20–100 of nano-
meters, which ensures that the tip does not get stuck 
in this liquid layer. The amplitude used in noncon-
tact AFM is much smaller (<10 nm; see above), and 
as a result, the noncontact tip often gets stuck in the 
liquid layer. In general, tapping mode is much more 
effective than noncontact AFM for imaging larger 
scan sizes that may include large variations in sam-
ple topography. Tapping mode can be performed in 
gases, liquids, and some vacuum environments.
The presence of a feedback loop is one of the 
subtler differences between AFMs and older 
TABLE 6.6 Example Atomic Force Microscope Cantilevers
Force 
Sensitivity (N)
k (N/m)
ω
ρ (g/cm–3)
Module Young E 
(1010 N/m2)
Dimensions (mm)
Material
~10−8
5000
22 kHz
8.9
22
4 × 0.25 diameter
Ni wire
~10−11
2.5
33 MHz
2.3
11
2 × 0.5 × 0.1 μm
Si bar
~10−14
0.004
8 kHz
3.1
32
0.2 × 0.036 × 0.3 μm
Si3N4 (V-shape)
10−12
0.4
14 kHz
2.2
7
0.25 × 5 μm diameter
Quartz fiber
Sensor output
⇒ δ ⇒ F
Position sensitive
photodetector
Mirror
Laser diode
A
B
C
D
δ
 10°–15°
Cantilever
Computer 
Piezoelectric
scanner
Probe tip
z
Sample
FIGURE 6.33 A light lever atomic force microscope setup.

[Page 320]
320   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 stylus-based instruments such as record players 
and stylus profilometers (see Figure 6.40). The 
AFM not only measures the force on the sam-
ple but also regulates it, allowing acquisition of 
images at very low forces. One point of interest: 
the faster the feedback loop can correct deviations 
of the cantilever deflection, the faster the AFM can 
acquire images; therefore, a well-constructed feed-
back loop is essential to microscope performance. 
AFM feedback loops tend to have a bandwidth of 
about 10 kHz, resulting in image acquisition times 
of about 1 min.
In Figure 6.34 we show a photograph of a typical 
AFM.
Tools to Measure Materials 
Properties: Property Metrology
Introduction
While most MEMS metrology techniques focus 
on dimensional metrology and some on dynamic 
metrology, few systems exist for measuring other 
properties of microsystems, such as electrical, mag-
netic, thermal, and mechanical characteristics. In 
the category of material property measuring equip-
ment, we start with a review of scanning proximal 
probe microscopes (SPMs) for determination of 
material properties, such as magnetic, thermal, and 
mechanical behavior. We then consider tools used 
to measure conductivity and carrier type of a mate-
rial. MEMS devices are often mechanically dynamic 
by nature. Therefore, there is also a need to measure 
dynamic motion of MEMS devices. We cover two 
mechanical property metrology techniques: using 
interferometry with a stroboscopic LED to freeze 
device motion and laser Doppler vibrometry to mea-
sure contactless velocity and displacement of vibrat-
ing structures.
Material Property Measuring Scanning 
Proximal Probe Microscopes
The scanning proximal microscopes introduced 
above also can be utilized for a variety of material 
property metrology tasks (see Table 6.5). We briefly 
describe a number of the best-known techniques.
Magnetic force microscopy (MFM) is an imaging 
mode derived from atomic force microscopy (AFM) 
used in the noncontact mode that maps magnetic 
force gradients above a sample surface with a reso-
lution of 10–25 nm. An image acquired with a MFM 
probe tip coated with a magnetized material (e.g., 
CoCr or NiFe) contains information about both the 
topography and the magnetic properties of a surface. 
Which effect dominates depends upon the distance 
of the tip from the surface, because the magnetic 
force persists for greater tip-to-sample separations 
than the van der Waals force. If the tip is close to the 
surface, in the region where standard noncontact 
AFM is operated, the image will be predominantly 
topographic. As the separation between tip and the 
sample increases, magnetic effects become appar-
ent. While scanning in the latter mode, it is the 
magnetic field’s dependence on tip-sample separa-
tion that induces changes in the cantilever’s ampli-
tude, resonance frequency, or phase. MFM can be 
used to image both naturally occurring and delib-
erately written magnetic domains. A MFM typically 
Photodiode
adjustment
knob
SPM tip
Tipholder
Sample
Scanner
(Shown: “A”)
Coarse adjustment
screws
Mode selector
switch
A-B
A+B
display
(A+C)-(B+D)
A+B+C+D
display
Signal sum display
(elliptical)
Base
Motor control
switch
Scanner support ring
Retaining springs
X-Y head translator
Head
Laser adjustment knobs
FIGURE 6.34 Veeco Instruments atomic force microscope. 

[Page 321]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   321
measures magnetic properties and topography of a 
surface in a two-pass fashion. The first pass is a stan-
dard AFM trace that maps out the surface topogra-
phy by gently tapping the tip along the surface. A 
second pass then samples the magnetic stray field 
by scanning at a constant height above the surface 
(see Figure 6.35).
Indentation (hardness) testing is very common for 
bulk materials where the direct relationship between 
bulk hardness and yield strength is well known. It 
can be measured by pressing a hard, specially shaped 
point into the surface and observing indentation. 
This type of measurement is of little use for mea-
suring thin films below 5 × 104 Å. Consequently, 
very little is known about the hardness of thin films. 
Nanoindenting and scratching are new AFM-based 
methods to characterize material mechanical prop-
erties on a very small scale. Features less than 100 nm 
across, as well as thin films less than 5 nm thick, can 
be evaluated. Test methods include indentation for 
comparative and quantitative hardness determina-
tion and scratching for evaluation of wear resistance 
and thin-film adhesion. During nanoindentation, a 
hard tip of known geometry makes an impression 
in a sample, with a penetration depth and force 
dynamically measured at resolutions of nanometers 
and micronewtons, respectively. The resulting force-
depth curve can be analyzed to give bulk properties 
such as modulus and  hardness, as well as to study 
deformation mechanisms. Empirical relations have 
correlated hardness with Young’s modulus and with 
uniaxial strength of thin films. Hardness calcula-
tions must include both plastic and long-distance 
elastic deformation. If the indentation is deeper than 
10% of the film, corrections for elastic hardness con-
tribution of the substrate must also be included.12 
Since in this new specialized instrument, load and 
displacement data are collected while the indenta-
tion is being introduced to the thin film; this elimi-
nates the errors associated with later measurement 
of indentation size and provides continuous moni-
toring of load/displacement data similar to a stan-
dard tensile test. Load resolution may be 0.25 µN, 
displacement resolution 0.2–0.4 nm, and x-y sample 
position accuracy 0.5 µm. Diamond and sapphire 
are the primary materials of nanoindenting tips, 
but other hard materials also can be used, such as 
quartz, silicon, tungsten, steel, tungsten carbide, 
and almost any other hard metal or ceramic.
Bushan provides an excellent introduction to 
this field in the Handbook of Micro/Nanotribology.13 In 
Figure 6.36 an indentation and scratch on polyure-
thane film is shown (17-µm scan).
In electrostatic force microscopy (EFM) a groun-
ded tip first acquires the surface topography using 
the tapping mode. A voltage between the tip and 
the sample is applied in the second scan to collect 
electrostatic data (50–100 nm above the surface). 
EFM measures electric field gradient and distribu-
tion above the sample surface. EFM is used to moni-
tor continuity and electric field patterns on samples 
such as semiconductor devices and composite con-
ductors, as well as for basic research on electric fields 
on the microscopic scale. For thermal microscopy, 
there are quite a few options, as listed in Table 6.7, 
but scanning thermal microscopy (SThM) provides 
by far the best spatial resolution.
Topography
MFM
0.04
30
20
10
0
30
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
20
10
0
0.02
0.00
30
20
10
0
30
20
10
0
FIGURE 6.35 Magnetic force microscopy of a magneto-
optical disc. (Veeco Instruments.)
FIGURE 6.36 Indentation and scratch on polyurethane 
film (17-μm scan). (Asylum Research, http://www.asylum 
research.com/Products/NanoI/NanoIndenter.pdf.)

[Page 322]
322   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
When an ultraminiaturized resistance is used as 
the scanning probe in an AFM, the image contrast 
reflects variations in thermal properties across the 
sample. The probe can be used as a thermometer or 
as a localized DC or AC heat source. When used as 
a thermometer, the image contrast represents vari-
ations in temperature across the surface. Hot spots, 
and also defects causing hot spots, in integrated 
circuits (ICs) and semiconductor devices may be 
detected this way. When used as a highly localized 
DC heat source, thermal conductivity/diffusivity 
variations across the surface can be mapped. In the 
AC heat source mode, thermal waves can be gen-
erated. Because of the evanescent nature of these 
waves, one can control the maximum depth of the 
sample that is imaged, according to the depth of 
penetration of the wave, which varies with the fre-
quency chosen. SThM therefore looks below the 
surface in a controlled manner.
Conductivity and Carrier Type of a Material
In this section we cover how to go about measur-
ing the conductivity and carrier type of thin films, 
such as thin-film resistors. In ICs and MEMS/
NEMS devices, resistors are either thin-film metals 
or semiconductors. Metal resistors are deposited by 
evaporation, sputtering, or plating, whereas doping 
a semiconductor substrate creates semiconductor 
resistors. Metal resistors are patterned by wet etch, 
dry etch, or lift off and come in typical thicknesses 
of 0.1–10 µm and widths between 1 and 100 µm. 
Typical resistivity values range from 3 µΩcm for Al 
to 100 µΩcm for Nichrome. Metal films have nearly 
linear resistance-temperature behavior over wide 
temperature ranges, with a typical resistivity coef-
ficient of 10–3/°C. Issues that arise with metal resis-
tors are morphological variations such as grain size 
changes and surface passivation. Semiconductor 
resistors, created by doping a semiconductor sub-
strate, have a typical resistivity from 10–3 to 107 
Ωcm. The resistance-temperature behavior of semi-
conductor is much more dependent on temperature 
and impurities than that of metals and feature a typ-
ical resistivity coefficient per °C of –0.05. The big-
gest issues with semiconductor resistors are dopant 
concentration uniformity and deleterious effects of 
high-temperature processing.
In Volume I, Chapter 3, we saw that the Hall effect 
enables the measurement of the free-carrier type and 
concentration in semiconductors. Here we review 
two simpler techniques to determine these param-
eters, i.e., hot-point probe and four-point probe.
 In Figure 6.37 we consider a very thin conduc-
tor film, of length l, width W, and thickness t, so 
that the current path area A = tW. The resistance, 
R, of this thin  conductive layer is proportional to 
the resistivity, ρ, and inversely proportional to the 
thickness, t. It is convenient to define a sheet resis-
tance, Rs, that is equal to ρ/t. Sheet resistance may 
be thought of as a material property for conductors 
that are essentially two-dimensional. For the resis-
tance of a thin deposited conductor layer of length 
L, thickness t, and width W, we can write the fol-
lowing equation:
 
R
t
L
W
R
L
W
s
=
=
ρ
 
(6.19)
TABLE 6.7 Thermal Microscopy for Micro-Nano 
Devices
Techniques
Spatial Resolution
Infrared thermometry
1–10 μm*
Laser surface reflectance
1 μm*
Raman spectroscopy
1 μm*
Liquid crystals
1 μm*
Near-field optical 
thermometry
<1 μm
Scanning thermal 
microscopy
<100 nm
* Diffraction limit for far-field optics.
W
L
Cross-sectional
area = A
t
FIGURE 6.37 Sample geometry for a conductor thin film.

[Page 323]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   323
The ratio L/W is referred to as the number of 
squares (~) and is dimensionless. The sheet resis-
tance has the units of ohms, but it is convenient to 
refer to it as ohms per square (Ω/~). The resistance 
of a rectangular thin layer is therefore the sheet 
resistance times the number of squares (L/W). The 
thickness and the number of squares, which can be 
accurately controlled with lithography, primarily 
determine the sheet resistance of a thin film.
The latter can be accurately controlled with 
lithography, whereas the sheet resistance primar-
ily is determined by the film thickness carrier type 
and conductivity. Sheet resistance of a newly depos-
ited thin film is typically measured with a four-
point probe, an important tool in any IC or MEMS 
laboratory. For measuring resistance of a thin film, 
one could just measure the current that flows for a 
given applied voltage between two electrodes con-
tacting the sample. However, in that case, contact 
resistances associated with the probes and current 
spreading problems around the probes can be sig-
nificant and are not easily accounted for. Using four 
metal probes, as shown in Figure 6.38, allows one to 
force the current through the two outer probes using 
a constant current source and measure the voltage 
between the two inner probes. There still might be 
contact resistance and current spreading problems 
around the two outer probes, but since the voltage 
drop is measured between the two inner probes, 
problems with probe contacts are eliminated since 
no current flows through these inner contacts. The 
measured resistance (V/I) is converted to resistivity 
using the following relationship:
 
ρ
π
= V
I
SF
.2
 
(6.20)
with S the distance in centimeters between the metal 
probe needles and F a correction term. In the case 
the thickness, t, of the wafer or a measured film is 
much larger than S (t >>>> S), the correction factor F 
in Equation 6.18 equals 1. For thin films with S >>> t, 
Equation 6.20 must be replaced by the following:
 
ρ
π
=
t
ln2
V
I
 
(6.21)
and since Rs = ρ/t, we can calculate the sheet resis-
tance as follows:
 
R
ln2
V
I
V
I
s =
=
≠
4 53
.
 
(6.22)
The latter expression is most handy and easy to 
memorize.
The technique is more powerful than the sheet 
resistance method described above because it can 
determine the material type, carrier concentra-
tion, and carrier mobility separately. To determine 
whether a wafer is n- or p-type, a hot-point probe 
is a simple and reliable tool. The basic operation of 
this probe is illustrated in Figure 6.39. Two metal 
probes make ohmic contact with the semiconductor 
surface, and one probe is heated 25–100°C higher 
than the other. A voltmeter measures a potential 
difference across the probes, and the voltage polar-
ity indicates whether the material is n- or p-type. In 
the case of an n-type sample, the majority carriers 
are electrons. At the hot probe, the thermal energy 
of the electrons is higher than at the cold probe, so 
the electrons will tend to diffuse away from the hot 
probe driven by the temperature gradient. As the 
electrons diffuse away from the hot probe, they leave 
behind a positively charged zone at the hot probe 
and the negatively charged mobile electrons tend 
to build up near the cold probe. This results in the 
hot probe becoming positive with respect to the cold 
probe. By a similar set of arguments, if the mate-
rial were p-type, positively charged holes would be 
the majority carriers, and the polarity of the induced 
voltage would be reversed.
Dynamic Mechanical Properties
Interferometry with a stroboscopic LED and laser 
Doppler vibrometry can both be used to measure 
Voltmeter
R
I
V
Wafer
Constant current source
FIGURE 6.38 Four-point probe measurement arrangement.

[Page 324]
324   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
contactless velocity and displacement of vibrat-
ing structures. A stroboscopic LED freezes device 
motion and enables an interferometer, as shown in 
Figure  6.11, to measure in-plane and out-of-plane 
motion at frequencies up to 10 MHz (this addi-
tion to an interferometer is called a dynamic MEMS 
capability).
A laser Doppler vibrometer is an interferometry 
system for accurately measuring velocity and dis-
placement of vibrating structures again without 
contact. The system is based on the principle of 
the detection of the Doppler shift of coherent laser 
light scattered from a small area of the moving test 
structure. This system detects the Doppler shift of 
a coherent laser and then converts the frequency 
shift to velocity. As the laser light has a very high 
frequency, a direct demodulation of the light is 
impossible; therefore, an optical interferometer 
is used to mix the scattered light coherently with 
a reference beam. Such an arrangement can be 
based on a Michelson interferometer, as shown in 
Figure 6.10.
Structure Metrology
Introduction
Structural metrology measures crystallinity, defects, 
surface roughness, etc. In the structural metrology 
category, we review stylus profilometry for surface 
roughness and transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) for crystallinity.
Stylus Profilometry
Surface texture of a sample is, in general, broken up 
into three components: roughness, waviness, and 
form (see also Volume II, Chapter 6, on mechanical 
 energy-based removing). Roughness refers to the 
marks made on a sample surface by the machining 
tool itself, e.g., grooves from the tool or from each 
grinding granule on a grinding wheel. Waviness is 
the result of the distance between the tool and the 
workpiece changing during machining. This may 
be caused by vibration in the tool caused by sources 
outside the machining tool (e.g., a truck pass-
ing by) or by sources inside the tool (e.g., a worn 
spindle). Form errors are yet larger dimensional 
errors because the machine tool path is not always 
straight or it may be worn. This creates surface 
irregularities, but in a consistent manner, because 
the machine follow the same wrong path. All three 
surface finish components exist simultaneously 
and overlap one another. One often will want to 
look at each (roughness, waviness, and form) sepa-
rately, so we make the assumption (a correct one, 
in most cases) that roughness has a shorter wave-
length than waviness, which in turn has a shorter 
wavelength than form.
A stylus profilometer uses a hard tip (e.g., dia-
mond) dragged over a surface with very light 
pressure and simultaneously measures form, 
dimension, texture, and step height. The first such 
devices for surface roughness measurement came 
about around 1930. The movement of the tip 
actuates a linear variable differential transducer 
(LVDT) that converts movement in an electrical 
signal. The tip of the profilometer is conical and 
has a finite rounded shape, which interacts with 
the sample being scanned. It may measure film 
thickness (step height) changes of 200 Å to 65 µm 
with a vertical resolution of about 1 nm. The verti-
cal sensitivity is in the nanometer range, but steep 
edge profiles are distorted because of the shape of 
the tip, as indicated in Figure 6.40. The horizontal 
resolution depends on tip radius, so small-radius 
tips are better but are more likely to be damaged by 
mishandling.
Cold
probe
Energetic
holes diﬀuse away
Energetic electrons
diﬀuse away
p-type
n-type
Hot
(–)
Hot
(+)
A
Hot
probe
FIGURE 6.39 Using a hot-point probe to determine whether a semiconductor is n- or p-type.

[Page 325]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   325
As we saw earlier, an atomic force microscope 
(AFM) is a new instrument for measuring rough-
ness of a sample surface. As for its design, an AFM 
has similarities to a conventional stylus profilome-
ter; however, an AFM can image a sample surface 
and precisely measure up to nanometer size in three 
dimensions. Because of the sharper tip and small 
loading force, the lateral resolution in AFM is greatly 
improved in comparison with the conventional pro-
filometer. In Table 6.8 we compare the major types 
of profilometers.
Transmission Electron Microscopy
Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll built the first transmis-
sion electron microscope (TEM) in 1931. As in the 
case of the first optical microscope, this was a very 
crude machine compared with its modern descen-
dants. It did, however, put some important ideas 
about how to image with electrons to the test. For 
example, instead of using glass lenses to bend and 
focus light, electron microscopes use magnetic coils 
to do the same for electrons (H. Busch was the first 
to use a magnetic coil like a lens in 1926). Ruska 
used his first electron microscope to take pictures 
of gold and copper surfaces and produced images 
at about ×10 (about the same magnification as the 
1595 Janssen microscope). The development of 
the electron microscope was much faster, though, 
than that of the optical microscope, and it was not 
long before electron microscopes far surpassed 
the resolution of optical microscopes (Ruska con-
structed a microscope that surpassed the 200-nm 
optical limit in 1933). Following the development 
Stylus tip angle
Trace
Sample step
r
R
H
H
FIGURE 6.40 The stylus of a stylus profilometer.
TABLE 6.8 Profilometers Compared
White Light Interferometry and 
Phase Shift Technology
Stylus Contact
Atomic Force Microscope
Advantages
Excellent depth resolution, 
0.1 nm; very good lateral 
resolution down, to 0.3 μm
Lowest-price technique for 
standard systems
Best lateral resolutions for 
detail imaging
Use charge-coupled device 
camera to take roughness 
measurement in a few seconds
Depending on design can test 
steep angular surfaces
Can reveal surface structure 
in details
Stitching technique allows 
coverage of large surfaces
Ideal for many microelectronic 
applications
Disadvantages
Difficulty on high-angular 
surfaces or surface where line 
of interference pattern is 
difficult to see; chromatic 
aberration technique works 
better on these surfaces
Tip size often larger than 10 μm 
but can be down to 1 μm in 
higher-priced systems
Slow compared with white 
light systems
More limited than white light 
chromatic aberration in the 
z-direction; stitching allows a 
few millimeters
Depending on size of probe and 
load applied, deformation may 
occur on softer materials, such 
as polymers or plastics
Requires more knowledge 
for use
Normally two-dimensional 
instruments
Relatively small surfaces 
can be tested (100 μm by 
100 μm)
Slow, especially if three-
dimensional imaging is 
performed
Source: http://www.microphotonics.com/compare.htm.

[Page 326]
326   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
of the first commercial available electron micro-
scope by Ruska and the company Siemens in 1939, 
the electron microscope rapidly became an invalu-
able tool to science and engineering. Much of what 
we know about the nanoworld we owe indeed to 
the electron microscope. Although the technique 
of x-ray diffraction preceded the invention of the 
electron microscope and provided compelling evi-
dence for atomic crystal structure, atoms them-
selves had never been seen until high-resolution 
TEMs came about.
A TEM maybe compared to a slide projector. In 
a slide projector, a beam of light passes through 
(transmits) a slide, and as the light passes through, 
the structures and objects on the slide modulate it. 
This transmitted beam is then projected onto the 
viewing screen, forming an enlarged image of the 
slide. TEMs work much the same way except that 
they shine a beam of electrons through a very thin 
specimen, and whatever electrons are transmitted 
are projected onto a phosphor screen or recorded 
on film or by a digital camera for the user to see. 
TEMs are used to characterize the microstructure 
of materials with very high spatial resolution. The 
electron gun, condenser lenses, and vacuum sys-
tem in a TEM are similar to the ones in an SEM (see 
above), but in a TEM, a higher acceleration voltage 
of 120–200 kV is used (the operating voltage in an 
SEM ranges from 30 to 60 kV). In a scanning trans-
mission electron microscope (STEM), the beam is 
rastered across the sample to form the image.
With a TEM, information about the morphology, 
crystal structure, defects, crystal phases, and com-
position is obtained by a combination of electron-
 optical imaging, electron diffraction, and small 
probe (20 Å) capabilities. The trade-off for this 
diverse range of structural information and high 
resolution is the challenge of producing very thin 
samples for electron transmission (Figure 6.41). A 
TEM sample must be 1000 Å or less in thickness in 
the area of interest. Sample preparation for TEM is 
more tedious and time consuming than for almost 
any other analytical technique.
There are three basic modes of TEM operation: 
the bright-field imaging mode, the dark-field imag-
ing mode, and the diffraction mode. The way 
to choose which electrons form the image is by 
 inserting an aperture into the back focal plane of 
the objective lens.
In the bright-field (BF) mode of the TEM, an aper-
ture is placed in the back focal plane of the objec-
tive lens, which allows only the direct beam to pass 
(Figure 6.42a). In this case, the image results from a 
weakening of the direct beam by its interaction with 
the sample. Therefore, mass-thickness and diffrac-
tion contrast contribute to image formation: thick 
areas, areas in which heavy atoms are enriched, and 
crystalline areas appear with dark contrast.
In dark-field (DF) images, the direct beam is 
blocked by the aperture while one or more diffracted 
beams are allowed to pass the objective aperture. 
Since diffracted beams have strongly interacted with 
the specimen, very useful information is present in 
DF images, e.g., about planar defects, stacking faults, 
or particle size (Figure 6.42b).
We can also think of the TEM as a diffraction 
camera. To obtain lattice images, a larger objective 
aperture is selected to allow many beams, including 
the direct beam, to pass (Figure 6.42c). The image is 
formed by the interference of the diffracted beams 
with the direct beam (phase contrast). If the point 
resolution of the microscope is sufficiently high and 
a suitable sample is oriented along a zone axis, then 
high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images are obtained. 
In many cases, the atomic structure of a specimen 
can directly be investigated by HRTEM.
Interaction with a thin specimen (TEM & STEM)
Incident electrons
Secondary electrons
X-rays (atom
speciﬁc)
Backscattered
Bremsstrahlung
Electrons
Elastically
scattered electrons
Transmitted electrons 
Inelastically
scattered electrons
Tin specimen
Heat
FIGURE 6.41 Electron path through a thin specimen 
(<1,000 Å) in transmission electron microscopy and 
scanning transmission electron microscopy.

[Page 327]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   327
The objective lens forms a diffraction pattern in 
the back focal plane with electrons scattered by the 
sample and combines them to generate an image in 
the image plane (first intermediate image) as illus-
trated in Figure 6.43. Thus, diffraction pattern and 
image are simultaneously present in the TEM. In 
imaging mode (left panel in Figure 6.43), an objec-
tive aperture can be inserted in the back focal plane 
to select one or more beams that contribute to the 
final image (BF, DF, and HRTEM). In selected area 
electron diffraction (SAED), an aperture in the plane 
of the first intermediate image defines the region 
for which the diffraction is obtained (Figure 6.43, 
right panel). Which of them appears in the plane of 
the second intermediate image and is magnified by 
the projective lens on the viewing screen depends 
on the intermediate lens. Switching from real space 
(image) to reciprocal space (diffraction pattern) is 
easily achieved by changing the strength of the inter-
mediate lens. By manipulating the magnetic lenses 
of the microscope, the diffraction pattern may thus 
be observed by projecting it onto the screen instead 
of the image (Figure 6.43).
 An example of what a diffraction pattern ob tained 
in this way may look like is shown in Figure 6.44. The 
center spot in this figure corresponds to the transmit-
ted electron beam, and the other spots are diffracted 
portions of the initial electron beam. The location 
of the spots is governed by Bragg’s law (nλ = 2d sinθ; 
see Volume I, Figure 2.17 and Equation 2.20).
Transmission and scanning transmission electron 
microscopy can produce images of atomic lattices 
with 2.3-Å point-to-point resolution. In Table 6.9, 
we compare scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with 
optical microscopy (OM) and scanning proximal 
microscopy (SPM) (using both STMs and AFMs).
Compositional Metrology
Introduction
As examples of chemical composition metrol-
ogy we discuss energy dispersive analysis of x-rays 
(EDAX) [also known as energy dispersive x-ray spec-
troscopy (EDX) or EDS], a standard procedure for 
identifying and quantifying elemental composition 
of  specimen surfaces to shallow depths and Auger 
electron spectroscopy (AES) and scanning Auger 
Optic axis
Objective aperture
Diﬀraction
pattern
Bright-ﬁeld image
(a)
Optic axis
Objective aperture
Diﬀraction
pattern
Lattice image
(c)
(b)
Optic axis
Objective aperture
Diﬀraction
pattern
Dark-ﬁeld image
FIGURE 6.42 Bright-field image (a), dark-field image (b), and diffraction (c) in scanning transmission electron microscopy.
Specimen
Objective lens
Back focal plane
objective aperture
1. Intermediate image
SAED aperture
2. Intermediate
image
Intermediate
lens
Projective
lens
Image
Diﬀraction pattern
Viewing
screen
FIGURE 6.43 Switching from imaging to diffraction 
in scanning transmission electron microscopy. SAED = 
selected area electron diffraction.

[Page 328]
328   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 6.9 The Use of SEMs and TEMs Compared with OM and Scanning Proximal Microscopy (Using 
Both STMs and AFMs)
OM
SEM/TEM
Scanning Proximal Probe 
Microscopy
Environment
Air, liquid
Vacuum
Air, liquid, UHV
Depth of field
Small
Large
Medium
Lateral resolution
1 μm
1–5 nm: SEM 0.1 nm: TEM
2–10 nm: AFM 0.1 nm: STM
Vertical resolution
N/A
N/A
1.1 nm: AFM 0.2 0.01 nm: STM
Magnification
Up to 2,000
Up to 1,000,000
Up to 100,000,000
Sample
Not completely 
transparent
Unchargeable, vacuum 
compatible; thin film: TEM
Surface height <10 mm
Contrast
Absorption/reflection
Scattering/diffraction
Tunneling
R
L
= 1 d
1 λ
d =
L
λ
R
000
000 010 020 030
100 110 120 130
Trace of
reﬂecting
planes
Diﬀracted
spot
Center
spot
R
L
210
200
220
R
Electron
beam
Ewald
sphere
hk0
hk1
2
FIGURE 6.44 An example of what a diffraction pattern in a scanning transmission electron microscope may look like. 
The center spot corresponds to the transmitted electron beam, and the other spots are diffracted portions of the initial 
electron beam. The locations of the spots are governed by Bragg’s law.

[Page 329]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   329
micros copy (SAM), which can identify every atom 
from Li on up.
EDAX (EDX or EDS)
Energy dispersive analysis of x-rays (EDAX) is also 
called EDX and, more and more frequently, EDS. 
This compositional metrology technique is carried 
out in conjunction with scanning electron micros-
copy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM). A modern trend in electron microscopy is 
indeed to fit x-ray analysis equipment as a bolt-on 
accessory to electron microscopes. Bombarding a 
specimen with electrons causes x-rays of character-
istic wavelengths and energies to be emitted from 
the spot where the beam strikes the sample, and an 
EDS detector analyzes the x-ray photons by energy 
rather than wavelength. The EDS detector (some-
times called EDX detector) converts the energy of 
each individual x-ray into a voltage signal of pro-
portional size. The detector involves a large single-
 crystal Si that either has been treated to approximate 
an ideal semiconductor or is of high-enough purity 
to truly be an intrinsic semiconductor. Front and 
back contacts on the Si piece are kept at several kilo-
volts potential relative to each other, and x-rays are 
converted into a charge by ionization of atoms in the 
crystal. To keep electronic noise at a minimum, the 
Si detector is cooled in liquid nitrogen. X-rays that 
pass through the front contact tend to dissipate their 
energy, creating electron-hole pairs in the intrinsic 
region. Next, this charge is converted to a voltage 
signal by a field effect transistor (FET) preamplifier, 
and the voltage signal is input into a pulse proces-
sor for measurement. Since each electron-hole pair 
has a characteristic creation energy, the total num-
ber of charge carriers created is proportional to the 
energy of the incident x-ray. A computer keeps track 
of the number of counts within each energy range, 
and the total collected x-ray spectrum can then be 
determined. Computer analysis of energy spectra 
makes it possible to measure accurately the nature 
and quantity of different elements in the material. 
This can then be used to make a chemical map of 
the surface. The technique is of little use to biolo-
gists because light elements such as carbon produce 
too weak an x-ray signal. However, it is of great value 
in materials science, particularly because an area 
as small as 1 µm2 can be analyzed with precision 
(http://www.edax.com).
Typically, x-ray analysis is a bulk sensitive tech-
nique because of the small cross-section [10–6 Å2 
compared with 1 Å2 for LEED (see above)], but graz-
ing incidence (<1°) makes it surface sensitive (total 
reflection, because the refractive index of x-rays is 
slightly smaller than unity). The refracted wave 
becomes an evanescent wave traveling along the sur-
face within a few 10 Å. This is called gracing incidence 
x-ray diffraction (GIXRD).
Auger Electron Spectroscopy and 
Scanning Auger Microscopy
Upon electron bombardment of metals, Pierre Auger, 
in 1925, observed (at first in a cloud chamber, and 
then on photographic plates) the occurrence of elec-
tron emissions with precisely determined energies. 
These electrons were later named Auger electrons 
and may serve to identify their parent atoms. It was 
J. J. Lander, who in 1953 suggested the idea of using 
Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) for surface analy-
sis. AES was implemented as an analytic tool in 1967 
(by Larry Harris), after increasing the sensitivity of 
the method by using differential spectra to discrimi-
nate the small Auger peaks in the electronic spectra. 
AES is now the most commonly used method by 
which to investigate surface composition.
The Auger process is a three-electron concerted 
process, as illustrated in Figure 6.45. An incident 
electron beam (2–10 keV) hits an atom and ejects 
a core electron, leaving a hole in a highly excited 
atom. The ionized atom relaxes by emitting either 
an x-ray photon (x-ray fluorescence) or by ejecting 
another electron (Auger electron). For lighter ele-
ments Auger emission is favored over x-ray fluores-
cence. In Auger spectroscopy the state of excitation 
is quenched by another electron falling into the hole 
left by the ejected core electron. The binding energy 
of the first electron is always very much greater than 
that of the second, so that there is still considerable 
excess energy in the system. This extra energy is 
shed by the ejection of a third electron from another 
shell. The residual kinetic energy of the ejected elec-
tron is measured and is a unique quantity deter-
mined by the binding energies of the three electrons 
and the work function of the materials involved. 

[Page 330]
330   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
An Auger process is identified by the three letters 
of the atomic shells that participate in the process. 
The transition in Figure 6.45, for example, is a KLL 
Auger transition.
In Figure 6.18 above, we showed the relative 
intensity versus abundance of the various emission 
phenomena from a sample under e-beam radiation 
in an SEM and a TEM. Some of the electrons, in the 
energy region between backscattered and secondary 
electrons, arise from the Auger process occurring in 
atoms near the surface. Many Auger electrons will 
fully lose their energy via inelastic collisions in the 
solid. Therefore, the analyzer will collect only those 
Auger electrons originating from the near surface 
region. The number of emitted electrons N(E) ver-
sus energy is redrawn in Figure 6.46, with empha-
sis on the Auger electron peaks. Electrons emitted 
in the 100–1000 eV range (higher than secondary, 
lower than backscattered) are energy analyzed, and 
a spectrum is obtained that is unique to every atom. 
Often, hemispherical analyzers are used because of 
its better geometric properties. Hence, it gives very 
specific atomic identity information rather than the 
general small/large z-guidance provided by backscat-
tered electrons (BSEs) in an SEM. Auger spectroscopy 
can identify every atom from Li on up (since three 
electrons are involved in the Auger process, H and 
He do not produce Auger electrons). Auger spectra 
for all elements are compiled in an Auger atlas.
Typically, the relatively small Auger signals N(E) 
are superimposed on a large background. Therefore 
the spectra are usually taken in the derivative mode, 
by applying a modulation voltage on the analyzer 
and detecting with a lock-in amplifier. This is dem-
onstrated in the AES example of Figure 6.47.
Since the electron beam can be can be focused 
to a spot of <1 nm, one can carry out SAM. In the 
excitation process, the backscattered electrons also 
find their way into neighboring regions of the sam-
ple and can excite electrons and induce an Auger 
 process in regions of the sample that were not in the 
original excitation volume. The Auger signal then 
arises from an apparently larger region of the sam-
ple than the incident electron beam directly excites. 
This degrades the spatial resolution in the SAM 
process by a factor of 2–5 compared with the same 
SEM experiment. As a consequence, the penetration 
depth and scattering within the solid typically limits 
the SAM resolution to ∼20 nm, but recent instru-
ments claim a resolution of ∼6 nm. By correlating a 
specific signal with the excitation beam’s location, a 
chemical map of a surface can be produced, as illus-
trated in Figure 6.48. Although chemical shifts lead 
to changes in the Auger energies, AES is usually not 
used to get chemical binding information because 
of the three electrons involved.
Summary: Microscope Comparisons
In Figure 6.49 we compare the lateral resolutions of 
optical microscopes (OMs), scanning electron micro-
scopes (SEMs), interference microscopes (IMs), and 
proximal probe techniques such as the use of scan-
ning tunneling microscopes (STMs) and atomic force 
microscopes (AFMs).
OM is usually what one thinks of when study-
ing microscopy. It is prevalent and widely available. 
Its resolution is limited by the diffraction of light, 
which is limited to about ½ of the wavelength of 
the light being diffracted through the optical lens-
ing elements of the microscope. While this is several 
K
L
M
Vacuum level
Eject core electron
Higher electron
falls into hole
Another higher level
electron is ejected to
carry away excess
energy
Measure kinetic energy of
ejected electron
Incident
electron
beam (5 kV)
Ekinetic = E(K) – E(L) – E(L)
FIGURE 6.45 The Auger process.
Secondary 
electrons
Elastically scattered 
electrons
Auger
electrons
Energy
Eincident
Direct spectrum
N(E)
FIGURE 6.46 Auger peaks in the electron spectra of an 
scanning electron microscope or transmission electron 
microscope.

[Page 331]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   331
hundred nanometers, in practice it is challenging to 
get good optical resolution down to the 1-µm range. 
Interference microscopy is a newer technique that 
uses optical wavelength light. Its lateral resolution 
is controlled exactly like that of optical microscopy, 
and it has the same limitations. As we will see below, 
its virtue comes from its vertical resolution and its 
wide dynamic range.
In an SEM, the resolution is limited by the dif-
fraction of electron waves. Since these are in the 
angstrom range, SEMs with resolution of a few 
nanometers and a wide magnification range, from 
× 20 to × 650,000 are quite widely deployed. Recent 
reports have even described a new instrument able 
to observe atoms (a few angstroms), but these are 
not available for use yet. Probe microscopes such as 
STMs and AFMs have a resolution that is controlled 
by the sharpness of the probe tip. This can be in the 
range of a few nanometers, but the differing contrast 
mechanisms mean that an STM can easily achieve 
529eV
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Electron energy, eV
900 1000
703eV
848eV
*
Cr
Fe
Ni
*
*
90
80
70
MNN
LMM
KLL
60
50
40
30
25
15
Cr
Fe
Ni
Atomic number
5
20
10
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.01.2
Electron energy (KeV)
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Li Be
C
O
Ne
Si
S
Ar
Ca
Ti
Cr
Fe
Ni
Zn
Ge
Se
Kr
Sr
Zr
Mo
Ru
Pd
Cd
Sn
Te
Xe
Ba
Ca
Nd
Sm
Gd
Dy
Er
Yb
Hf
VV
Os
Pt
Hg
Pb
Po
Rn
Ra
Th
U
Mg
B
N
Na
Al
PCI
K
Sc
V
Mn
Co
Cu
Ga
As
Br
Rb
Nb
Tc
Rh
Ag
In
Sb
I
Cs
La
Pr
Pm
Eu
Tb
Ho
Tm
Lu
Ta
Re
Ir
Au
Ti
Bi
At
Fr
Ac
Pa
Y
F
85
75
65
55
45
35
FIGURE 6.47 Example of an Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) spectrum. From the differential AES spectrum, Cr, Fe, and 
Ni have been identified.
SAM image:
red = Al; blue = F; magenta = Al + F
Red = Al;  green = O
red = Al;  blue = F; green = O
SEM surface image
Al+F+O
FIGURE 6.48 Scanning electron microscopy and Auger images of an aluminum oxide surface, in the absence and 
presence of fluorine contamination.

[Page 332]
332   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
atomic resolution, whereas atomic resolution for an 
AFM is difficult to achieve.
AFM comes with lateral resolutions down to 30 Å 
and a vertical resolutions to 0.1 Å. STM has a lateral 
resolution of 1 Å and a vertical resolution of 0.1 Å. 
SAM is closely related to SEM, except that the scat-
tering in the sample leads to a “smearing” of the 
incident beam and broadens the effective spot size. 
Its resolution general lags behind that of an SEM by 
a factor of 2–5.
Vertical resolutions for the types of microscopes 
listed above are quite different from their lateral 
resolutions, as is evident from Figure 6.50. OMs, 
SEMs, and SAMs do not give much vertical infor-
mation at all. While it is rather straightforward to 
derive quantitative lateral data, these techniques do 
not provide for quantitation in the vertical direc-
tion. To counter this, it is possible to tilt samples 
and image their sides. However, in a specific image, 
the vertical information is very poor. Hence, these 
techniques have much better lateral resolution than 
vertical resolution. In contrast, probe microscopes 
and IMs have much better vertical resolution than 
lateral resolution. The IM, even though it is an opti-
cal technique, has a resolution limit approaching 
1 nm. The AFM and the STM have vertical resolu-
tions in the subatomic range of tens of picometers. 
The best instruments can resolve down to a few 
hundred femtometers.
We need to image large things as well as small. 
So another important point is, which instrument 
can provide the largest field of view? What is the 
range of features, largest to smallest, that can be 
observed? The resolution limits listed above do 
define the lower limits of the dynamic range of 
the microscopes reviewed, and the upper limit 
is controlled by the size of the field of view that 
can be imaged at once. OM is able to image from 
macroscopic features down to its resolution limit. 
The scanning electron techniques generally have a 
maximum field of view of a few millimeters. The 
proximal probe microscopes are quite limited in 
their maximum field of view. Also, the limitations 
are different for the lateral and vertical directions. 
Lateral limits range from a few micrometers to over 
100 µm. By contrast, the range in the vertical direc-
tion is limited to around a few micrometers. These 
limits often are determining factors in assessing the 
applicability of a probe microscope technique for a 
particular application. IM has a very wide dynamic 
range. It is able to image features varying in verti-
cal displacement of over a millimeter. The lateral 
range is set by its maximum field of view, which is 
around 5 mm. The dynamic ranges of the various 
1 cm
1 mm
1 µm
1 nm
1 Å
AFM
STM
IM
SEM
OM
SAM
FIGURE 6.49 Lateral resolution of microscopies: optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), scanning 
Auger microscopy (SAM), interference microscopy (IM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and atomic force micros-
copy (AFM).
1 cm
1 mm
1 µm
1 nm
AFM
STM
IM
SEM
OM
SAM
1 Å
FIGURE 6.50 Vertical resolution of microscopies: optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), scanning 
Auger microscopy (SAM), interference microscopy (IM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and atomic force micros-
copy (AFM).

[Page 333]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   333
microscopes, considered here, are summarized in 
Figure 6.51.
MEMS Based Metrology: In Situ 
Stress-Measuring Techniques
Introduction
A stressed thin film will bend a thin substrate by a 
measurable degree. A tensile stress bends the surface 
and makes it concave, while a compressive stress ren-
ders the surface convex (see Volume II, Figure 7.58). 
The most common methods for measuring the stress 
in a thin film are based on this substrate bending 
principle. The deformation of a thin substrate due to 
stress is measured either by observing the displace-
ment of the center of a circular disk or by using a thin 
cantilevered beam as a substrate and calculating the 
radius of curvature of the beam and hence the stress 
from the deflection of the free end. More sophisticated 
local stress measurements use analytical tools such 
as x-ray,14 acoustics, Raman spectroscopy,15 infrared 
spectroscopy,16 and electron-diffraction techni ques. 
Local stress does not necessarily mean the same as 
the stress measured by substrate bending techniques, 
since stress is defined microscopically, while defor-
mations are induced mostly macroscopically. The 
relationship between macroscopic forces and dis-
placements and internal differential deformation, 
therefore, must be modeled carefully. Local stress 
measurements may also be made using in situ surface 
micromachined structures such as strain gauges made 
directly out of the film to be tested.17–22 The dimen-
sions and structure of a thin suspended and pres-
surized micromachined membrane, as we learned 
above, may be measured by stylus profilometry, 
light microscopy, or interferometry. Intrinsic stress 
influences the frequency response of mobile micro-
structures (see Volume II, Equation 7.29), which can 
be measured by laser Doppler vibrometer or with 
an interferometer equipped with a stroboscope (see 
Figure 6.11: optical WYKO white-light profilometer 
with dynamic MEMS capability). Whereas residual 
stress can be determined from wafer curvature and 
dynamic deflection data, material structure of the 
film can be studied by x-ray diffraction and transmis-
sion electron microscopy (TEM). Krulevitch, among 
others, attempted to link the material structure of 
polysilicon and its residual strain.23 Below, we will 
review stress-measuring techniques, starting with 
the more traditional ones and subsequently clarify-
ing the problems and opportunities in stress mea-
suring with in situ surface micromachined devices.
Disk Method: Biaxial Measurements of 
Mechanical Properties of Thin Films
For all practical purposes, only stresses in the x and 
y directions are of interest in determining overall 
thin-film stress, as a film under high stress can only 
expand or contract by bending the substrate and 
deforming it in a vertical direction. Vertical deforma-
tions will not induce stresses in a substrate because 
it freely moves in that direction. The latter condi-
tion enables us to obtain quite accurate stress values 
by measuring changes in bow or radius of curvature 
of a substrate. The residual stresses in thin films are 
large, and sensitive optical gauges may measure the 
associated substrate deflections.
The disc method most commonly used is based on 
a measurement of the deflection in the center of the 
disc substrate (say a Si wafer) before and after pro-
cessing. Since any change in wafer shape is directly 
attributable to the stress in the deposited film, it 
1 cm
1 mm
1 µm
1 nm
AFM
 
 
STM
OM
SEM
 
 
SAM
IM
1 Å
FIGURE 6.51 Dynamic range of microscopies: optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), scan-
ning Auger microscopy (SAM), interference microscopy (IM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and atomic force 
microscopy (AFM).

[Page 334]
334   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
is relatively straightforward to calculate  stress by 
 measuring these changes. Stress in films using this 
method is found through the Stoney equation,24 relat-
ing film stress to substrate curvature, as follows:
 
σ
−ν
= 1
R
E
6(1
)
T
t
2  
(6.23)
where R =  measured radius of curvature of the bent 
substrate
E/(1 – ν) = biaxial modulus of the substrate
T = thickness of the substrate
t = thickness of the applied film25
The underlying assumptions include the following:
 
◾The disc substrate is thin and has transversely 
isotropic elastic properties with respect to the 
film normal.
 
◾The applied film thickness is much less than 
the substrate thickness.
 
◾The film thickness is uniform.
 
◾The temperature of the disk substrate/film sys-
tem is uniform.
 
◾The disc substrate/film system is mechanically 
free.
 
◾The disc substrate without film has no bow.
 
◾Stress is equibiaxial and homogeneous over the 
entire substrate.
 
◾Film stress is constant through the film 
thickness.
For most films on Si, we assume that t ≤ T; for 
example, t/T measures ∼10–3 for thin films on Si. 
The acceptability of the uniform thickness, homoge-
neous, and equibiaxial stress assumptions depend 
on the deposition process. Chemical vapor deposi-
tion (CVD) is a widely used process, as it produces 
relatively uniform films; however, sputter-deposited 
films can vary considerably over the substrate. In 
regard to the assumption of stress uniformity with 
film thickness, residual stress can vary considerably 
through the thickness of the film. Equation 6.23 
gives only an average film stress in such cases. In 
cases where thin films are deposited onto aniso-
tropic single-crystal substrates, the underlying 
assumption of a substrate with transversely isotro-
pic elastic properties with respect to the film nor-
mal is not completely justified. Using single-crystal 
silicon substrates possessing moderately anisotropic 
properties such as <100> or <111> oriented wafers 
(Volume I, Equation 4.87) satisfies the transverse 
isotropy argument. Any curvature inherent in the 
substrate must be measured before film deposition 
and algebraically added to the final measured radius 
of curvature. To give an idea of the degree of cur-
vature, 1 µm of thermal oxide may cause a 30-µm 
warp of a 4-inch silicon wafer, corresponding to a 
radius of curvature of 41.7 m.
The following companies offer practical disc 
method-based instruments to measure stress on 
wafers: ADE Corp. (Newton, MA; acquired by KLA-
Tencor in 2006), Corning Tropel (Fairport,  NY; 
http://www.corning.com/metrology), Ionic Systems 
(San Jose, CA; http://www.ionic.com), and KLA 
Tencor Instruments (Mountain View, CA; http://
www.kla-tencor.com).25 Figure 6.52a illustrates the 
sample output from KLA Tencor’s optical stress 
analysis system. Figure 6.52b represents the mea-
suring principle of Ionic Systems’ optical stress ana-
lyzer. None of the above techniques satisfies the 
need for measuring stress in low modulus materi-
als such as polyimide. For the latter applications, 
the suspended membrane approach (see below) is 
more suited.
Dog-Bone Method: Uniaxial Measurements 
of Mechanical Properties of Thin Films
Many problems associated with handling thin films 
in stress test equipment may be bypassed by apply-
ing micromachining techniques. One simple exam-
ple of problems encountered with thin films is the 
measurement of uniaxial tension to establish the 
Young’s modulus. This method, effective for macro-
scopic samples, proves problematic for small sam-
ples. The test formula is illustrated in Figure 6.53. 
The gauge length, L, of the bar-shaped structure in 
Figure 6.53a represents the region we allow to elon-
gate, and the area, A (= W × H), is the cross-section 
of the specimen. A stress, F/A, is applied and mea-
sured with a load cell; the strain, δL/L, is measured 
with an LVDT or another displacement transducer 
(a typical instrument used is the Instron 1123). The 
Young’s modulus is then deduced from the follow-
ing equation.

[Page 335]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   335
 
E
F
A
L
L
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
δ
 
(6.24)
The obvious problem, for small or large sam-
ples, is how to grip the sample without chang-
ing A. Under elongation, A will indeed contract by 
(W + H)δνL. In general, making a dog-bone shaped 
structure (also called an Instron specimen) solves 
that problem, as shown in Figure 6.53b. Still, the 
grips introduced in an Instron sample can pro-
duce end effects and uncertainties in determining 
L. Making Instron specimens in thin films is even 
more of a challenge, since the thin film needs to be 
removed from the surface, possibly changing the 
stress state, while the removal itself may modify 
the film.
As in the case of adhesion (see Volume II, Figure 
7.56), some new techniques for testing stress in thin 
films, based on micromachining, are being explored. 
These microtechniques prove more advantageous 
than the whole wafer disc technique in that they 
are able to make local (in situ) measurements.
The fabrication of micro-Instron specimens of 
thin polyimide samples is illustrated in Figure 
6.54A.26 Polyimide is deposited on a p+ Si mem-
brane in multiple coats. Each coat is prebaked at 
130°C for 15 minutes. After reaching the desired 
thickness, the film is cured at 400°C in nitrogen for 
1 h (Figure 6.54Aa). The  polyimide is then  covered 
with a 3,000-Å layer of evaporated aluminum 
(Figure 6.54Ab). The aluminum layer is patterned 
by wet etching (in phosphoric-acetic-nitric solution, 
referred to as the PAN etch) into the Instron speci-
men shape (Figure 6.54Ac). Dry etching transfers 
the pattern to the polyimide (Figure 6.54Ad). After 
removing the Al mask by wet etching, the p+ sup-
port is removed by a wet isotropic etch (HNA) or an 
SF6 plasma etch (Figure 6.54Ae), and finally the side 
silicon is removed along four pre-etched scribe lines, 
releasing the residual stress (Figure 6.54Af). The 
Support diameter D
Displacement, d
Knife edge
Stressed or bowed wafer
Unstressed wafer
Fiberoptic
bundle
Wafer shape and stress
(b)
Distance (mm)
10
–6
–4
Blank
Oxidized
Diﬀerence
Deﬂection (µm)
–2
0
2
4
6
8
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Scan proﬁles of an oxidized wafer
3215A steam oxide
(a)
FIGURE 6.52 Curvature measurement for stress analysis. (a) Sample output from KLA Tencor’s FLX 2908 stress  analysis 
instrument, showing how stress is derived from changes in wafer curvature. (b) The reflected light technique, used 
by Ionic Systems to measure wafer curvature. (From Singer, P. 1992. Film stress and how to measure it. Semicond Int 
15:54–58. With permission.25)
L
H
F
W
F
Stress : F/A (area A = W × H)
(a)
Strain : δ/L/L
L = “gauge length” (region we allow to elongate)
A, under elongation, will contract by (W+H) δ ν L
unless a dog-bone-structure is used
L
Young’s
modulus
E =
F
A
L
δL
(b)
FIGURE 6.53 Measuring Young’s modulus. (a) With a bar-shaped structure. (b) With a dog-bone; Instron specimen. 
(From Senturia, S. D., and R. T. Howe. 1990. Lecture notes. Boston: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.26)

[Page 336]
336   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
remaining silicon acts as supports for the grips of 
the Instron.27 The resulting structure can be manip-
ulated like any other macrosample without the need 
for removal of the film from its substrate. This tech-
nique enables the gathering of stress/strain data for 
a variety of commercially available polyimides.28 A 
typical measurement result for DuPont’s polyimide 
2525, illustrated in Figure 6.54B, gives a break stress 
and strain of 77 MPa (σb) and 2.7% (εb), respectively, 
and 3350 MPa for the Young’s modulus.
Figure 6.55a illustrates a micromachined test 
structure able to establish the strain and the  ulti mate 
stress of a thin film.29 A suspended rectangular poly-
mer membrane is patterned into an asym metric 
structure before removing the thin support ing Si. 
Once released, the wide suspended strip (width, W1) 
pulls on the thinner necks (total width, W2), result-
ing in a deflection, δ, from its original mask position 
toward the right to its final position after release. The 
residual tensile stress in the film drives the defor-
mation, δ, as shown in Figure 6.55a. By varying the 
geometry, it is possible to create structures exhibit-
ing small strain in the thinner sections as opposed 
to others that exceed the ultimate strain of the film. 
For structures where the strain is small enough to be 
modeled with linear elastic behavior, the deflection, 
δ, can be related to the strain as follows:
 
ε
σ
δ
=
=
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
−
E
W
L
W
L
W
W
1
1
2
2
1
2
 
(6.25)
where the geometries are defined as illustrated in 
Figure 6.55a. Figure 6.55b displays a photograph 
of two released structures, one with thicker necks, 
the other with necks so thin that they fractured 
upon release of the film. On the basis of the resid-
ual tensile strain of the film and the geometry of 
the structures that failed, the ultimate strain of the 
particular polyimide used was determined to be 
4.5%.
Using similar micromachined tensile test struc-
tures, Biebl et al.30 measured the fracture strength 
of undoped and doped polysilicon and found 2.84 ± 
0.09 GPa for undoped material and 2.11 ± 0.10 GPa 
in the case of phosphorus doping, 2.77 ± 0.08 GPa 
for boron doping, and 2.70 ± 0.09 GPa for arsenic 
doping. No statistically significant differences were 
observed between samples released using concen-
trated HF or buffered HF. However, a 17% decrease of 
the fracture stress was observed for a 100% increase 
in etching time. These data contrast with Greek et 
al.’s31 in situ tensile strength test result of 768 MPa for 
an undoped polysilicon film, a mean tensile strength 
approximately one-tenth that of single-crystal Si (6 
GPa).32 We normally expect polycrystalline films to 
be stronger than single-crystal films (see Volume II, 
Chapter 7). Greek et al.31 explain this discrepancy 
for polysilicon by pointing out that their polysilicon 
Stress (Mpa)
(A)
(a)
(e)
(f)
(b)
(c)
(d) 
(B)
E = 3350 Mpa
Remove side Si along pre-
etched scibe lines
Al patterning with PAN
Remove p+ support
Al mask
Multilayer polyimide coat
p+
Si
Dry-etching polyimide
σb = 77 Mpa
2.7
0
0
25
50
75
1
2
3
4
Στραιν (%)
FIGURE 6.54 Uniaxial stress measurement. (A) Fabrica-
tion process of a dog-bone sample for measurement of 
uniaxial strain. (B) Stress versus strain for DuPont’s 2525 
polyimide. (Courtesy of Dr. F. Maseeh, IntelliSense.)

[Page 337]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   337
films have a very rough surface compa red with sin-
gle-crystal material, containing many locations of 
stress concentration where a fracture crack can be 
initiated.
Biaxial Measurements of Mechanical 
Properties of Thin Films: Suspended 
Membrane Methods
Disc stress-measuring techniques are not suitable 
for measuring stress in low modulus tensile materials 
such as polyimides, whereas suspended membranes 
are very convenient for this purpose. The same 
micromachined test structure used for adhesion 
testing, sometimes called the blister test, as shown in 
Volume II, Figure 7.56, can measure the tensile stress 
in low-modulus materials. This type of test structure 
ensues from shaping a silicon diaphragm by conven-
tional anisotropic etching, followed by applying the 
coating, and finally removing the supporting silicon 
from the back with an SF6 plasma.29 By pressuriz-
ing one side of the membrane and measuring the 
deflection, one can extract both the residual stress 
and the biaxial modulus of the membrane. Pressure 
to the suspended film can be applied by a gas or by a 
point-load applicator.33 The load-deflection curve at 
moderate deflections (strains less than 5%) answers 
to the following equation:
 
p
C
td
a
C
E
1
td
a
1
2
2
3
2
=
σ
+
−ν
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(6.26)
where 
p = pressure differential across the film
d = center deflection
a = the initial radius
t = the membrane thickness
σ = the initial film stress
In the simplified Cabrera model for circu-
lar membranes, the constants C1 and C2 equal 
4 and 8/3, respectively. For more rigorous solu-
tions for both circular and rectangular mem-
branes and references to other proposed models, 
consult Maseeh-Tehrani.27 The relationship in 
Equation  6.26 can simultaneously determine σ 
and the biaxial modulus E/1 – ν; plotting pa2/dt 
versus (d/a)2 should yield a straight line. The resid-
ual stress can be extracted from the intercept and 
the biaxial modulus from the slope of the least-
squares best-fit line.29 A typical result obtained via 
such  measurements is  represented in Figure 6.56. 
For the same DuPont polyimide 2525, measuring 
a Young’s modulus of 3350 MPa in the uniaxial 
test (Figure 6.54B), the measurements give 5540 
MPa for the biaxial modulus and 32 MPa for the 
residual stress. The residual stress-to-biaxial mod-
ulus ratio, also referred to as the residual biaxial 
strain, thus reaches 0.6%. The latter quantity must 
be compared with the ultimate strain when eval-
uating potential reliability problems associated 
with cracking of films. By loading the membranes 
to the elastic limit point, yield stress and strain 
can be determined as with the uniaxial test.
Top view
L1
W1
W2/4
(a)
(b)
L2
δ
FIGURE 6.55 Ultimate strain. (a) Test structures for stress-to-modulus (strain) and ultimate stress measurements. (b) Two 
released structures, one of which has exceeded the ultimate strain of the film, resulting in fracture of the necks. (From 
Senturia, S. 1987. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro Robots and Teleoperators Workshop 3/1–5. Hyannis, MA. With permission.29)

[Page 338]
338   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Poisson Ratio for Thin Films
The Poisson ratio for thin films presents us with 
more difficulties to measure than the Young’s mod-
ulus, as thin films tend to bend out of plane in 
response to in-plane shear. Maseeh and Senturia28 
combine uniaxial and biaxial measurements to 
calculate the in-plane Poisson ratio of polyimides. 
For example, for the DuPont polyimide 2525, they 
determined 3350 MPa for E and 5540 MPa for the 
biaxial modulus [E/(1 – ν)], leading to a Poisson 
ratio (ν) of 0.41 ± 0.1. The errors on both the biaxial 
and uniaxial measurements need to be reduced in 
order to develop more confidence in the extracted 
value of the Poisson ratio. At present, the precision 
on the Poisson ratio is limited to about 20%.
Other Surface Micromachined 
Structures to Gauge Intrinsic Stress
Introduction
Various other surface micromachined structures 
have been used to measure mechanical properties of 
thin films. We will give a short review here, but the 
interested reader might want to consult the original 
references for more details.
Clamped-Clamped Beams
Several groups have used rows of clamped-clamped 
beams (bridges) with incrementally increasing 
lengths to determine the critical buckling load and 
hence deduce the residual compressive stress in 
 polysilicon films (Figure 6.57a).34,35 The residual 
strain, ε = σ/E, is obtained from the critical length, 
Lc, at which buckling occurs (Euler’s formula for 
elastic instability of struts):
 
ε
π
= 4
2
A
I
Lc
2  
(6.27)
where A is the beam cross-sectional area and I the 
moment of inertia. As an example, with a maxi-
mum beam length of 500 µm and a film thickness 
of 1.0  µm, the buckling beam method can detect 
compressive stress as small as 0.5 MPa. This simple 
Euler approach does not take into consideration 
additional effects such as internal moments result-
ing from gradients in residual stress.
Ring Crossbar Structures
Tensile strain can be measured by a series of rings 
(Figure 6.57b) constrained to the sub strate at two 
points on a diameter and spanned orthogonally 
by a clamped-clamped beam. After removal of the 
sacrificial layer, tensile strain in the ring places the 
spanning beam in compression; the critical buck-
ling length of the beam can be related to the average 
strain.37
Vernier Gauges
Both clamped-clamped beams and ring structures 
need to be implemented in entire arrays of struc-
tures. They do not allow easy integration with active 
microstructures because of space constraints. As 
opposed to proof structures, one might use vernier 
gauges to measure the displacement of structures 
induced by residual strain.36 The idea was first 
explored by Kim,38 whose device consisted of two 
cantilever beams fixed at two opposite points. The 
end movement of the beams caused by the residual 
strain is measured by a vernier gauge. This method 
requires only one structure, but the best resolution 
for strain measurement reported is only 0.02% 
for 500-µm beams. Moreover, the vernier gauge 
device may indicate an erroneous strain when an 
out-of-plane strain gradient occurs.36 Other types 
of direct strain measurement devices are the T- 
and H-shaped structures from Allen et al.20 and 
90
80
70
60
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
(d/a)2 ×103
(pa2/dt) Mpa
FIGURE 6.56 Load deflection data of a polyimide mem-
brane (DuPont 2525). From the intercept, a residual stress 
of 32 MPa was calculated, and from the slope, a biaxial 
modulus of 5540 MPa was calculated. (From Senturia, S. 
1987. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro Robots and Teleoperators 
Workshop 3/1–5. Hyannis, MA. With permission.29)

[Page 339]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   339
Mehregany et al.17 Optical measurement of the 
movement at the top of the T- or H-shape structures 
becomes possible only with very long beams 
(greater than 2.5 mm). They occupy large areas, and 
their complexity requires finite element methods 
to analyze their output. The same is true for the 
strain magnification structure by Goosen et al.39 
This structure measures strain by interconnecting 
two opposed beams such that the residual strain 
in the beams causes a third beam to rotate as a 
gauge needle. The rotation of the gauge needle 
quantifies the residual strain. A schematic of a 
micromachined strain gauge capable of measuring 
tensile or compressive residual stress, as shown in 
Figure 6.57c, was developed by Lin at University of 
California, Berkeley.36 Figure 6.57d represents an 
SEM photograph of Lin’s strain gauge. This gauge 
by far outranks the various in situ gauges explored. 
The strain gauge uses only one structure, can be 
fabricated in situ with active devices, determines 
tensile or compressive strain under optical micro-
scopes, has a fine resolution of 0.001%, and resists 
the out-of-plane strain gradient. When the device 
is released in the sacrificial etch step, the test beam 
(length Lt) expands or contracts, depending on the 
sign of the residual stress in the film, causing the 
compliant slope beam (length Ls) to deflect into an 
S shape. The indicator beam (length Li), attached 
to the deforming beam at its point of inflection, 
rotates through an angle θ, and the deflection, δ, 
Si
Si
(a)
(b)
F = |σ|A= |σ|tw
SiO2
Polysilicon
freestanding
diaphragm
Tensile material
Spanning beam is compressed by
tensile strain in the ring material
Anchor
Anchor
Anchor points
Test beam
Slope beam
Indicator beam
Compressive
strain
Vernier gauge
Tensile
strain
(c)
(d)
Polyimide
Critical buckling length Lc
FIGURE 6.57 Some micromachined structures used for stress measurements. (a) Clamped-clamped beams: measuring 
the critical buckling length of clamped-clamped beams enables measurement of residual stress. (b) Crossbar rings: tensile 
stress can be measured by buckling induced in the crossbar of a ring structure. (c) A schematic of a strain gauge capable 
of measuring tensile or compressive stress. (d) Scanning electron microscope microphotograph of two strain gauges. 
(c and d from Lin, L. 1993. Selective encapsulations of MEMS: Micro channels, needles, resonators, and electromechanical 
filters. PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley. With permission.36)

[Page 340]
340   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
is read on the vernier scale. The residual strain is 
calculated as follows:
 
ε
δ
f
s
i
t
L
L L C
=
2
3
 
(6.28)
where C is a correction factor due to the presence 
of the indicator beam.36 This equation was derived 
from simple beam theory relationships and assumes 
that no out-of-plane motion will occur. The accuracy 
of the strain gauge is greatly improved, because its 
output is independent of both the thickness of the 
deposited film and the cross-section of the micro-
structure. Krulevitch used these devices to measure 
residual stress in in situ phosphorus-doped poly-
silicon films,23 while Lin tested LPCVD silicon-rich 
 silicon nitride films with it.36
An improved micromachined indicator structure, 
inspired by Lin’s work, was built by Ericson et al.40 
By reading an integrated nonius scale in an SEM or 
an optical microscope, internal stress was measured 
with a resolution better than 0.5 MPa.40,41 Both thick 
(10 µm) and thin (2 µm) polysilicon films were char-
acterized this way.
Lateral Resonators
Biebl et al.42 extracted the Young’s modulus of in 
situ phosphorus-doped polysilicon by measuring 
the mechanical response of polysilicon linear lateral 
comb-drive resonators (see Volume II, Figure  7.76). 
The  results reveal a value of 130 ± 5 GPa for the 
Young’s modulus of highly phosphorus-doped films 
deposited at 610°C with a  phosphine-to-silane mole 
ratio of 1.0 × 10–2 and annealing at 1050°C. For a depo-
sition at 560°C with a phosphine-to-silane ratio of 1.6 × 
10–3, a Young’s modulus of 147 ± 6 GPa was extracted.
Stress Nonuniformity Measurement by 
Cantilever Beams and Cantilever Spirals
Introduction
The uniformity of stress through the depth of a film 
introduces a property that it is extremely important 
to control. Variations in the magnitude and direction 
of the stress in the vertical direction can cause can-
tilevered structures to curl toward or away from the 
substrate. Stress gradients present in the polysilicon 
film must thus be controlled to ensure predictable 
behavior of designed structures when released from 
the substrate. To determine the thickness variation 
in residual stress, noncontact surface profilome-
ter measurements on an array of simple cantilever 
beams43, 44 or cantilever spirals can be used.25
Cantilever Beams
The deflections resulting from stress variation 
through the thickness of simple cantilever beams 
after their release from the substrate are shown 
in Figure 6.58A. The bending moment causing 
deflection of a cantilever beam follows out of pre-
release residual stress and is given by the following 
equation:
 
M
zb (z)dz
t/2
t/2
=
σ
−∫
 
(6.29)
where σ(z) represents the residual stress in the film 
as a function of thickness and b stands for cantilever 
width. Assuming a linear strain gradient Γ (physi-
cal dimensions 1/length) such that σ (z) = EΓz, 
Equation 6.29 converts as follows:
 
Γ =
=
12M
Ebt
M
EI
3
 
(6.30)
where the moment of inertia, I, for a rectangular 
cross-section is given by I = bt3/12. The measured 
deflection z, i.e., the vertical deflection of the canti-
lever’s endpoint, from beam theory for a cantilever 
with an applied end moment, is given as follows.
 
z
ML
2EI
L
2
2
2
=
= Γ
 
(6.31)
Figure 6.58B represents a topographical contour 
map of an array of polysilicon cantilevers. The can-
tilevers vary in length from 25 to 300 µm by 25-µm 
increments. Notice that the tip of the longest canti-
lever resides at a lower height (approximately 0.9 µm 
closer to the substrate) than the anchored support, 
indicating a downward-bending moment.43 The gra-
dients can be reduced or eliminated with a high-
 temperature anneal. With integrated electronics 
on the same chip, long high-temperature process-
ing must be avoided. Therefore, stress gradients can 
limit the length of cantilevered structures used in 
surface-micromachined designs.

[Page 341]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   341
The use of silicon-on-insulator (SOI)-based 
 micromachined cantilevers for measuring surface 
stress induced during adsorption of biomolecules is 
illustrated in Volume I, Example 4.1.
Cantilever Spirals
Residual stress gradients also can be measured by 
Fan’s cantilever spiral, as shown in Figure 6.59a.45 
Spirals anchored at the inside spring upward, rotate, 
and contract with positive strain gradient (tending to 
curl a cantilever upward), whereas spirals anchored 
at the outside deflect in a similar manner in response 
to a negative gradient. Theoretically, positive and 
negative gradients produce spirals with mirror sym-
metry.45 The strain gradient can be determined from 
spiral structures by measuring the amount of lateral 
contraction, the change in height, or the amount of 
rotation. Krulevitch presented the computer code 
for the spiral simulation in his doctoral thesis.23 
Figure 6.59b shows a simulated spiral with a bending 
moment of Γ = ±3.0 mm–1 after release.
Krulevitch compared all the above surface micro-
machined structures for stress and stress gradient 
measurements on polysilicon films. His comments 
are summarized in Table 6.10.23 He found that 
the fixed-fixed beam structures for determining 
compressive stress from the buckling criterion 
produced remarkably self-consistent and repeatable 
results. Wafer curvature stress profiling proved reli-
able for determining average stress and the true 
stress  gradient as compared with micromachined 
spirals. Measurements of curled cantilevers could 
not be used a lot, as the strain gradients mainly 
were negative for polysilicon, leading to cantilevers 
contacting the substrate. The strain gauge dial struc-
tures were useful over a rather limited strain-gradient 
range. With too large a strain gradient, curling of 
the long beams overshadows expansion effects and 
makes the vernier indicator unreadable.
Modeling
Modeling is the use of mathematical equations to 
simulate and predict real events and processes. In 
this modeling section we introduce finite element 
analysis and review software packages helpful in the 
Polysilicon
Polysilicon
Substrate
Substrate
Polysilicon
Substrate
(A)
Reasons for stress gradient:
• Recrystallization during deposition
• Poor temperature control during deposition
(a)
(b)
(c)
0.30
0.00 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.10
0.25 mm; 400 p/mm
0.13 0.15 0.17 0.20 0.23 0.26
0.25
5.2
3.8
2.3
0.9
5.2
3.8
2.3
0.9
(μm)
(B)
0.20
0.15
mm
0.10
0.05
0.00
FIGURE 6.58 Microcantilever deflection for measuring stress nonuniformity. (A) Micro-cantilever deflection for measur-
ing stress nonuniformity. (a) No gradient. (b) Higher tensile stress near the surface. (c) Lower tensile stress near the sur-
face. (B) Topographical contour map of polysilicon cantilever array. (From Core, T. A., W. K. Tsang, and S. J. Sherman. 1993. 
Fabrication technology for an integrated surface-micromachined sensor. Solid State Technol 36:39–47. With permission.43)

[Page 342]
342   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
design phase of miniaturized devices, that is, soft-
ware for computer-aided design (CAD).
After brainstorming about sensor specifications 
and sensor transduction principles and making 
preliminary designs on paper and the white board, 
it is a good idea to initiate a CAD of the overall 
microsystem to grasp how all the components, 
including the package, fit together. In Figure 6.60 
we show a three-dimensional visualization (con-
struction) of a NiTi-based valve (the principle of this 
shape memory type valve is discussed in Chapter 8, 
this volume, on actuators).
More than visualization is needed though for 
CAD, and a software package in general is struc-
tured as sketched in Figure 6.61 with the design aids 
used to create the design, simulation to develop the 
technology, and verification to check the design. 
The final verification is during fabrication itself; 
the goal here is to avoid wasteful and slow experi-
ments by carrying out less costly computer work 
and to get the fabrication “right” the first time.53
During design, the process may be separated in 
a conceptual design and simulation phase and a 
phase of final design of masks and processes. The 
ideal suite of CAD tools required for each activity 
is summarized in Table 6.11;54 besides visualization, 
 simulation, and verification, a good MEMS CAD 
package typically includes an extensive materials 
database.
With CAD for MEMS application in mind, IC 
development software packages have been expanded 
with finite element analysis (FEA) programs and 
TABLE 6.10 Summary of Various Techniques for Measuring Residual Film Stress
Measurement Technique
Measurable Stress State
Remarks
Wafer curvature
Stress gradient, average stress
Average stress over entire 
wafer, provides true stress 
gradient, approximately 
5 MPa resolution
Vernier strain gauges
Average stress
Local stress, small dynamic 
range, resolution = 2 MPa
Spiral cantilevers
Stress gradient
Local stress, provides 
equivalent linear gradient
Curling beam cantilevers
Large positive stress gradient
Local stress, provides 
equivalent linear gradient
Fixed-fixed beams
Average compressive stress
Local stress measurement
Source: Krulevitch, P. A. 1994. Micromechanical investigations of silicon and Ni–Ti–Cu thin films. PhD 
 thesis, University of California, Berkeley. With permission.23
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 6.59 Cantilever spirals for stress gradient measurement. (a) Scanning electron microscope micrographs of spirals 
from an as-deposited polysilicon. (Courtesy of Dr. L.-S. Fan, IBM, Alamaden Research Center.) (b) Simulation of a thin-
film micromachined spiral with G = 3.0 mm–1. (From Krulevitch, P. A. 1994. Micromechanical investigations of silicon and 
Ni–Ti–Cu thin films. PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley. With permission.23)

[Page 343]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   343
materials databases. This type of software is paying 
off, even for IC development where there is a growing 
need for the ability to perform mechanical analysis 
of microelectronic devices, both in ensuring struc-
tural reliability against failure of thin film layers and 
in evaluating the effects of various external loads, 
including the effects of temperature and humidity. 
An understanding of the required processes and 
materials properties that ensure reproducibility for 
commercial MEMS products has emerged slowly, 
and several CAD systems that have facilitated the 
wider acceptance of MEMS are now on the mar-
ket. Most include a materials database that can be 
updated by the user. Details on CAD packages for 
MEMS is preceded by a short introduction to finite 
element analysis. We finish this chapter by referring 
to software packages of interest in NEMS and bio-
NEMS modeling.
Finite Element Analysis
Introduction
Finite element analysis is used in almost every engi-
neering discipline. Early FEA packages were limited 
to simulators using linear static stress analysis. Today, 
they have been extended to include nonlinear static 
stress, dynamic stress (vibration), fluid flow, heat 
transfer, electrostatic forces, etc. These capabilities 
are frequently combined to perform coupled-force 
analyses that consider multiple physical phenom-
ena and are tightly integrated within a CAD inter-
face. The best-developed application areas, which 
also happen to be very important for microsystem 
design, are electrostatics, stress/strain analysis of 
solid structures, heat conduction analysis, and fluid 
dynamics. FEA typically includes the steps outlined 
below, where we will assume that we are dealing 
with a stress/strain analysis of a solid structure.
Geometry Development
The essence of FEA is “divide and conquer,” and 
the first step consists of dividing the whole MEMS 
structure under analysis into a finite number of 
subdivisions of special shapes or elements that 
are interconnected at specific points, called nodes 
(Figure 6.62). The nodes are discrete points of the 
MEMS structure where the analysis will reflect the 
TO-8 cap
BeCu spring
TiNi die
Oriﬁce die
TO-8 header
BeCu
Bias spring
Bexyllium-copper
Poppet
Silicon
Flow oriﬁce
Oriﬁce die
Spacer
Actuator die
TiNi spring and actuator
(b)
(a)
Sapphire ball
FIGURE 6.60 Microflow Analytical’s shape memory alloy valve. Normally closed micro valve. A current through the NiTi 
die lifts it from the orifice die. (Courtesy of Dr. D. Johnson, TiNi Corporation.)
Design
goal
Design
aids
Simulation
?
Veriﬁcation
Proposed
design
FIGURE 6.61 Design, simulation, and verification.54

[Page 344]
344   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
response of the component to an applied loading. 
This response is defined in terms of nodal degrees 
of freedom. In the case of stress analysis, up to six 
degrees of freedom are possible at each node (three 
components of translation and three components of 
rotation), depending on the element type selected 
(e.g., beam, plate, 2D, and 3D elements). Element 
selection is a function of product geometry and 
loading conditions. The element selected affects the 
results as each element has characteristic properties. 
A model can use more than one type of element.
Material Property Assignment
In the second stress/strain finite element analysis 
step, the modulus of elasticity or rigidity and Poisson 
ratio are used to define material properties for each 
element. For a nonlinear material condition (elastic-
plastic), a stress-strain curve represents the material 
properties.
Mesh Generation
The grid of connecting elements at common nodes is 
called the mesh (Figure 6.62). Based on the element 
TABLE 6.11 Ideal Tool Suites for MEMS
Conceptual Design and Simulation
Final Design of Masks and Process
Rapid construction and visualization of 
three-dimensional solid models
Process simulation or process database, 
including:
• Lithographic and etch process biases 
(the difference between as-drawn and 
as-fabricated dimensions)
• Process tolerances on thicknesses, lateral 
dimensions, doping and resistivity levels
A database of materials properties
Design optimization and sensitivity analysis:
• Variation of device sizing to optimize 
performance
• Analysis of effects of process tolerances
Simulation tools for basic physical 
phenomena. For example:
• Thermal analysis: heat flow
• Mechanical and structural analysis: 
deformation
• Electrostatic analysis: capacitance and 
charge density
• Magnetostatic analysis: Inductance and 
flux density
• Fluid analysis: pressures and flow
Mask layout
Coupled-force simulators. For example:
• Thermally induced deformation 
• Electrostatic and magnetostatic actuators
• Interaction of fluids with deformable 
structures
Design verification, including:
• Construction of a three-dimensional solid 
model of the design, using the actual masks 
and process sequence
• Checking the design for violation of any 
design rules imposed by the process
• Simulation of the expected performance 
of the design, including the construction 
of macromodels of performance useable 
in circuit simulators to assess overall system 
performance
Formulation and use of macromodels. 
For example:
• Lumped mechanical equivalents for 
complex structures
• Equivalent electric circuit of a resonant 
sensor
• Feedback representation for coupled-force 
problems
Source: Senturia, S. D., and R. T. Howe. 1990. Lecture notes. Boston: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.26

[Page 345]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   345
types selected, automatic mesh generation subdi-
vides the geometry into finite elements in a third 
step of the FEA process. The element density within 
each segment of the structure is either chosen or 
automatically determined. When adjacent elements 
share nodes, the displacement field is continuous 
across the shared element boundaries and loads 
can be transferred between the elements. Analysis 
is performed on the elements instead of the whole 
structure, and solutions at the element level are 
“assembled” to get the corresponding solutions for 
the whole structure. Mathematically, this is achieved 
by calculating nodal stiffness properties for each ele-
ment and arranging these into matrices. The appro-
priate matrix transformation generates a global stiff-
ness matrix from the existing element matrix.
Boundary and Loading Conditions 
In a fourth step, the appropriate boundary and load-
ing conditions apply constraints to the model. In 
stress analysis, the boundary conditions specify dis-
placement constraints (i.e., in the x-, y-, or z-direc-
tion), and the loading conditions apply loads to the 
model such as concentrated forces at specified nodes 
or pressure at specified edge surfaces of the element.
Run Analysis
During analysis, in a fifth step, the program pro-
cesses the equation matrices with the applied loads 
and boundary conditions to calculate displacements, 
strain, natural frequencies, or other data specified 
by the user. This provides a stress distribution across 
the entire MEMS structure. The high-stress regions 
should have the highest element density, as a finer 
mesh increases the accuracy of the model. Various 
adaptive methods find the critical regions in the 
model and make the necessary mesh refinement to 
reduce the error for the next iteration before reach-
ing convergence.
Results
Results obtained in a sixth step include nodal 
and element information, displacement at nodes, 
stresses and strains in each element, and various 
forms of graphical display of the solution. In this 
regard, a von Mises stress plot often is used. The von 
Some typical nodes in a mesh
Typical ﬁnite elements
FIGURE 6.62 Finite element analysis mesh.

[Page 346]
346   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Mises stress (also called effective or equivalent stress) is 
defined as follows:
 
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
M =
−
+
−
+
−
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
2
2
3
2
1
3
2
2
 (6.32)
where σ1, σ2, and σ3 are the three principal stresses. 
The von Mises stress is compared with the yield 
strength for plastic yielding and for the prediction of 
rupture of the structure.55
Data Correlation and Design Optimization
Finally, in a seventh step, experimental data are 
collected to correlate the FEA model results and to 
formulate a baseline. After comparing the baseline 
results, design modification and remodeling are 
available. This iterative process constitutes design 
optimization, namely, combining the engineering 
requirements, geometric parameters, CAD model, 
and performance goals into a computer simulation 
to achieve the optimum design.
As mentioned in the introduction, in addition to 
considering a part’s ability to withstand mechani-
cal stresses, today’s FEA software also enables engi-
neers to predict other real-world stresses. These 
might include the effects of extreme temperatures 
or temperature change (heat transfer analysis), the 
flow of fluids through and around objects (fluid 
flow analysis), or voltage distributions over the sur-
face or throughout the volume of an object (electro-
static analysis). As these effects often are coupled, 
it is important that the FEA program consider their 
effects on one another. For instance, a MEMS chip 
may be heating up over time, cooling down by air-
flow from a fan, vibrating against other parts, and be 
electrically charged. A typical approach is to isolate 
and calculate each variable then feed the results into 
the FEA program one at a time. But since each vari-
able could also affect the others, either a coupled 
analysis or tools for relating results is required.
CAD for MEMS
Introduction
CAD tools were essential to the evolution of MEMS 
from laboratory status to a bona fide and accessible 
manufacturing process. Without them, fabrication 
would have remained in the domain of experts, and 
evolution of the design process would still rely on 
empirical approaches. Early developments in CAD 
for MEMS evolved from 2D IC circuit work and often 
lacked the tools for a priori design of micromechani-
cal devices in 2.5 or three dimensions essential for 
high-aspect ratio microsystems. Given the freedom 
to fabricate 3D systems, designers think in terms of 
the whole system, not a series of 2D reticulations 
of the system (i.e., masks). The mask-to-model 
approach is still somewhat suitable for surface 
micromachined devices but becomes less useful as 
the number of processes, materials, and mechani-
cal degrees of freedom increases, as in the case of 
high-aspect ratio micromachining (especially for a 
process such as LIGA).56 A number of current com-
mercial CAD packages for MEMS are competing for 
market share, and the codes have been improving 
steadily. For the future, CAD programs addressing 
generic miniaturization problems rather than just 
micromachining for Si and poly-Si would be highly 
desirable. The architecture should have both litho-
graphic and nonlithographic machining options, 
adhere to accepted format standards for data com-
munication, and integrate available design, model-
ing, and simulation software from both traditional 
and nontraditional (i.e., IC based manufacturing) 
industries wherever possible.
Derived CAD Packages for MEMS
For some of the simplest micromachined structures, 
modest modification of existing IC software pack-
ages enabled designing of the micromachine as in 
regular IC processing. Marshall et al.,57 for exam-
ple, modified the standard Magic VLSI mask lay-
out package (http://opencircuitdesign.com/magic/
archive/papers/Magic_A_VLSI_Layout_System.
pdf) to permit the design of simple micromachined 
structures using CMOS processes. This modifica-
tion makes standard foundry work through the 
MOSIS service (http://www.mosis.org) possible.58 
Other traditional IC mask layout software packages 
are used by MEMS engineers from companies such 
as TMA and Cadence. In the public domain, one 
can turn to KIC from the University of California, 
Berkeley.59 For a comparison of various layout 
design and verification software pack ag es, visit 

[Page 347]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   347
http://www.ee.rochester.edu/users/sde/cad/ 
LDV.
html. Mechanical drafting tools with interfaces to 
mask making, such as AutoCAD, have full geometric 
flexibility. Other popular mechanical CAD tools for 
3D solid model construction, meshing, application of 
loads and boundary conditions, and visualization of 
results include Pro/Engineer, PATRAN, and I-DEAS. 
Suppliers of CAD systems to the semiconductor 
industry also offer one- and two-dimensional pro-
cess simulators. These simulators cover standard 
semiconductor processes such as oxidation, diffu-
sion, thin film deposition, and plasma etching. An 
example is SAMPLE60–62 for simulation of projection 
lithography, deposition, and etching. Simulation 
tools for basic physical properties include ABAQUS 
for structural and thermal finite-element simulation 
and FASTCAP (with its follow-on MEMCAP) (avail-
able for download from http://www.rle.mit.edu/cpg/
research_codes.htm) for electrostatic boundary-ele-
ment simulation.
COSMOS (http://www.cosmosm.com) has a 
MEMS analysis capability for mechanical, thermal, 
electrostatic, electromagnetic, and fluid flow mod-
eling. COSMOS sells a version that is tightly inte-
grated with the 3D modeling software SolidWorks™. 
SolidWorks is a player in the mechanical CAD tools 
arena for 3D solid model construction. Its tight 
integration with the COSMOS FEA package also 
enabled it to enter the MEMS simulation indus-
try. AnSoft (http://www.ansoft.com) has software 
products for 2D and 3D electromagnetic field and 
thermal field finite-element simulation capabili-
ties applicable to RF-MEMS analysis and design. 
AnSoft’s products integrate electromagnetic, circuit, 
and system engineering modules. Field equation 
solvers such as QuickField (http://www.quickfield.
com) are increasingly being used for MEMS model-
ing. Such software provides a quick analysis tool for 
2D field problems such as electromagnetics, heat 
transfer, and fluid flow.
CAD Specifically Developed for MEMS
Some early examples of CAD programs devel-
oped specifically for MEMS include Oyster from 
IBM,63 MEMCAD from Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT),64 CAEMEMS from the University 
of Michigan,65 and the SESES system from ETH 
(Zurich).66 These programs mainly address bulk Si 
micromachining and poly-Si surface micromachin-
ing applications.
The CAEMEMS program provides a database of 
material properties and process model parameters, 
a process modeler that takes process information 
as input and produces a solid model of the device 
to be fabricated, a solid modeler that allows for 
visualization and design verification, and a device 
modeler that  performs finite element simulations 
of components and systems. The database can be 
updated by the user as new information becomes 
available. A block diagram of the CAEMEMS soft-
ware package is shown in Figure  6.63.65 ANSYS 
Multiphysics is the version of ANSYS FEA software 
that has been used for MEMS modeling. ANSYS 
Multiphysics has a broad physics capability, such 
as structural modal, static, transient, electrostatic-
structural, high-frequency and low-frequency  elec-
tromagnetics, electrothermal-structural coupled 
phy sics, free surfaces and capillary action, capaci-
tance extraction, Newtonian/non-Newtonian con-
tinuum flow, and fluidic structural capability to 
evaluate damping effects, among others.
Graphical
interface
Mesh
information
Visualization
MEMS
Sim
Device modeling
MEMS
CAD
Process modeling
MEMS Databases
Doping parameters, etch rates,
and material properties
Solid
modeler
Mask and
process
information
Boundary cond
and forcing
functions
Microelectromechanical designer
FIGURE 6.63 Block diagram of the CAEMEMS system. 
[Crary, S., and Y. Zhang. 1990. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’90), 113–14. Napa 
Valley, CA. With permission.65]

[Page 348]
348   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
The architecture of MEMCAD, illustrated in 
Figure 6.64a, integrates various simulators, data-
bases, and a solid state modeler with a user inter-
face.54 As outlined by the dashed blocks in the 
figure, the CAD system consists of three sections: 
the  microelectronic CAD  section, the mechanical 
CAD section, and the material property simula-
tor. The interactions among these three sections 
and the flow of information is denoted by the direc-
tion of the arrows. In MEMCAD V1.0, the primary 
interface for mechanical modeling was through 
PATRAN. MEMCAD V2.0 provides this function 
from I-DEAS. In the microelectronic section, the 
mask is created using KIC. SUPREM 3 and SAMPLE 
are integrated to provide depth and cross-sectional 
modeling capabilities. Microcosm licensed the 
MEM CAD technology from MIT and released the 
first redesigned commercial version in June 1996. 
Besides MEMCAD V4.0, Microcosm also developed 
FlumeCAD, geared toward modeling of microfluidic 
devices. In January 2001 Microcosm Technologies 
changed its name to Coventor (http://www.coven-
tor.com).
IntelliSense Corp. sells IntelliSuiteTM (http:// www.
intellisense.com),67 incorporating the MEMaterial® 
database and the anistropic etching module AnisE®. 
The material database contains electrical, mechani-
cal, optical, and physical properties of semiconduc-
tor thin films collected from the literature. As in the 
case of CAEMEMS, the database can be updated by 
the user. The architecture of IntelliCAD, with a cen-
tral graphical user interface, is shown in Figure 6.64b. 
Figure 6.65 shows a typical output of MEMaterial. 
The selected 3D plot shows the density variation 
of a plasma-enhanced chemical vapor-deposited Si 
nitride film as a function of deposition temperature 
and pressure. AnisE simulates single-crystal silicon 
anistropic etching. It predicts the effects of etchant’s 
temperature, concentration, and etch time on the 
final 3D geometry. Users can study etch stops, cor-
ner compensation, higher-order etch planes, and 
process tolerances for single- or double-sided masks. 
The program added RF-MEMS design tool (2002) 
and a bio-MEMS design tool (2003).
Other simulators for anistropic etching of Si are 
available. For example, the Anisotropic Crystalline 
Etch Simulation (ACESTM) is a first personal 
computer-based 3D etch simulator from the University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The  program can 
simulate silicon etching with different front-surface 
orientations in different etchants. 2D and 3D simu-
lation programs for anisotropic etching profiles have 
also been developed by Sequin at the University of 
California, Berkeley,68 Koide et al. at Hitachi,69 and 
Li et al. at Caltech.70 These programs enable the 
prediction of a change in cross-sectional shape of a 
feature in a Si wafer with arbitrary crystallographic 
orientation and with a mask including concave and 
convex edges.
Coventor now markets CoventorWare,™ which 
consists of a system-level modeling environment, 
a 2D layout editor, materials property editor and 
database, a 3D model generator, and a multiphys-
ics numerical analysis framework. It has also added 
a new module that interfaces with IC design envi-
ronment by exporting models to IC simulators from 
Synopsys and Cadence.
CFD Research Corporation (CFDRC) is another 
provider of advanced software tools for modeling, 
simulation, and design of MEMS. Their software has 
been used for the analysis of a wide variety of physi-
cal phenomena such as fluid flow, heat transfer, com-
bustion, and fluid-structure interaction. Industrial 
applications include MEMS, electronics packaging, 
semiconductor turbomachinery, and automotive 
engineering (http://www.cfdrc.com/).
MEMS Pro, originally from MEMSCAP, pro-
vides a unified MEMS and IC design environment. 
It includes certain software elements licensed from 
Tanner Research. MEMS Pro was sold in 2004 to 
Soft MEMS (http://www.softmems.com/) and is 
still marketed under the same name. It provides an 
integrated MEMS and IC- design environment with 
system-level tools, layout editing, 3D Solid Modeler 
(3D view generator from layout and fabrication pro-
cess description), FEA modeling tools, and MEMS 
verification tool for design rule checks.
SUGAR V3.1 from University of California, 
Berkeley, is a free simulation program for MEMS 
devices composed of beams, electrostatic gaps, 
anchors, circuits elements etc. The approach is 
based on a modified nodal analysis to solve cou-
pled nonlinear differential equations. The simu-
lation algorithms are implemented in MATLAB® 

[Page 349]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   349
User
interface
(a)
File
editor
Structure simulator
3-D solid model
(neutral ﬁle)
(PATRAN)
Material
property
interface
Numerical
output
Material
property
database
Mask
layout
(KIC)
Layout
description
(CIF)
Process modelers
(SUPREM 3
SAMPLE)
User
interface
User
interface
CAD graphic
geometry, FEA input
and output
(PATRAN)
FEM output
interface
(PATRAN)
FEM input
interface
(PATRAN)
FEM
simulation
(ABAQUS)
Process
description
(PFR)
Microelectronic CAD
Mechanical
CAD
Material property
simulator
User
interface
(b)
Simulators
Graphical
user interface
Tool interface
Solid modeler
Databases
FIGURE 6.64 (a) Outline of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology MEMCAD. (b) Schematic of IntelliCAD architecture. 
(Courtesy of Dr. F. Maseeh, IntelliSense.)

[Page 350]
350   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
and are portable across all Unix and personal com-
puter platforms.
FEMLAB, marketed by COMSOL (http://www.
comsol.com), has entered the MEMS market with 
its MEMS Module. FEMLAB is a partial differential 
equation-based FEA modeling tool. It has modules 
for mechanical, thermal, DC and AC electrical, 
and fluidic modeling of devices among others. The 
FEMLAB MEMS Module includes ready-made appli-
cations that cover microfluidics plus electromagnet-
ic-structural, thermal-structural, and fluid-structural 
interactions. Its MEMS-specific application modes 
are electrostatics, stress and strain, piezoelectric, 
and electrokinetics.
ALGOR (http://www.algor.com) has a MEMS 
module for mechanical, thermal, and fluid flow 
modeling. It also has electrostatic analysis and 
piezoelectric material model capabilities.
The major improvements in the leading MEMS 
software have been in a tighter integration with solid 
modeling as well as IC design environments, system-
level modeling for quick analysis, capabilities of 
modeling microfluidics for the bio-MEMS industry, 
and capabilities for modeling RF-MEMS. Some FEA 
software packages have also added MEMS modules.
Future of CAD for MEMS and NEMS
Future MEMS CAD packages should seamlessly 
integrate 2D IC processes with 3D MEMS and tra-
ditional machining in a wide variety of materi-
als. A conspicuous example for the need of such a 
3D microdesign tool is in micromolding of LIGA 
shapes, in which nontraditional (lithography) and 
traditional (plastic molding) technologies are com-
bined (see Volume II, Chapter 10). As an example 
of work in this direction, Hill et al.71 explored the 
use of the computer software I-DEAS Master Series™ 
Thermoplastic Molding to model the micromold-
ing aspect of such LIGA parts and have found that it 
accurately describes the filling characteristics of the 
microparts. What is needed now is to extend this 
package to include lithography steps.
A good introduction to the available CAD pro-
grams for IC processes comes from Fichtner.72 
A most detailed account of simulation and design 
issues of microsystems and microstructures is by 
Adey et al.73 For access to continuously updated 
information on MEMS modeling, visit the MEMS 
Interchange on the Web (http://www-mtl.mit.edu/
semisubway/semi subway.html); equally useful is 
http://www.memsnet.org.
Density
Density
2.50
2.50
2.45
2.40
2.35
P_dep
101.67
160.78
219.89
279
600
475
350
225
T_dep
2.45
2.40
2.35
P_dep
T_dep
42.56
2.40344
2.48092
2.48151
2.48423
2.48545
100.000
225.000
350.000
475.000
600.000
Parameter
T_dep
P_dep
RfPow
RfFreq
tot_ﬂ
SiH4pp
NH3pp
Arpp
Density
meas
2.55
g/cm3
Value
275
127
260
13.56
2320
0.017
0.024
0.959
Units
deg_C
Pa
Watt
Mhz
sccm
part.pr
part.pr
part.pr
FIGURE 6.65 The MEMaterial design window from IntelliSense Corp. The three-dimensional graph shows the variation 
of Si nitride density deposited by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor-deposition. The table at the bottom left shows the 
process parameters, their numerical values, and units. The resulting density is shown at the bottom of the table. The user 
can alter any of the parameters. (Courtesy of Dr. F. Maseeh, IntelliSense.)

[Page 351]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   351
With the advent of NEMS and bio-MEMS, molec-
ular modeling has come to the forefront. Molecular 
modeling is a collective term that refers to theo-
ret ical methods and computational techniques to 
model or mimic the behavior of molecules. For mole-
cular modeling (say on protein or DNA  sensors), 
software  can now successfully model the dynam-
ics of most molecular interactions under numerous 
static and dynamic conditions. Molecular dynamics 
(MD) is a specialized discipline of mole cular mod-
eling and computes the behavior of a system as a 
function of time. The main justification of the MD 
method is that statistical ensemble averages are 
equal to time averages of the system. Because molec-
ular systems generally consist of a vast number of 
particles, it is impossible to find the properties of 
such complex systems analytically; MD simulation 
circumvents this problem by using numerical meth-
ods. Molecular dynamics simulations are playing 
an increasingly important role in many areas of sci-
ence and engineering, from biology and pharmacy 
to nanoelectronics and structural materials. We 
review only some available software packages for 
molecular modeling.
A lot of the modeling work is geared toward DNA 
and proteins; software is available to graphically 
manipulate 3D images of proteins and nucleic acids. 
The modules perform complex molecular and quan-
tum mechanical calculation and protein structure 
homology analysis. Files in standard formats such 
as that of the Protein Data Bank can be imported.
Some other programs to check out are the 
following:
 
◾CPMD (Car-Parrinello Molecular Dynamics)—
This code can be used to perform ab initio 
molecular dynamics calculations. It allows for 
time-dependent density functional calcula-
tions, wave function optimization, and path-
integral molecular dynamics.
 
◾Siesta 
(Spanish 
Initiative 
for 
Electronic 
Simulations with Thousands of Atoms)—This 
code uses numerically truncated orbitals (sin-
gle- and double-zeta approach) to build an 
order-N density functional code. This code is 
ideal for modeling large scale nanostructures 
(i.e., nanotubes, nanowires, and molecules).
 
◾NWChem—This code is a highly parallel quan-
tum chemistry package capable of self-con-
sistent field, Hartree-Fock (RHF, UHF), and 
Gaussian density functional calculations, as 
well as several other techniques.
 
◾Atomistix (ATK and VNL)—This commercial 
package provides the ability to calculate I-V 
curves in nanostructures and molecular junc-
tions. The code is based on a nonequilibrium 
Green’s function approach, and it also takes 
advantage of numerically truncated orbitals to 
allow for calculations of large systems.
 
◾LAMMPS—This is a general purpose molecu-
lar dynamics simulator that has the option to 
use Leonard Jones potentials, embedded atom 
potentials, and potentials for biomolecules and 
proteins. This parallel code can easily handle 
systems with thousands of atoms. The ability to 
incorporate the effect of temperature provides 
an important complement to density func-
tional techniques.
 
◾MPB (MIT Photonic Bands package)—This code 
can calculate the band structure and electromag-
netic modes of periodic dielectric structures.
 
◾UTQUANT—This is a quasi-static CV simulator 
for one-dimensional silicon MOS structures.
 
◾SEMC-2D (Schrödinger Equation Monte Carlo 
2D)—This is a simulator for quantum transport 
and inelastic scattering effects in nanoscale 
semiconductor devices, such as nanoscale dou-
ble-gate MOSFETs and tunnel injection lasers.
Questions
 Questions by Chuan Zhang, UC Irvine
 6.1:  Compare the similarities and differences 
of scanning near-field optical microscopy 
(NSOM) and traditional optical microscopy. 
Explain how NSOM exceeds the resolution 
limit of traditional optical microscopes.
 6.2:  Classical far-field microscopy was intro-
duced by Anton van Leeuwenhoek in the 
16th century. It was a major breakthrough 
that played an important role in the advance-
ment of science, engineering, and medicine. 
Briefly explain what is the underlying physical 

[Page 352]
352   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
limitation regarding the magnification/resolu-
tion of classical far-field optical microscopy.
 6.3:  What does the NSOM acronym stand for? 
What are the principles of NSOM? What is the 
difference between apertureless NSOM and 
aperture-based NSOM and what dictates their 
resolution?
 6.4:  Scanning tunneling microscopes (STMs) and 
atomic force microscopes (AFMs) are two so-
called proximal probe techniques with the power 
to reveal the atomic world to us. 
 
(a)  What is the difference between these two? 
 
(b)  A crucial component in an STM is the inte-
grated sharp tip, which has a curvature 
radius of about 50 Å, an angle of aperture of 
5°, and a height of 10 µm. Sketch a process 
to fabricate this integrated tip on a Si wafer.
 6.5:  What is the effect of the following changes on 
quantum yield of fluorescence? Explain the 
reason for your answer.
 
(a) Raising the temperature.
 
(b) Adding a heavy atom to the solvent.
 
(c) Lowering solvent viscosity.
 
(d)  What is the physical process that makes 
phosphorescence rare?
 6.6:  What does AFM stand for and what is the 
principle of operation of AFM? What kind of 
information can you obtain by using AFM? 
Briefly describe an application where AFM is 
employed.
 6.7:  Briefly state the difference between fluores-
cence and phosphorescence.
 6.8:  Please define the following analytical terms. 
Use equations when appropriate.
 
(a) Beer’s law 
 
(b) Transmittance 
 
(c) Quantum yield 
 
(d) Sensitivity 
 
(e) Precision 
 
(f) Accuracy
 6.9:  Suggest the type of system that you would 
employ for the separation of the following 
compounds. Justify your choice.
 
(a)  DNA with a size of 500 bases in length and 
DNA with a size of 2,000 bases in length
 
(b)  A protein of a MW = 15,000 Daltons and 
another protein of a MW = 100,000 Daltons
 
(c)  A protein with a MW = 50,000 Daltons 
and a fluorophore with a MW = 300
 
(d)  A mixture of long-chain unsaturated ali-
phatic compounds
6.10:  Compare the merits of an AFM with transmis-
sion electron microscopy (TEM) and a scan-
ning electron microscopy (SEM).
6.11:  Why do the samples for TEM need to be 
extremely thin, while those for SEM don’t 
need to be?
6.12:  Both energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) 
and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) can be 
utilized to conduct the composition analysis 
of a sample. Which one of them can be used to 
analyze light elements such as Li, Be, and C?
6.13:  How does two-photon confocal micros-
copy enhance the resolution of fluorescence 
microscopy?
6.14:  List the signals generated when electrons interact 
with a solid. What information about a material 
can be obtained from each of those signals?
6.15: Explain the Auger process.
6.16:  Review the various steps in a typical finite 
element analysis (FEA), e.g., a stress-strain 
problem.
6.17:  The identity of a semiconductor can be deter-
mined by measuring its intrinsic carrier 
concentrations at various temperatures. An 
unknown semiconductor is submerged in ice 
water (273K) and boiling water (373K). Its 
intrinsic carrier concentrations, ni, were found 
to be 4.6 × 1018 m–3 and 3.1 × 1020 m–3 at 273K 
and 373K, respectively. What is the bandgap 
and identify of the semiconductor?
Further Reading
ASTM Standard Guide for Computed Tomography (CT) Imaging. 
Designation E 1441–93, Philadelphia: ASTM.
Binnig, G., C. Quate, and C. Gerber. 1986. Atomic force micros-
copy. Phys Rev Lett 56:930–33.
Binnig, G., and H. Rohrer. 2000. Scanning tunneling microscopy. 
IBM Journal of Research and Development 44(1–2):279–93.
Cao, S., U. Brand, T. Kleine-Besten, W. Hoffmann, H. Schwenke, 
S. Bütefisch, and S. Büttgenbach. 2002. Recent develop-
ments in dimensional metrology for microsystem compo-
nents. Microsystems Technologies 8:3–6.
Ceremuga, J. 2003. Obtaining inspection of high aspect ratio 
microstructures using a programmable optical microscope. 
Masters thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 
GA.

[Page 353]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   353
Chinn, D., P. Ostendorp, L. Garrett, P. Guthrei, M. Haugh, R. 
Kershmann, and T. Kurfess. 2002. Three dimensional imag-
ing of LIGA-made micromachines using digital volumetric 
imaging. Proceedings of the Japan-USA Symposium on Flexible 
Automation, Hiroshima, Japan, Vol. 1:565–68.
Chinn, D., P. Ostendorp, M. Haugh, R. Kershmann, T. Kurfess, A. 
Claudet, and T. Tucker. Three dimensional imaging of LIGA-
made microcomponents. ASME Journal of Manufacturing 
Science and Engineering 126:813–21.
Corle, T., and G. Kino. 1996. Confocal Scanning Optical Microscopy 
and Related Imaging Systems. San Diego: Academic Press.
El-Hakim, S. 1990. Some solutions to vision dimensional metrol-
ogy problems. Close-Range Photogrammetry Meets Machine 
Vision. SPIE 1395:480–87.
Fan, K., C. Chu, and J. Mou. 2001. Development of a low-cost 
autofocusing probe for profile measurement. Measurement 
Sci Tech 12:2137–46.
Fukiwara, M., A. Yamaguchi, K. Takamasu, and S. Ozono. 2001. 
Evaluation of stages of nano-CMM. Initiatives of Precision 
Engineering at the Beginning of a Millennium, 634–638, New 
York: Springer.
Griffith, J., H. Marchman, G. Miller, and L. Hopkins. 1995. 
Dimensional metrology with scanning probe microscopes. 
J Vacuum Sci Tech 13(3):1100–05.
Groot, P., and L. Deck. 1994. Surface profiling by frequency-
domain analysis of white light interferograms. Proceedings 
of SPIE—The International Society for Optical Engineering 
2248:101–04.
Hall, A., and L. Degertekin. 2002. Integrated optical interfero-
metric detection method for micromachined capacitive 
acoustic transducers. Appl Phys Lett 80:3859–61.
Heller, A. 2003. Nondestructive characterization at the meso-
scale. Science and Technology Review, Livermore, CA: 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
Hibbard, R., and M. Bono. 2003. Meso-scale metrology tools: A 
survey of relevant tools and a discussion of their strengths 
and weaknesses. Proceedings of Machines and Processes for 
Micro-scale and Meso-scale Fabrication, Metrology, and Assembly, 
70–72.
Kim, B., A. Razavi, L. Degertekin, and T. Kurfess. 2003. 
Micromachined interferometer for MEMS metrology. 
Proceedings of Machines and Processes for Micro-scale and 
Meso-scale Fabrication, Metrology, and Assembly, 73–78.
Kim, B., A. Razavi, F. Degertekin, and T. Kurfess. 2002. 
Micromachined interferometer for measuring dynamic 
response of microstructures. Proceedings of 2002 ASME 
International Mechanical Engineering Congress, and Exposition, 
MEMS Symposium, New Orleans, LA.
Kim, B., Schmittdiel, M. C., Degertekin, F. L., and T. R. Kurfess. 
2004. Scanning grating microinterferometer for MEMS 
metrology. ASME Journal of Manufacturing Science and 
Engineering 126:807–12.
Kirkland, E. 2003. A nano coordinate machine for optical 
dimensional metrology. Master’s thesis, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, Atlanta GA.
Kramar, J., J. Jun, W. Penzes, F. Scire, E. Teague, and J. Villarrubia. 
1999. Grating pitch measurements with the molecular mea-
suring machine. SPIE 3806, Conference on Recent Advances in 
Metrology, Characterization, and Standards for Optical Digital 
Data Disks, 46–53.
Kramar, J., E. Amatucci, D. Gilsinn, J. Jun, W. Penzes, F. Scire, E. 
Teague, and J. Villarrubia. 1999. Toward nanometer accu-
racy measurements. SPIE 3677, Metrology, Inspection and 
Process Control for Microlithography XIII, 1017–28.
Kurfess, T., D. Chinn, P. Ostendorp, A. Claudet, and T. Tucker. 
2002. Metrology for micro-components. Proceedings of 
the JSME/ASME International Conference on Materials and 
Processing 2002, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2:77–82.
Lagerquist, M., W. Bither, and R. Brouillette. 1996. Improving 
SEM linewidth metrology by two-dimensional scanning 
force microscopy. SPIE 2725, Metrology, Inspection and 
Process Control for Microlithography X, 494–503.
Larrabee, R., and M. Postek. 1994. Parameters characterizing the 
measurement of a critical dimension. Proceedings of SPIE—
The International Society for Optical Engineering CR52:2–24.
Li, X., M. Rahman, K. Liu, K. Neo, and C. Chan. 2003. Nano-
precision measurement of diamond tool edge radius for 
wafer fabrication. J Materials Process Tech 140:358–62.
Mack, C., S. Jug, R. Hones, P. Apte, S. Williams, and M. Pochkowski. 
2001. Metrology and analysis of two dimensional SEM pat-
terns. SPIE 4344, Metrology, Inspection and Process Control for 
Microlithography XV, 169–76.
Marchman, H. 1996. Nanometer-scale dimensional metrol-
ogy with noncontact atomic force microscopy. SPIE 
2725, Metrology, Inspection and Process Control for 
Microlithography X.
Marchman, H., and N. Dunham. 1998. AFM: A valid reference 
tool? SPIE 3332, Metrology, Inspection and Process Control for 
Microlithography XII, 2–9.
Marchman, 
H. 
1998. 
Critical 
dimension 
metrology. 
Microlithography: Science and Technology, New York: Marcel 
Dekker, Inc.
Marschner, T., G. Eytan, and O. Dror. 2001. Determination of 
best focus and exposure dose using CD-SEM side-wall 
imaging. SPIE 4344, Metrology, Inspection and Process Control 
for Microlithography XV, 355–65.
Martz, H., and G. Albrecht. 2003. Nondestructive character-
ization technologies for metrology of micro/mesoscale 
assemblies. Proceedings of Machines and Processes for Micro-
scale and Meso-scale Fabrication, Metrology, and Assembly, 
131–141.
Meyyappan, A., M. Klos, and S. Muckenhirn. 2001. Foot (bottom 
corner) measurement of a structure with SPM. SPIE 4344, 
Metrology, Inspection and Process Control for Microlithography 
XV, 733–38.
Nichols, J. F., and Kurfess, T. R. 2004. Metrology of high aspect 
ratio MEMS. J Microsyst Tech 10:556–59.
O’Mahony, C., M. Hill, M. Brunet, R. Duane, and A. Mathewson. 
2003. Characterization of micromechanical structures 
using white-light interferometry. Measurement Sci Tech 
14:1807–14.
Ogura, I., and Y. Okazaki. 2003. A study of development of 
small-cmm probe detecting contact angle. ASPE Summer 
Topical Meeting—Coordinate Measuring Machines, 349.
Opsal, J., H. Chu, Y. Wen, Y. Chang, and G. Li. 2002. Fundamental 
solutions for real-time optical CD metrology. SPIE 4344, 
Metrology, Inspection and Process Control for Microlithography 
XVI, Santa Clara, CA, March 4–7, 2002, p. 163.
Peggs, G., A. Lewis, and R. Leach. 2003. Measuring in three dimen-
sions at the mesoscopic scale. Proceedings of Machines and 
Processes for Micro-scale and Meso-scale Fabrication, Metrology, 
and Assembly, 53–57.
Peggs, G., A. Lewis, and S. Oldfield. 1999. Design for a com-
pact high-accuracy CMM. CIRP Annals—Manufacturing 
Technology 48(1):417–20.
Postek, M. 1994. Scanning electron microscope metrology. 
Proceedings of SPIE—The International Society for Optical 
Engineering CR52:46–90.

[Page 354]
354   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Rizivi, S., and A. Meyyappan. 1999. Atomic force microscopy: 
A diagnostic tool (in) for mask making in the coming 
years. SPIE 3677, Metrology, Inspection and Process Control for 
Microlithography XIII.
Roth, J., E. Felkel, and P. Groot. 2003. Optical metrology. 
Proceedings of Machines and Processes for Micro-scale and 
Meso-scale Fabrication, Metrology, and Assembly, 87–92.
Schellekens, P., H. Haitjema, and W. Pril. 2001. A silicon-etched 
probe for 3-D coordinate measurements with an uncer-
tainty below 0.1 µm. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation 
and Measurement 50(6):1519–23. 
Shilling, M. 2003. Two dimensional analysis of mesoscale parts 
using image processing techniques. Masters thesis, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
Shiozawa, H., Y. Fukutomi, T. Ushioda, and S. Yoshimura. 1998. 
Development of ultra-precision 3D-CMM based on 3-D 
metrology frame. Proc ASPE 18:15–18.
Simon, M., and C. Sauerwein. 2001. Quality control of light 
metal castings by 3D computed tomography. http://www.
ndt.net/article/wcndt00/papers/idn730/idn730.htm.
St. Clair, L., and A. Mirza. 2000. Metrology for MEMS manufac-
turing. Sensors Magazine 17(7):24–33.
Storment, C., D. Borkholder, V. Westerlind, J. Suh, N. Maluf, 
and G. Kovacs. 1994. Flexible, dry-released process for 
aluminum electrostatic actuators. J Microelectromech Syst 
3(3):90–96.
Svetkoff, D., and D. Kilgus. 1991. Influence of object structure 
on the accuracy of 3D systems for metrology. SPIE 1614 
Optics, Illumination, and Image Sensing for Maching Vision 
VI, 218–30.
Takamasu, K., M. Fujiwara, A. Yamaguchi, M. Hiraki, and S. 
Ozono. 2001. Evaluation of thermal drift of nano-CMM. 
Proc. of 2nd EUSPEN International Conference, Turin, Italy, 
May 27–31. 
Takamasu, K., M. Hiraki, K. Enami, and S. Ozono. 1999. 
Development of nano-CMM and parallel-CMM. Proc. of 
Intl. Dimensional Metrology Workshop, May 10–13. 
Uhlmann, E., D. Oberschmidt, and G. Kunath-Fandri. 2003. 
3D-analysis of microstructures with confocal laser scan-
ning microscopy. Proceedings of Machines and Processes 
for Micro-scale and Meso-scale Fabrication, Metrology, and 
Assembly, 93–97.
Veeco. 2003. Scanning probe/atomic force microscopy: Technology over-
view and update. Santa Barbara, CA: Veeco Instruments, Inc.
VIEW Engineering. Voyager 6x12 specifications. http://www.vie-
weng.com, 2003.
Walch, K., A. Meyyappan, S. Muckenhirn, and J. Margail. 2001. 
Measurement of sidewall, line and line-edge roughness with 
scanning probe microscopy. SPIE 4344, Metrology, Inspection 
and Process Control for Microlithography XV, 726–32.
Wyant, J. 2002. White light interferometry. Proceedings of 
SPIE—The International Society for Optical Engineering 
4737:98–107.
Zygo Corporation. 2003. NewView 5000 specifications. Middlefield, 
CT: Zygo Corporation.
References
 
1. Quirk, M., and J. Serda. 2001. Semiconductor manufacturing 
technology. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
 
2. Nichols, J. F. 2004. Metrology of high aspect ratio MEMS, PhD 
diss., Georgia Institute of Technology.
 
3. Ehmann, K., D. Bourell, M. L. Culpepper, T. J. Hodgson, 
T. R. Kurfess, M. Madou, K. Rajurkar, and R. DeVor. 2007. 
Micromanufacturing: International research and development. 
New York: Springer.
 
4. Denk, W., J. Strickler, and W. Webb. 1990. Two-photon laser 
scanning fluorescence microscopy. Science 248:73–76.
 
5. Tompkins, H. G., and E. A. Irene, eds. 2005. Handbook of 
ellipsometry. Berlin: Springer.
 
6. Goldstein, J., D. Newbury, D. Joy, C. Lyman, P. Echlin, 
E. Lifshin, L. Sawyer, and J. Michael. 2003. Scanning elec-
tron microscopy and x-ray microanalysis. New York: Kluwer 
Academic/Plenum Publishers.
 
7. Synge, E. H. 1928. A suggested method for extending micro-
scopic resolution into the ultramicroscopic region. Phil Mag 
6:356–62.
 
8. O’Keefe, J. A. 1956. Resolving power of visible light. J Opt 
Soc Am 46:359.
 
9. Ash, E. A., and G. Nicholls. 1972. Super-resolution aper-
ture scanning microscope. Nature 237:510.
 10. Pohl, D. W., W. Denk, and M. Lanz. 1984. Optical stethos-
copy: Image recording with resolution lambda/20. Appl 
Phys Lett 44:651–53.
 11. Harootunian, A., E. Betzig, M. Isaacson, and A. Lewis. 
1986. Super-resolution fluorescence near-field scanning 
microscopy. Appl Phys Lett 49:674–76.
 12. Vinci, R. P., and J. C. Braveman. 1991. Mechanical testing of 
thin films. 6th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, June 24–27, 
1991, pp. 943–48.
 13. Bushan, B., ed. 1995. Handbook of micro/nanotribology. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
 14. Wong, S. M. 1978. Residual stress measurements on chro-
mium films by x-ray diffraction using the sin2 Y method. 
Thin Solid Films 53:65–71.
 15. Nishioka, T., Y. Shinoda, and Y. Ohmachi. 1985. Raman 
microprobe analysis of stress in Ge and GaAs/Ge on silicon 
dioxide-coated silicon substrates. J Appl Phys 57:276–81.
 16. Marco, S., J. Samitier, O. Ruiz, J. R. Morante, J. Esteve-Tinto, and 
J. Bausells. 1991. Stress measurement of SiO2-polycrystalline 
silicon structures for micromechanical devices by means of 
infrared spectroscopy technique. 6th International Conference 
on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San 
Francisco, June 24–27, 1991, pp. 209–12.
 17. Mehregany, M., R. T. Howe, and S. D. Senturia. 1987. Novel 
microstructures for the in situ measurement of mechanical 
properties of thin films. J Appl Phys 62:3579–84.
 18. Jaccodine, R. J., and W. A. Schlegel. 1966. Measurements of 
strains at Si-SiO2 interface. J Appl Phys 37:2429–34.
 19. Bromley, E. I., J. N. Randall, D. C. Flanders, and R. W. 
Mountain. 1983. A technique for the determination of 
stress in thin films. J Vac Sci Technol B1:1364–66.
 20. Allen, M. G., M. Mehregany, R. T. Howe, and S. D. Senturia. 
1987. Microfabricated structures for the in situ measure-
ment of residual stress, Young’s modulus and ultimate 
strain of thin films. Appl Phys Lett 51:241–43.
 21. Zhang, L. M., D. Uttamchandani, and B. Culshaw. 1991. 
Measurement of the mechanical properties of silicon 
microresonators. Sensors Actuators A A29:79–84.
 22. Pratt, R. I., G. C. Johnson, R. T. Howe, and J. C. Chang. 
1991. Micromechanical structures for thin film character-
ization. 6th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, June 24–27, 
1991, pp. 205–08.

[Page 355]
Metrology and MEMS/NEMS Modeling   355
 23. Krulevitch, P. A. 1994. Micromechanical investigations of 
silicon and Ni–Ti–Cu thin films. PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley.
 24. Hoffman, R. W. 1976. In Physics of nonmetallic thin films 
(NATO advanced study institutes series: Series B, physics), ed. 
C. H. S. Dupuy and A. A. Cachard, 273–353. New York: 
Plenum Press.
 25. Singer, P. 1992. Film stress and how to measure it. Semicond 
Int 15:54–58.
 26. Senturia, S. D., and R. T. Howe. 1990. Lecture notes. Boston: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 27. Maseeh-Tehrani, F. 1990. Characterization of mechani-
cal properties of microelectronic thin films. PhD thesis, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 28. Maseeh, F., and S. D. Senturia. 1989. In Polyimides: 
Materials, chemistry, and characterization, ed. C. Feger, M. 
M. Khojasteh, and J. E. McGrath, 575–84. Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.
 29. Senturia, S. 1987. Can we design microbotic devices with-
out knowing the mechanical properties of materials? 
Proceedings: IEEE Micro Robots and Teleoperators Workshop. 
Hyannis, MA, November 1987, 3/1–5.
 30. Biebl, M., and H. von Philipsborn. 1993. Fracture Strength 
of Doped and Undoped Panical Filters. PhD thesis, 
University of California, Berkeley.
 31. Greek, S., F. Ericson, S. Johansson, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 
1995. In situ tensile strength measurement of thick-film 
and thin film micromachined structures. 8th Interna tional 
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers 
’95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, pp. 56–59.
 32. Ericson, F., and J.-Å. Schweitz. 1990. Micromechanical frac-
ture strength of silicon. J Appl Phys 68:5840–44.
 33. Vinci, R. P., and J. C. Braveman. 1991. Mechanical testing of 
thin films. 6th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, June 24–27, 
1991, pp. 943–48.
 34. Sekimoto, M., H. Yoshihara, and T. Ohkubo. 1982. 
Silicon nitride single-layer x-ray mask. J Vac Sci Technol 
21:1017–21.
 35. Guckel, H., T. Randazzo, and D. W. Burns. 1985. A sim-
ple technique for the determination of mechanical strain 
in thin films with applications to polysilicon. J Appl Phys 
57:1671–75.
 36. Lin, L. 1993. Selective encapsulations of MEMS: Micro 
channels, needles, resonators, and electromechanical fil-
ters. PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
 37. Guckel, H., D. W. Burns, C. C. G. Visser, H. A. C. Tilmans, 
and D. Deroo. 1988. Fine-grained polysilicon films 
with built-in tensile strain. IEEE Trans Electron Devices 
35:800–01.
 38. Kim, C. J. 1991. Silicon electromechanical microgrippers: 
Design, fabrication, and testing. PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley.
 39. Goosen, J. F. L., B. P. van Drieenhuizen, P. J. French, and R. F. 
Wolfenbuttel. 1993. In 7th International Conference on Solid-
State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, 
Japan, June 7–10, 1993, pp. 783–86.
 40. Ericson, F., S. Greek, J. Soderkvist, and J.-Å. Schweitz. 
1995. High sensitive internal film stress measurement 
by an improved micromachined indicator structure. 8th 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, 
pp. 84–87.
 41. Benitez, M. A., J. Esteve, M. S. Benrakkad, J. R. Morante, 
J. Samitier, and J. Å. Schweitz. 1995. Stress profile char-
acterization and test structures analysis of single and 
double ion implanted LPCVD polycrystalline silicon. 8th 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, 
pp. 88–91.
 42. Biebl, M., G. Brandl, and R. T. Howe. 1995. Young’s 
modulus of in situ phosphorus-doped polysilicon. 8th 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, 
pp. 80–83.
 43. Core, T. A., W. K. Tsang, and S. J. Sherman. 1993. Fabrication 
technology for an integrated surface-micromachined sen-
sor. Solid State Technol 36:39–47.
 44. Chu, W. H., M. Mehregany, X. Ning, and P. Pirouz. 1992. 
Measurement of residual stress-induced bending moment 
of p+ silicon films. Mat Res Soc Symp 239:169.
 45. Fan, L.-S., R. S. Muller, W. Yun, J. Huang, and R. T. Howe. 
1990. Spiral microstructures for the measurement of aver-
age strain gradients in thin films. Proceedings: IEEE Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’90). Napa Valley, CA, 
February 11–14, 1990, pp. 177–81.
 46. Campbell, D. S. 1970. In Handbook of thin film technology, 
eds. L. I. Maissel and R. Glang. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 47. Bushan, B. 1996. In Proceedings: IEEE Ninth Annual 
International Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, 
91–98. San Diego, CA.
 48. Bushan, B., Ed. 1995. Handbook of micro/nanotribology. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
 49. Howe, R. T., and R. S. Muller. 1983. Polycrystalline silicon 
micromechanical beams. J Electrochem Soc 130:1420–23.
 50. Howe, R. T. 1985. In Micromachining and micropackaging of 
transducers, eds. C. D. Fung, P. W. Cheung, W. H. Ko, and 
D. G. Fleming, 169–87. New York: Elsevier.
 51. Yun, W. 1992. A surface micromachined accelerometer with 
integrated CMOS detection circuitry. PhD thesis, University 
of California, Berkeley.
 52. Adams, A. C. 1988. In VLSI technology, ed. S. M. Sze. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
 53. Maseeh, F., and S. D. Senturia. 1990. In Technical Digest: 
1990 Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head 
Island, SC, June 1990, pp. 55–60.
 54. Senturia, S. D., and R. T. Howe. 1990. Lecture notes. Boston: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 55. Cook, R. D. 1995. Finite element modeling for stress analysis. 
New York: Wiley.
 56. Murphy, M. 1995. Personal communication.
 57. Marshall, J. C., M. Parameswaran, M. E. Zaghloul, and 
M. Gaitan. 1992. High-level CAD melds microma-
chine devices with foundries. IEEE Circuits Devices Mag 
8:10–17.
 58. Tomovich, C., ed. 1988. MOSIS user manual. Los Angeles, 
CA: University of Southern California.
 59. Billingsley, G. C. 1983. Report no. UCB/ERL M83/62. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California, Berkeley.
 60. ERL. 1985. SAMPLE version 1.6a user’s guide. Berkeley, CA: 
Electronics Research Laboratory, University of California, 
Berkeley.
 61. Oldham, W. G., S. N. Nandgaonkar, A. R. Neureuther, and 
M. O’Toole. 1979. A general simulator for VLSI lithography 
and etching processes—Part I: Application to projection 
lithography. IEEE Trans Electron Devices ED-26:717–22.

[Page 356]
356   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 62. Oldham, W. G., A. R. Neureuther, J. L. Reynolds, S. N. 
Nandgaonkar, and C. Sung. 1980. A general simula-
tor for VLSI lithography and etching processes—Part 2: 
Application to deposition and etching. IEEE Trans Electron 
Devices ED-27:1455–59.
 63. Koppelman, G. M. 1989. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’89), 88–93. Salt Lake City, UT.
 64. Gilbert, J. R., G. K. Ananthasuresh, and S. D. Senturia. 
1996. 3-D modeling and simulation of contact prob-
lems and hysteresis in coupled electromechanics. Ninth 
Annual International Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’96). San Diego, CA, February 11–15, 1996, 
pp. 127–32.
 65. Crary, S., and Y. Zhang. 1990. CAEMEMS: an integrated com-
puter aided engineering workbench for micro electrome-
chanical systems. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’90). Napa Valley, CA, pp. 113–14.
 66. Korvink, J. G., J. Funk, M. Roos, G. Wachutka, and H. Baltes. 
1994. SESES: a comprehensive MEMS modeling system. IEEE 
International Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
(MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan, January 25–28, 1994, pp. 22–27.
 67. Maseeh, F. 1994. A novel multidimensional semiconductor 
material analysis tool. Solid State Technol 37:83–84.
 68. Sequin, C. H. 1992. Computer simulation of anisotropic 
crystal etching. Sensors Actuators A A34:225–41.
 69. Koide, A., K. Sato, and S. Tanaka. 1991. Simulation of two-
dimensional etch profile of silicon during orientation-de-
pendent anisotropic etching. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan, pp. 216–20.
 70. Li, G., T. Hubbard, and E. K. Antonsson. 1998. SEGS: 
on-line etch simulator. 1998 International Conference on 
Modeling and Simulation of Microsystems. Santa Clara, CA.
 71. Hill, S. D. J., K. P. Kamper, U. Dasbach, J. Dopper, W. Ehrfeld, 
and M. Kaupert. 1995. In Simulation and design of microsys-
tems and microstructures, eds. R. A. Adey, A. Lahrmann, and 
C. Lessmollmann, 276–83. Billerica, MA: Computational 
Mechanics Publications.
 72. Fichtner, W. 1988. In VLSI technology, ed. S. M. Sze, 422–65. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
 73. Adey, R. A., A. Lahrmann, and C. Lessmollmann, eds. 1995. 
Simulation and design of microsystems and microstructures. 
Billerica, MA: Computational Mechanics Publications.

[Page 357]
PART II
Scaling Laws, 
Actuators, 
and Power 
and Brains 
in Miniature 
Devices
Diﬀuser/current
collector
H2
O2
H+
e–
Proton exchange
membrane
Catalyst 
electrode
Cathode
1/2 O2
 + 2 H+ + 2 e–
H2O
Anode
H2
2 H+ + 2 e–
(a)
(b)
(a) Nested Russian dolls as an example of isometric scaling. (b) Proton exchange 
membrane fuel cell.

[Page 358]
358   Scaling Laws, Actuators, and Power and Brains in Miniature Devices
The civilization of abundance is also that of 
famines in African and other places. The collapse 
of totalitarian regimes has left intact all the evils 
of the democratic liberal societies, ruled by the 
demon of money. Marx’s famous phrase about 
religion as the opiate of the masses can now be 
applied, and more accurately; to television, which 
will end up anaesthetizing the human race, sunk in 
an idiotic beatitude.
Octavio Paz in a passage on the science and 
technology of the West in In Light of India
Napoleon asked: “Monsieur Laplace, why wasn’t 
the Creator mentioned in your book on Celestial 
Mechanics?”
Laplace replied: “Sir, I have no need for that 
hypothesis.”
Introduction to Part II
Chapter 7 Scaling Laws
Chapter 8 Actuators
Chapter  9 Power and Brains in Miniature Devices
Introduction to Part II
Of the three chapters in Part II, the first deals with 
scaling laws, the second deals with actuators, and 
the third discusses surrounding power generation 
and the implementation of brains in miniaturized 
devices.
In Chapter 7, on scaling laws, we look at scaling 
from both intuitive and mathematical  points of 
view. We are especially interested in deviations 
from linear scaling, where downscaling reveals new 
unexpected physical and chemical phenomena. The 
scaling chapter also constitutes an introduction to 
the subsequent treatises on actuators in Chapter 8 
and on power and brains in Chapter 9. An actuator—
like a sensor—is a device that converts energy from 
one form to another. In the case of an actuator, one 
is interested in the ensuing action; in the case of a 
sensor, one is interested in the information garnered. 
Scaling enables one to compare various actuator 
mechanisms, such as those proposed to propel a 
rotor blade, bend a thin Si membrane, or move fluids 
in fluidic channels. Power generation poses quite a 
challenge for miniaturization science; the smaller 
the power source, the less its total capacity. We will 
consider the powering of miniaturized equipment, 
as well as the miniaturization of power sources 
themselves, in Chapter 9. In the same chapter, we 
also discuss the different strategies for making 
micromachines smarter. 
Part II should help the reader to choose a preferred 
actuator mechanism and/or power source through 
a  better understanding of scaling and give some 
idea on how to incorporate intelligence in MEMS.

[Page 359]
359
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Microintuition
Mathematical Approach to Scaling
Scaling Examples
Breakdown of Scaling Laws
Appendix 7A: Common 
Dimensional Numbers
Questions
References
7
Scaling Laws
Introduction
The electronics revolution, which began in the 1960s, drove the 
miniaturization of radio, television, hard disk drives, camcorders, personal 
digital assistants, etc., to the point where miniaturization now appears 
commonplace. More recent is the miniaturization of components that are 
not based on integrated circuits in hardware such as physical, chemical, 
and biological sensors and analytical instruments. Progress in this newer 
area is derived from mature, traditional manufacturing technologies 
such as mechanical precision machining, as well as from lithography-
based nontraditional microelectromechani cal system (MEMS) and 
nanoelectromechanical system (NEMS) tech niques. The encroaching 
limits of our planet’s resources and the continuing deterioration of the 
environment are adding urgency to this trend of scaling things down 
in size.
In Table 7.1 we list sound reasons for miniaturizing systems, actua-
tors, power sources, sensors, and components. In some cases, the reason 
is favorable scaling—for example, smaller devices tend to be faster and 
consume less power. Scaling may also disfavor miniaturization, as often 
happens with actuators and power sources; smaller actuators exert less 
force, and smaller power sources harness less power.
In this chapter, we analyze scaling laws and the size regimes where 
macrotheories start requiring corrections. We aspire to elucidate the 
unexpected behavior of some of these micromachines and to better 
understand why, in some cases, it makes sense to miniaturize a device 
for reasons beyond economics, volume, and weight. Following some 
comments about human microintuition, we introduce the concepts of 
 Our solar system as an example of isometric scaling.

[Page 360]
360   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
isometry, allometry, and dimensional analysis—
mathematical techniques that help us predict the 
influence of downscaling more reliably. The lessons 
learned are then applied to some scaling applica-
tions in both natural and human-made “machines.” 
We end the chapter by introducing some examples 
where scaling  laws break down and where non-
continuum  models must be invoked. In a contin-
uum, all quantities are defined everywhere and vary 
continuously from point to point; in a noncontin-
uum this continuity breaks down.
Microintuition
As children, we learned to deal with everyday objects 
having size and scale dimensions that are naturally 
“sized up” by our senses, and we were mystified and 
enthralled by anything much larger (Gulliver) or 
smaller (Tom Thumb) (see Figure 7.1). It is indeed 
much more difficult to get a feel for or understand 
the consequences of dimensions of physical systems 
many orders of magnitude larger or smaller than 
what we commonly experience. Of all our senses, 
vision informs our mind the most. The unaided 
eyes generally give us the ability to discern things 
as small in size as an ant’s eye or the point of a pin 
(approximate size, 50 µm). However, telescopes and 
microscopes continue to improve and greatly extend 
our sensory capabilities in our quest to understand 
and utilize our material world better, including sys-
tems spanning extreme length scales from the astro-
nomical to the atomic. These new sets of eyes have 
greatly assisted us in assessing the size and scale 
of diverse natural and artificial material systems. 
Today telescopes allow us to see galaxies 13 billion 
light-years away (1025 m), and microscopes allow us 
to see even single atoms (about 10–10 m)!
Q:  Gulliver was twelve times as tall as the 
Lilliputians. How much should they feed 
him? Could it be twelve times their own food 
ration? Hint: A person’s food needs are related 
to his or her mass (volume), which depends 
on the cube of the linear dimension.
A:  Let lG and VG denote Gulliver’s linear and vol-
ume dimensions. Let lL and VL denote a Lilli-
putian’s linear and volume dimensions. Gulliver 
is twelve times as tall as the Lilliputians,  or 
TABLE 7.1 Motivations to Miniaturize Systems, Actuators, Power Sources, Sensors, and 
Components
Miniaturization Attributes
Motivations
Low energy* and little material consumed
There are limited resources on planet Earth
Arrays of sensors
Redundancy, wider dynamic range, and 
increased selectivity through pattern 
recognition 
Small
Smaller is lower in cost, minimal invasive
Favorable scaling laws (in some cases)
Forces that scale with a low power become 
more prominent in the microdomain; if these 
are positive attributes then miniaturization is 
favorable, e.g., surface tension becomes 
more important than gravity in narrower 
capillaries
Batch and beyond batch techniques (roll-to-
roll manufacturing)
Lowers cost
Disposable
Helps avoid contamination
Breakdown of macrolaws in physics and 
chemistry
New physics and chemistry might be 
developed
Increased sensitivity (in some cases)
Nonlinear effects can increase a sensor‘s 
sensitivity, e.g., amperometric sensors 
Smaller building blocks
The smaller the building blocks, the more 
sophisticated a system that can be built
*  There is a significant debate about this point. If the total environmental “cost” for a product is considered, 
miniaturized products might be worse for the planet. It is similar to the debate about hybrid cars: they save 
on gas, but the environmental impacts of producing the batteries are often ignored.

[Page 361]
Scaling Laws   361
lG = 12 lL. Then, VG ∝ (lG)3 and VL∝ (lL)3, so 
VG/VL = (lG)3/(lL)3 = (12 lL)3/(lL)3 = 123 = 1728. 
Gulliver needs to be fed 1728 times as much 
food each day as a Lilliputian. This may be the 
real reason Gulliver was driven out of Lilliput. 
(Courtesy of W. Wilson, University of Central 
Oklahoma).
Humans are accustomed to thinking in distances 
and sizes—even microsizes have become quite intu-
itive, more so than microtimes. To accommodate 
the  human inability to comprehend minute seg-
ments of time, Isaac Asimov introduced a measure 
based on the speed of light. Asimov’s light-meter is 
the time required for light (in a vacuum) to cover the 
distance of a meter. An illustrative case is the half-
life of radioactive particles. Saying that the half-life 
of a first particle is of the order of a hundredth of a 
millionth of a second and that of a second particle 
is of a thousandth of a trillionth of a second makes 
little impression. On the other hand, saying that the 
half-life of one type of particle is of the order of a 
light-meter and that of the other is of a tenth of a 
light-micrometer is more effective. We find linear 
extrapolation of length easy but are quickly at a loss 
when considering the implications that shrinking of 
time segments has or shrinking of surface-to-volume 
ratios on the relative strength of external forces 
working on miniaturized structures. In dealing 
with very small devices, our micro intuition—as Bill 
Trimmer calls it—is often misleading (see also http://
home.earthlink.net/~trimmerw/mems/ tutorials 
.html).1
The effect of downscaling, especially into the 
nanodomain, is indeed not well understood and 
leads to some very surprising and sometimes 
counterintuitive results. For example, scaling shows 
that NEMS devices feature fundamental frequen-
cies in  the microwave range, active masses in the 
femtogram range, mechanical quality factors (Qs) 
in the tens of thousands, force sensitivities in the 
attonewton level, mass sensitivities at the level of 
individual atoms, and heat capacities far below 
yoctocalories. NEMS will make for electromechani-
cal components with response times and operating 
frequencies that are as fast as most of today’s elect -
ron devices. We now introduce a rigid mathematical 
formulation for scaling of a system, illustrating 
the newly gained insights with observations from 
nature. Our aim is to develop a systematic approach 
about the likely behavior of downsized systems so 
we do not need to rely on microintuition alone.
In Figure 7.2 we illustrate some known and not-
so-well-known objects and their respective sizes, 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 7.1 Tom Thumb originally by the Brothers Grimm (a) and Gulliver’s Travels by Jonathan Swift (b). 

[Page 362]
362   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
including MEMS and NEMS, organized in powers 
of ten.
Mathematical Approach to Scaling
Introduction
In his book On Growth and Form (first published in 
1917), D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson explains the 
profound effects of scaling in nature. Thompson 
(1860–1948) was a mathematically trained zoolo-
gist who pioneered the field we call biomathematics 
today (scaling laws in nature are a subset of biomathe-
matics). He recognized many strong mathe matical 
patterns in nature (spiral seashells, zebra stripes, 
etc.) and tried to find an explanation for the physi-
cal principles behind them. His book is the work of 
a true maverick and still inspires those interested 
in a mathematical understanding of biology. For a 
more recent account on growth and form in nature, 
including a more detailed mathematical treatment 
of scaling in animals, we refer to Knut Schmidt-
Nielsen.2 A popularizing and exquisitely illustrated 
work on the same topic is Thomas McMahon and 
John Bonner’s On Size and Life.3
Similarity or Isometry, Allometry, 
Fractals, and Dimensional Analysis
A scaling law describes the variation of physical 
quantities with the size of the system. To understand 
scaling, it is essential to develop a notion for the 
concept of similarity or isometry. The idea is famil-
iar from geometry: for example, two triangles are 
Bird ± 10 cm high,
hand ± 10 cm long
Diameter human
hair ± 100 µm
Ni micromachined
gear ± 100 µm
Dust particle ± 1.5 µm
Quantum electronic
structures ± 200 Å
DNA ± 2 nm wide
Atoms  1-4 Å
Elephant ± 2 m high
IC chip ± 1 cm wide
Grain of sand ± 1 mm
Biological cell ± 10 µm
1 m
0.1 m = 10 cm
0.01 m = 1 cm
1 mm
0.1 mm = 100 µm
0.01 mm = 10 µm
Micromachining
Nanomachining
1 µm
0.1 µm =100 nm Smallest IC features ± 0.18 µm
0.01 µm = 10 nm
1 nm = 10 Å
 65 Å high
Atomic lettering using
scanning tunneling
microscope
0.1 nm = 10 Å
FIGURE 7.2 Various objects and their linear size.

[Page 363]
Scaling Laws   363
said to be similar or isometric if all of their angles 
are equal, even if the sides of the two triangles are 
of different lengths. The two triangles have the same 
shape; the larger one is simply a scaled up version 
of the smaller one. This notion can be generalized 
to include complex organisms or human-made arti-
facts such as engines, boats, and aircraft.
In the most general case, to compare the relative 
sizes of two structures, x and y, one may write:
 
y = bxa  
(7.1)
where a and b are constants. If the exponent a equals 
zero, then y and x are independent. This holds, for 
example, for the size of a cell (y) as a function of 
animal size (x); the cell diameter (b) is independent 
of animal size (about 10 µm, see Chapter 2). In case 
of a linear relationship between y and x, a equals 
1, and x and y are said to be isometric or exhibit 
geometric similarity—the proportions of the struc-
tures that are being compared do not change with 
a change in size. Isometric change occurs when 
each dimension of a structure is scaled up or down 
regardless of the disproportionate change in such 
parameters as surface area and volume. If x doubles 
in length, then so does y. The proportions remain 
constant and do not change with a change in size. 
Besides the aforementioned triangles, the nine plan-
ets and the ten nested Russian dolls shown above 
are all simple examples of isometry, in which the 
proportions do not change with size. 
From the rules of isometry, we expect that for 
geometrically similar animals of the same mass 
density, the body mass, m, will be proportional to 
the cube of the body length, l3, and that the area, S, 
will be proportional to l2. In a number of species, 
body surface areas proportional to the 2/3 power of 
body mass are just what is found. This is illustrated 
in Figure 7.3 where we have plotted the surface area 
versus body mass for a species of salamander in a 
log-log plot. To elucidate the plot in Figure 7.34, we 
first rewrite Equation 7.1 in its logarithmic form 
and obtain the following.
 
log y = log b + a log x 
(7.2)
In the example case the slope a equals 2/3, or 
0.67, and fits the isometric prediction exactly. The 
value of b is of significance as well; it fixes the value 
for y when x is equal to 1. Comparisons made over 
a limited size range, say within a given species of 
plants or animals and types of bridges or boats, are 
often isometric. 
When, on the other hand, comparing animals, 
plants, engines, or boats of greatly differing size, 
proportions do often change with size, and one 
speaks about allometry. Allometric change occurs 
when the proportions of an organism adjust to 
the different rates at which surface area, volume, 
and other physical parameters change with differ-
ing sizes. It is sometimes referred to as differential 
scaling. Perhaps the most famous allometric rela-
tionship pertains to the metabolic machinery of 
animals. In 1932, Max Kleiber, an American vet-
erinary scientist, found that the basal metabolic 
rate (the rate at which the body generates heat 
when the organism is at rest), as measured by the 
rate of oxygen consumption or heat production, 
is proportional to m0.75 over a very wide range of 
animals. In Figure 7.4, we show what has become 
known as Kleiber’s law, which says that the meta-
bolic rate for a wide range of different species is 
proportional to m0.75 (the broken line with a slope 
of 0.67 = 2/3 has been added for comparison). This 
law has been shown to be approximately true over 
twenty orders of magnitude (from single cells to 
elephants). There are a large variety of other phe-
nomena that change with body size according 
to quarter-power law scaling. For example, a cat, 
103
102
Surface area (cm2)
10
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
Body mass (kg)
1
1
FIGURE 7.3 Surface area versus body mass for a species 
of salamander, the dwarf siren (Pseudobranchus striatus). 
The surface area, S, is proportional to the body mass, m, 
raised to the 0.67 power.

[Page 364]
364   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
100 times the weight of a mouse lives about 1001/4, 
or about three times, as long as a mouse, and 
heartbeat scales as m–1/4, so the cat’s heart beats 
one-third as fast as a mouse’s.
The reason for Kleiber’s allometric relation has 
eluded scientists for a long time. For metabolism, 
molecules inside and outside cells, such as 
carbohydrates, enzymes, hormones, nucleic acids, 
must interact and react with each other. If a cell and 
its organelles were not limited to a size of only a few 
micrometers in diameter, then it would be difficult 
for the various molecules to diffuse and come in 
contact within a reasonable amount of time. The 
small cell size maximizes surface-to-volume ratio 
(S/V), allowing for the most efficient metabolism. 
In larger organisms, individual cells are accessed via 
distribution networks: in plants, a vascular system 
of xylem and phloem carries water and nutrients to 
and from the different parts of the organism, and 
in animals, the circulatory system of veins plays 
the same role. If S/V was the main factor involved 
in controlling metabolic rate, that rate would be 
expected to scale to the body mass of an organism 
to the two-thirds power. Plotting the basal rate of 
oxygen consumption rate within a given species is 
indeed often found to be proportional to m0.67. On 
this basis, for a cat, 100 times more massive than 
a mouse, we expect to have a basal metabolism of 
1000.67, or about 21.5 times that of the mouse. But 
Kleiber’s law, which applies when one looks across 
different species and over a wide range of sizes, means 
that a cat’s metabolic rate is not 21.5 times greater 
than a mouse’s, but 31.6 times. One of the more 
inspiring explanations for Kleiber’s law came from 
ecologists Enquist and Brown and physicist West in 
1997. These authors explain that the generic principle 
underlying Kleiber’s law is that nutrient supply 
networks in animals and plants form a branching 
fractal network* to reach all cells in an organism. 
They showed that they could derive Kleiber’s 
3/4-power scaling law by invoking these fractal 
networks. In their analysis, then, the metabolism 
scales as the dimension of the circulatory system, 
which is after all what delivers the  energy being 
metabolized.† Allometric changes in proportions are 
often compensations for competing requirements 
of surface area, cross-sectional area, and volume. 
In this case, nature evidently evolved a method to 
overcome the natural limitation of simple geomet-
ric scaling by developing these more efficient 
fractal-like webs to connect all the similarly sized 
cells within an organism. Fractals are an optimal 
geometry for minimizing the work lost due to the 
transfer network while maximizing the effective 
surface area (see Figure 7.5, with a tree as an example 
of a fractal). We believe that this insight might be of 
great value in human engineering endeavors where 
reagents and reaction products must be distributed 
with maximum efficiency throughout the bulk of 
a device, be it a fuel cell, a battery or a sensor. In 
electrochemical systems, it is advantageous to have 
a large S/V when there is the need to transfer the 
signal or power effectively to an electrical network. 
* In a fractal network, each tiny part is a replica of the whole. In the 
current context, think about blood capillaries in our bodies and their 
botanical equivalent in trees: a silhouette of the human circulatory 
system and of roots and branches of a tree actually look remarkably 
similar.
† The theory is not without is detractors; Dodds at MIT, for example, 
disputes the very existence of the 3/4 law.5 A 2005 paper by West and 
coworkers seems to vindicate this team’s work.6
1,000,000
Heat production per day (kcal)
100,000
10,000
1,000
100
10
1
0.001
0.01
Body weight (kg)
0.1
1
10
100
1,000 10,000 100,000
Weight
Weight
Rat
Guinea pig
Rabbit
Cat
Macaque
Dog
Goat
Sheep
Chimpanzee
Woman
(Swine)
(Porpoise)
(Steer calf)
Cow
(Elephant)
(Whale)
Mouse
Surface
FIGURE 7.4 A log-log plot of metabolic heat production 
against body weight, taken from Kleiber’s 1947 article. It 
is clear that most points (green) closely fit the red line 
with a slope of three quarters, rather than the weight 
line (slope of 1) or the surface line (slope of two thirds). 
Note that although the differences between the lines 
seem small, this is a log-log plot, so the deviations are 
actually vast.

[Page 365]
Scaling Laws   365
We will demonstrate in Chapter 9, this volume, in 
the section on miniaturizing power sources, that 
fractal geometries for the electrodes might be the 
best solution for maximizing the current while 
minimizing the internal resistance.
Having reviewed the basics of isometry and allom-
etry, we now introduce the concept of dimensional 
analysis, one of the simplest yet most powerful tools 
in a physicist’s bag of tricks. Dimensional analysis 
is important when modeling physical phenomena, 
for instance, predicting the performance of a large 
plane on the basis of observing a small-scale model 
in a wind tunnel or the reverse—more relevant in 
miniaturization science—predicting the behavior 
of a miniaturized machine on the basis of the per-
formance of a larger model. Besides predicting the 
behavior in scale-up or scale-down experiments, 
dimensional analysis is of use in the deduction of 
physics laws (physics demands dimensional con-
sistency in equations), reduction of number of 
variables by introducing dimensionless groups and 
order of magnitude analysis (which terms domi-
nate in an equation). Langhaar described dimen-
sional analysis as “a method by which we deduce 
information about a phenomenon from the single 
premise that the phenomenon can be described by 
a dimensionally correct equation among certain 
variables.”7
The dimensional specification for a physical vari-
able is its dimensional formula. The dimensional for-
mula shows the fundamental or base quantities 
(denoted by capital letters) raised to the appropri-
ate powers and enclosed in brackets. There are seven 
fundamental base quantities in these dimensional 
formulas: time, length, mass, electrical current, tem-
perature, amount of a substance in moles, and lumi-
nous intensity. All other quantities, dimensions, and 
units are known as derived quantities. For example, 
the dimensional formula for acceleration, a, is [LT–2]. 
In the simplest use, dimensional analysis helps one 
decide whether an equation is correct as the dimen-
sions on both sides of the equality sign must be the 
same and one can figure out the dimensions of a 
particular variable if the others are known. 
In a more advanced use of dimensional analy-
sis, the object is to substitute a set of dimensionless 
numbers for the dimensional physical variables that 
describe the problem—pressure, velocity, density, 
and so on. As the dimensionless numbers are prod-
ucts or ratios of the physical variables, this process 
always succeeds in reducing the number of variables 
in the problem. This reduction in the number of 
variables is a very worthwhile exercise since it fre-
quently saves a great deal of experimental effort. 
We introduce first the two most important theo-
rems of dimensional analysis and follow that by 
listing a number of detailed steps to carry out a 
typical  dimensional analysis using the exponent 
method or Buckingham method. Finally, we present 
a couple of examples and an exercise that will turn 
out to be of use later on in this chapter.
First Theorem
The dimensional homogeneity theorem states that 
any physical quantity is dimensionally a power law 
monomial: [Any Physical Quantity] = [MaLb  T c].
Second Theorem
The Buckingham Π theorem (Pi theorem) states that 
if a system has k physical quantities of relevance that 
depend on r independent dimensions, then there 
are a total of k – r mutually independent dimension -
less groups π1, π2, …, πk – r. The dimensionless groups 
are called pi-terms. The behavior of the system is 
then describable by a dimensionless equation F (π1, 
π2, …, πk – r) = 0. The number of pi-terms is thus fewer 
than the original number of variables by r.
In practice, one proceeds as follows:
 
1. Make an informed guess about which para-
meters (variables), k, are likely to be important 
FIGURE 7.5 A tree as an example of a fractal.

[Page 366]
366   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
in the phenomenon under scrutiny. These are 
typically all variables required to describe the 
problem geometrically (e.g., diameter, D), 
materials properties [e.g., fluid properties (ρ,µ)], 
physical constants (e.g., gravity, g—would things 
work differently on the moon?), and external 
effects (dp/dx, a pressure differential).
 
2. Express each variable in terms of its funda-
mental quantities (dimensions), [M], [L], [T], 
etc.
 
3. Determine the required number of dimension-
less parameters (k – r).
 
4. Select a number of repeating variables equal to 
the number of dimensions (= r). All fundamen-
tal quantities must be included in this set, and 
each repeating variable must be dimensionless 
independent of the others.
 
5. Form a dimensionless parameter π by multi-
plying one of the nonrepeating variables by the 
product of the repeating variables, each raised 
to an unknown exponent.
 
6. Solve for the unknown exponents.
 
7. Repeat this process for each nonrepeating 
variable.
 
8. Express results as a relationship among the 
dimensionless parameters: F (π1, π2, π3, …) = 0.
Example 7.1
We apply the Buckingham method now to some 
example problems, starting with a simple one. 
Say you want to find out the drag force FD on a 
body immersed in a flowing fluid (say a fish or 
a submarine moving underwater—let’s call it a 
swimmer). The drag force FD is the force oppos-
ing the object’s velocity and will depend on the 
following:
 
FD = f(l, v, ρ, µ) 
(7.3)
where k = 5 (number of variables/parameters) 
and r = 3 number of dimensions (L, T, and M).
Thus, the number of dimensionless numbers 
is expected to be 5 – 3 = 2. This is summarized in 
Table 7.2.
Select “repeating” variables: l, v, and ρ. Com-
bine these with the rest of the variables: µ and 
FD. So the first pi-term becomes π1 = µ(la vb ρc). 
To calculate the exponents, one writes the fol-
lowing equation:
 
π1 = µ(la vb ρc) 
(7.4)
and since this combination is supposed to be 
dimensionless:
 
M0L0T0 = (ML–1 T–1)(L)a(LT–1)b(ML–3)c
 
M: 0 = 1 + c → c = –1
 
L: 0 = –1 + a + b – 3c → a = –1
 
T: 0 = –1 – b → b = –1
The first π term is thus as follows:
 π1 = µ/lvρ, π1 = 1/Reynolds number (1/Re) 
(7.5)
usually written as follows:
 
Re = ρvl/µ 
(6.71)
The Reynolds number, familiar from Volume I, 
Chapter 6, appears in a large number of fluid 
flow problems. It is the ratio of inertial forces 
over viscous forces. A more complete discussion 
of the Reynolds number is given in Volume I, 
Chapter 6, on fluidics. A list of other common 
dimensionless groups is represented in Appendix 
7A. The second dimensionless group (pi-term) 
should be chosen in such a way that it is certain 
to be independent of the first pi-term. One way 
to do that is to make sure that at least one physi-
cal parameter that was present in the first group 
is missing from the second and vice versa. In the 
example case, we replace the viscosity µ by the 
drag force FD, as follows:
 
π2 = FD(ρdlevf)  
(7.6)
 
M0L0T0 = (MLT–2)(ML–3)d(L)e(LT–1)f
 
M: 0 = 1 + d → d = –1
 
L: 0 = 1 – 3d + e + f → e = –2
 
T: 0 = –2 – f → f = –2
TABLE 7.2 There Are Five Parameters or Variables 
(k) and Three Fundamental Quantities
FD
l
v
ρ
µ
MLT–2
L
LT–1
ML–3
ML–1T–1

[Page 367]
Scaling Laws   367
This way we obtain a second dimensionless 
group, given as follows.
 
π2 = FD/ρ l2v2  
(7.7)
This second group, FD/ρ l2v2, may be considered 
a dimensionless drag force. Using A as the wetted 
surface of the submerged swimmer, this dimen-
sionless group may be rewritten as the drag coef-
ficient CD. Since π2 = f (π1) we can also write the 
following.
 
CD = FD/ρl2v2 = f (Re)  
(7.8)
For a given Reynolds number, the best design for 
a race car, submarine, or airplane is the one that 
minimizes drag coefficient CD (see below under 
“Scaling in Flying”).
Example 7.2
In a second example, we apply dimensional 
analysis to the drag force on a rough sphere in a 
flowing solution. Drag force on a rough sphere 
(with diameter D and roughness k) is a function 
of D, ρ, µ, v, and k. The relative roughness of the 
sphere is given as k/D: 
 
k = 6 (number of variables/parameters)
 
r = 3 number of dimensions (L, T, and M)
Thus, the number of dimensionless numbers is 
expected to be 6 – 3 = 3. This is summarized in 
Table 7.3.
Select “repeating” variables: D, v, and ρ. 
Combine these with the rest of the variables: FD, 
µ, and k. So the first pi-term is given as follows:
 
π1 = µ(Da vb ρc) 
(7.9)
and since this combination is dimensionless:
 
M0 L0 T0 = (ML–1T–1) (L)a(LT–1)b(ML–3)c
 
M: 0 = 1 + c → c = –1
 
L: 0 = –1 + a + b – 3c → a = –1
 
T: 0 = –1 – b → b = –1
we again obtain π1 = µ/lvρ, π1 = 1/Reynolds num-
ber, abbreviated as Re = ρvl/η (Volume I, Equation 
6.71). For the second dimensionless group we 
choose the repeating variables D, v, and ρ and 
combine those with the nonrepeating variables 
FD, µ, and k.
 
π2 = k(Da vb ρc) 
(7.10)
 
M0 L0 T0 = (L)(L)a(LT–1)b(ML–3)c
 
M: 0 = c → c = 0
 
L: 0 = 1 + a + b – 3c → a = –1
 
T: 0 = –b → b = 0
 
π2 ≡ k/D 
(7.11)
For the third pi-term, we write a dimensionless 
group as follows:
 
π3 = FD(Da vb ρc) 
(7.12)
 
M0 L0 T0 = (MLT–2)(L)a(LT–1)b(ML–3)c
 
M: 0 = c + 1 → c = –1
 
L: 0 = 1 + a + b – 3c → a = –2
 
T: 0 = –2 – b → b = –2
 
π3 ≡ FD/D2 v2 ρ 
(7.13)
And since π3 ≡ f(π2, π1), we can also write the fol-
lowing equation:
 
FD/D2v2ρ = f(ρvl/µ, k/d) 
(7.14)
We encountered this expression when discuss-
ing the friction factor for pipe flow in Volume I, 
Chapter 6 (see Volume I, Equation 6.73). With 
the math introduced so far, we can express simil-
itude or similarity a bit better now than the way 
we represented it in Equation 7.1. As we noted 
before, similarity is very important to be able 
to predict the behavior of a model with respect 
to the real life object. In miniaturization science 
the model is usually very large compared with 
the actual prototype device. Suppose the physi-
cal problem described in terms of dimensionless 
parameters is given as π1 = f(π2,π3,…,πn); applied 
TABLE 7.3 There Are Six Parameters or Variables 
(k) and Three Fundamental Quantities
FD
D
v
k
ρ
µ
MLT–2
L
LT–1
L
ML–3
ML–1 T–1

[Page 368]
368   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
to the prototype, this transforms into π1p  = 
f(π2p,π3p,…,πnp), and for the model of the proto-
type it reads as π1m = f(π2m,π3m,…,πnm). The simi-
larity requirements for modeling then become 
the following:
 
π2m ≡ π2p
 
π3m ≡ π3p
 
……. 
(7.15)
 
πnm ≡ πnp
 
⇒ then π1m ≡ π1p
In other words, under these conditions the 
dependent variables for prototype and model 
will be the same. Similarity comes in different 
flavors. There is, first of all, geometric similar-
ity (scale factor); i.e., the ratio of lengths in the 
scale model compared with the full scale case is 
constant (all angles are identical). Then there is 
kinematic similarity, in which the ratios of veloc-
ity, acceleration, and flow rate between the 
scale model and the full scale are constant (time-
 dependent behavior of the model). Finally, there 
is dynamic similarity, where the ratios of forces 
on scale model and full-scale case are constant.
To illustrate these distinctive similarities, con-
sider predicting the drag on a thin rectangular 
plate (w × h) from a model placed normal to 
a flow. The drag function in this case will be 
FD = f(w, h, µ, ρ, and v). Dimensional analysis 
shows that π1 = f(π2, π3), and this applies to both 
model and prototype. Working out the problem 
leads to an expression very similar to the one in 
Equation 7.14 (drag on rough sphere instead of 
on a plate):
 
FD/ w2v2ρ = f(ρvl/µ, w/h) 
(7.16)
We can design a model to predict the drag on 
the prototype, since the drag on the model will 
be FDm/wm
2  vm
2  ρm = f(ρmvmlm/µm, wm/hm) as π1m = f 
(π2m, π3m), and for the prototype we will have FDp/
wp
2 vp
2 ρp = f(ρpvplp/µp,wp/hp) as π1p = f (π2p, π3p). The 
geometric similarity conditions give us the size 
of the model, with π2m ≡ π2p, wm/hm = wp/hp. For 
the kinematic similarity, we look at the π3 terms 
(π3m = π3p), namely ρmvmlm/µm = ρpvplp/µp, or the 
velocity of the model is as follows:
 
v
l
l v
m
p
m
p
=
μ ρ
μ ρ
m p
p m
 
(7.17)
For the dynamic similarity—the drag force—on 
the prototype, we calculate from π1m ≡ π1p.
 
F
w
w
v
v
F
Dp
p
m
p
m
Dm
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
2
ρ
ρ
p
m
 
(7.18)
Exercise 7.1
A model of a submarine is 1/20th scale and is 
moving in fresh water (20°C) at a speed of 
2 m/s. Find the speed of the model and the ratio  
of the drag force on the model to that of the 
real submarine moving in seawater. The density 
of seawater ρ is 1015 kg/m3, and ν = µ/ρ = 1.4 × 
10–6 m2/s.
From the Reynolds number (Rem = Rep), we can 
calculate the speed of the model in fresh water 
(kinematic similarity).
 
v l
v l
or v
l
l v
m
m m
m
p p
p
m
m p
p m
p
ν
ν
ν
ν
=
=
=
×
×
1
1 4
20
1
2
.
/s
v
28.6 m/s
m =
To calculate the ratio of the drag forces we 
rely on the dynamic similarity.
 
F
v l
=
F
v l
or
F
F
=
v l
m
m
m
2
m
2
p
p
p
2
p
2
m
p
m
m
2
m
2
p
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ v l
1000
1015
F
F
p
2
p
2
m
p
=
28 6
2
1
20
2
2
.
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
= 0.504
Trimmer’s Vertical Bracket Notation
From the preceding section, we appreciate that 
as the scale of structures decreases, so does the 
importance of phenomena that vary with the larg-
est power of the linear dimension l. Phenomena 
that are more weakly dependent on size dominate 
in small dimensions: electrostatics (l2), friction 
(l2), surface tension (l), diffusion (l1/2), and van der 
Waals forces (l1/4). High-power forces include grav-
ity (l3) (the mass of a system, m, scales as l3), inertia 
(l3), magnetism (l2, l3, or l4, depending on the exact 
configuration), flow (l4), and thermal emission 

[Page 369]
Scaling Laws   369
(l2 to l4). Scaling laws may be positive or negative 
order. Positive-order laws imply that the property 
grows with increasing scale, and negative-order 
laws imply that the property grows with decreas-
ing scale. A zero-order law implies that a property 
is invariant with scale. In other words, positive 
orders affect large objects and negative orders small 
objects.
Trimmer introduced an elegant method to express 
different scaling laws by using a vertical bracket 
notation. For different possible forces, he writes:
 
l
l
l
l
F
1
2
3
n
.
.
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
=
 
(7.19)
The top element in this notation refers to the case 
where the force scales as l1. The next one down 
refers to a case where the force scales as l2, etc. If the 
system becomes one-tenth its original size, all the 
dimensions decrease by a tenth. The mass of a sys-
tem, m, scales as l3, and as systems become smaller, 
the scaling of the force also determines the accelera-
tion a, transit time t, and the amount of power per 
unit volume (PV–1). For a generalized case with a 
force F scaling as lF, we obtain
 
a
F
m
l
l
F
3
=
=
−
 
(7.20)
for acceleration a,
 
t
2xm
F
l
l
l
1
3
F
=
=
−
(
)
1
2  
(7.21)
for transit time t, with x = distance, and 
 
P
V
Fx
tV
=
 
(7.22)
for power per unit volume. Applying Equation 7.20 
to Equation 7.22 to calculate a, t, and PV–1 for forces 
scaling with varying power of the linear dimension, 
we obtain the following:
 
l
l
l
l
F
l
l
l
1
2
3
n
2
1
0
.
.
.
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
=
→
−
−
.
.
.
l
a
l
l
l
l
n 3
1.5
1
0.5
−
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
=
→
4 n
2.5
1
0.5
t
l
l
l
−
−
−
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
=
→
.
.
l
P
V
n 2
4 n
−−
−
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
=
 
(7.23)
We can best appreciate the usage of the vertical 
bracket representation from an example. In the case 
of electrostatic actuation, lF = l2, and from Equation 
7.23 one deduces a = l–1, t = l1, and for the power den-
sity PV–1 = l–1 (an increase of a factor of 10).
For force laws with a power higher than l2, the 
power generated per volume degrades as the scale 
decreases. Even in a case with F = 14, the time 
required to perform a task remains constant when 
the system is scaled down. This is an observation 
we understand intuitively: small things tend to 
be quick. We should keep in mind that beneficial 
effects are easily overshadowed by loss mechanisms, 
which scale in the same way or become even more 
important in the microdomain.
In Table 7.4 we list various physical phenomena 
and their scaling. The highest-order law is that for 
the moment of inertia (l5); mass moment of iner-
tia becomes rapidly unimportant for small-scale 
systems, and consequently small motors, both elec-
tric and combustion powered, are able to reach top 
speed much faster than large motors. 
Scaling Examples
The Importance of the Surface-to- 
Volume Ratio
If a system is reduced isomorphically in size (i.e., 
scaled down with all dimensions of the system 
decreased uniformly), the changes in length, area, 
and volume ratios alter the relative influence of vari-
ous physical effects that determine the overall oper-
ation in unexpected ways. For geometrically similar 
(isometric) objects of the same mass density, body 
mass (m), is proportional to the cube of the body 
length, l3, and the surface area is proportional to l2 or 
the surface-to-volume ratio (S/V) equals l2/3, i.e., l0.67. 

[Page 370]
370   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
As isometric objects or organisms shrink in size, the 
S/V increases. The surface area of a smaller structure 
is relatively larger compared to its volume than that 
of a larger object. There are many examples in biol-
ogy and daily experience to choose from to illustrate 
the pervasive importance of increasing S/V  with 
decreasing size. The abundance curve of types of ani-
mals as a function of their size as shown in Figure 
7.6 illustrates the importance of a change in S/V as a 
function of size. For warm-blooded mammals there 
are significant problems associated with being too 
small. The very small pygmy or dwarf shrew (about 
4 cm long), for example, must eat continuously or 
freeze to death. The heat loss from a living creature 
is roughly proportional to its surface area (l2), and 
the rate of compensating heat generation through 
eating is roughly proportional to its volume (l3). As 
animals get smaller, a greater percentage of their 
energy intake is required to balance the heat loss. 
A warm-blooded animal smaller than the dwarf 
shrew or the Cuban bee hummingbird (about 5 cm) 
becomes improbable; it could neither obtain nor 
digest the food required to maintain its constant 
body temperature. Insects circumvent the problem 
of heat loss by being cold-blooded.
On the large end of the animal size spectrum, 
there are no land animals larger than the African 
elephant at 3.80 m. Land animals fighting the resis-
tance of gravity can grow only so big before becom-
ing too clumsy and inefficient. Large animals also 
find few niches on earth that can accommodate 
them, and as a consequence there are fewer large 
animals than small ones. For creatures of the sea, 
the same physical barrier of gravity to size does not 
TABLE 7.4 Scaling of a Selected Set of Physical Phenomena 
Physical Quantity
Scaling Exponent of l
Units
Area
2
m2
Bending stiffness
1
N m–1
Buoyant force
3
N
Capacitance
1
F
Capacitor electric field
–1
Vm–1
Deformation
1
m
Drag and lift forces
2 + 2n (n is fluid relative 
velocity)
N
Electrostatic energy
3
J
Electrostatic force
2
N
Frictional force
2
N
Heat capacity
3
J K–1
Inductance
1
H
Magnetic force
4
N
Mass (m)
3
kg
Mass moment of inertia
5
Kg·m2
Ohmic current
2
A
Resistance
–1
Ω
Resistive power loss
1
A2 Ω
Shear stiffness
1
N m–1
Strength
2
N m–2
Strength-to weight 
ratio
–1
m
Surface tension force
1
N
Thermal conductance
1
W K–1
Thermal time constant
2
s
Viscous forces
1 + ν (ν is fluid relative 
velocity)
N
Voltage
1
V
Volume (V)
3
m3

[Page 371]
Scaling Laws   371
exist. The largest sea creature in volume is a blue 
whale, a little more than 20 m (60 ft.) long, much 
larger than the elephant. In terms of their length, 
the range of living things stretches over about 8 
orders of magnitude, from the minute prokaryotic 
bacterium-like Mycoplasma (0.3 µm) to the massive 
blue whale (20 m).
At the small end of the size spectrum, smaller 
birds and animals are quicker and more agile, and 
insects are most plentiful. Scaling laws and the 
many niches in nature where they can hide and sur-
vive make insects perhaps the most successful ani-
mal species. Morowitz postulates that scaling laws 
must impose a lower limit for life in a dry environ-
ment even for cold-blooded animals, explaining 
why the abundance curve exhibits a peak.8 Smaller 
organisms, because of their very large S/V, cannot 
retain their vital fluids long enough to survive, 
and no independent living organism (we exclude 
viruses) is smaller than the smallest bacteria at 
0.2 µm. Water-based life increases its range of sizes 
both above and below that of terrestrial animals by 
evading gravity in the large-size range and drying 
out in the small-size range.
Faster evaporation in dry environments associ-
ated with larger surface-to-volume ratios also has 
important consequences for the retention of liq-
uids in small biosensors, the evaporation of ejected 
drops in drop delivery equipment, the aqueous 
cocktails in miniaturized polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) chambers, etc. In all these, evaporation 
quickly becomes a problem with decreasing drop 
size. Solutions include adding a hygroscopic mate-
rial; mixing with solvents with lower vapor pressure 
(e.g., glycerol); topping of the solution with a low-
vapor-pressure, nonmixing liquid; and working in a 
solvent-saturated environment.
Scaling in Surface Swimming
Earlier we mentioned the work on scaling in nature 
by Knut Schmidt-Nielsen, McMahon and Bonner, 
and Vogel in the context of Biomimetics (see also 
Chapter 2). In the same context, Hayashi presented 
an analysis of the natural laws that govern the rela-
tionship between speed and body length in water, 
on land, and in air.9 Hayashi also analyzed the effect 
that miniaturization has on the strength of materi-
als, various surface phenomena, and manufactur-
ing accuracy. The latter is an aspect we covered in 
Volume II, Chapter 6, on mechanical energy-based 
removing. Here we will briefly look at scaling in sur-
face swimming followed by an introduction to scal-
ing in flight.
The resistance fish and other swimmers must 
overcome moving on the surface of a body of water 
is not gravity (l3) but “skin friction,” which increases 
only as the square of the linear dimensions (l2). In 
this case, a larger size leads to a distinct advantage 
in that the larger the surface of the swimmer, the 
greater its swimming speed. This can be understood 
as follows. The available energy (E) for swimming 
speed (v) depends on the mass of the creature’s 
muscles or engines (l3), while its motion through 
water is opposed by the skin-friction resistance, R 
(l2). This leads to E ~ R × v2 or v ~ 1; in other words, 
the bigger fish or the bigger ship moves faster, but 
only in the ratio of the square root of the increas-
ing length. The latter is captured in the Froude num-
ber. The Froude number Fr is the ratio of inertial to 
gravitational forces. William Froude (1810–1879), 
British naval architect and engineer, realized that 
the factor that most limits the speed of ships or 
swimmers is the energy involved in the production 
102
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
1–2 mm
2–3 m
1–2 mm
30–50 cm
103
104
1
10
Length (mm)
Number of species
FIGURE 7.6 An abundance of types of animals in various 
size categories.

[Page 372]
372   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
of waves by the swimmer and by noting that wave 
speed increases with the square root of the wave-
length. Surface swimmers find it hard to go faster 
than the waves they create, and by making waves 
of longer length, the bigger swimmer makes waves 
that travel faster. Wave production depends on two 
forces, inertia and gravity. The inertia of the mov-
ing water keeps it wavy, and gravity tries to flatten 
the surface; the interaction of these two phenom-
ena sets the speed of the wave. Surface swimmers 
thus vary in how they produce waves on the basis 
of their length, so replace the mass in Equation 7.24 
by l3 times density. Inertial acceleration is hard to 
measure, so we replace it by velocity divided by time 
and obtain Equation 7.25. Time in Equation 7.25 
can be gotten rid of by noting that length over time 
is velocity, and the Froude number is obtained in 
Equation 7.26.
 
Fr
ma
mg
=
 
(7.24)
 
Fr
l vt
l
3
1
3
= ρ
ρ
−
g  
(7.25)
 
Fr
l vt
l
l v
l
v
l
3
1
3
2
2
3
2
= ρ
ρ
= ρ
ρ
=
−
g
g
g  
(7.26)
Scaling in Flying
Aircraft and ocean liners operate in fluid environ-
ments with a range of Reynolds numbers in the mil-
lions to hundreds of millions because the viscous 
forces are small compared with inertial forces (see 
Volume I, Equation 6.71). At the other end of the 
spectrum are small insects, birds, and fish, whose 
viscous forces are of the same order of magnitude 
as the inertial forces. Obviously, depending on size, 
different strategies will be required for both flying 
and swimming. Although the same fluid mechani-
cal rules govern motion through air and water, fly-
ing, as Icarus could attest (see the inset heading 
Chapter 2, this volume), is considerably harder than 
swimming. The lower density of air helps a flying 
machine go forward faster (thrust), but it neces-
sitates a larger force to keep it aloft. For an object 
to hover immobile in air takes an upward force 
that counterbalances weight, while forward thrust 
requires a force equal to the drag force (FD) at its spe-
cific flying speed. Weight depends on volume, while 
drag depends on area. Thus the smaller creature 
finds weight less troublesome, but drag becomes a 
real “drag”—in other words, for a tiny insect, staying 
aloft against gravity’s pull is easy but making head-
way against the drag of the air is tougher than for a 
bird or a plane.
The drag coefficient CD, a dimensionless number, 
is given by CD = FD/ρ l2v2 = f (Re) (Equation 7.8), with 
surface area A replacing l2 and a factor 1/2 added:
 
C
F
1
2 v A
D
D
2
=
ρ
 
(7.27) 
where ρ = density of the fluid
v = free stream velocity
A = characteristic area of the body*
FD = drag force
The drag coefficient, CD, is the parameter that best 
describes the resistance to motion. As we gleaned 
from Equation 7.8, the drag coefficient varies with 
the Reynolds number, but the coefficient also 
depends on the angle of attack (AOA). This is the 
angle that the flying object penetrates the air with. 
It is measured in degrees. In the case of an airfoil 
(Figure 7.7), at zero degrees AOA, the front of the 
airfoil is pointed directly into the stream. At a 90° 
AOA, it is pointed straight up.
We learned in Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics, 
that CD also depends on surface roughness; the drag 
coefficient decreases with increasing roughness as 
it delays the boundary layer separation. In Figure 
7.8A we show the historical reduction in drag on 
cars. The CD of a Porsche 924 Turbo, for example, is 
0.34, while that for a Toyota Tercel (liftback) is 0.54. 
In Figure 7.8B we also show the drag coefficient of 
some different familiar shapes.
Lift force, FL, is the force normal to the direction 
of the object’s velocity, v. Lift force, like drag force, 
depends on surface area and goes up with the object’s 
* A = frontal area (thick body, cylinder, cars, projectiles) = plan area 
(wide/flat body, wings, hydrofoils) = wetted area (surface ships, 
barges). This is a simplification, as both frictional and pressure drag 
forces should be considered, and factor A has a different meaning in 
both. For a more rigorous treatment, see Granger.6

[Page 373]
Scaling Laws   373
speed through the air. Many of us were taught that 
airplanes fly as a result of the Bernoulli’s principle, 
which says that if air speeds up,  pressure is lowered 
(Volume I, Equation 6.44). From the shape of the 
wing shown in Figure 7.7 the path over the top is 
longer than over the bottom, and in the Bernoulli 
model a wing generates lift because the air goes 
faster over the top, creating a region of low pres-
sure, and thus lift. This begs the question of how 
inverted flight is possible, and naturally one may 
also ask why the air goes faster over the top of the 
wing than over the bottom. The usual explanation is 
that when the air separates at the leading edge of the 
wing, the part that goes over the top must converge 
at the trailing edge with the part that goes under the 
bottom. This is the so-called principle of equal tran-
sit times (http://www.allstar.fiu.edu/AERO/airflylvl3.
htm, http://www.grc.nasa.gov/www/K-12/airplane/
Angle of
attack
Downward force
on air
Lift on an airplane wing
can be considered to be
the Newton’s 3rd law
reaction force to the
downward force on the
air.
Te lift on an airplane wing
must be consistent with the
Bernoulli equation since it
is an expression of conservation
of energy in the ﬂuid.
FIGURE 7.7 Angle of attack of an airfoil. For Bernoulli 
equation, see Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics (Equation 
6.44). Notice that the Bernoulli interpretation of lift is not 
entirely correct (see below).
1900
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
Year
(A)
Teoretical
minimum
CD
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
0
(B)
(a)
(b)
(c)
CD = 0.26
CD = 0.36
CD = 1.20
FIGURE 7.8 (A) Historical reduction of drag on cars. (B) Drag on a variety of shapes: (a) skater; (b) cyclist; (c) parachutist.

[Page 374]
374   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
lift1.html). But in a wind tunnel simulation, where 
colored smoke is introduced, one sees that the air 
that goes over the top of the wing gets to the trailing 
edge before the air that goes under the wing. In fact, 
closer inspection reveals that the air going under the 
wing is slowed down from the “free-stream” velocity 
of the air. A calculation of the average speeds of the 
air over and under the wing can be made, and from 
the Bernoulli equation the resulting pressure forces 
and thus lift can be determined. The problem is that 
this calculation shows that in order to generate the 
required lift for a typical small airplane, the distance 
over the top of the wing must be about 50% longer 
than under the bottom; this would make for a very 
odd wing shape. An airplane wing more typically 
has a top surface that is only 1.5–2.5% longer than 
the bottom surface. So a Cessna 172 would have to 
fly at over 400 mph to generate enough lift. Clearly, 
something in this description of lift is wrong. As 
Newton’s laws suggests, the wing must change 
something of the air to get lift, and that something, 
as revealed from wind tunnel tests, is that air passes 
over the wing and is bent down. The bending of the 
air is the action, and the reaction is the lift on the 
wing. The natural question now becomes, how does 
the wing divert the air down? When a moving fluid, 
such as air or water, comes into contact with a curved 
surface, it tries to follow that surface; this is known 
as the Coanda effect. The reason behind the Coanda 
effect is viscosity; viscosity in air is small, but it is 
enough for the air molecules to want to stick to the 
wing surface. Because the fluid near the surface has 
a change in velocity, the fluid flow is bent toward the 
surface. When the air is bent around the top of the 
wing, it pulls on the air above it, accelerating that air 
down; otherwise there would be voids left in the air 
above the wing. This pulling causes the pressure to 
become lower above the wing. It is the acceleration 
of the air above the wing in the downward direction 
that gives lift. The lift of a wing is equal to the change 
in momentum of the air it is diverting down.
The dimensionless lift coefficient CL is given by 
the following equation:
 
C
F
1
2 v A
L
L
2
=
ρ
 
(7.28)
Both lift and drag coefficients are a function of 
the Reynolds number, AOA, geometric shape (i.e., 
the thickness distribution), and speed. The lift and 
drag forces can be changed by changing (most easily) 
the AOA or velocity (v). The surface area (A) can also 
be changed by changing the shape or configuration 
of, say, the wing flaps during flight. As in swimming, 
larger objects mean faster flight: a fruit fly might hit 
3 mph, a bumblebee can do about 12 mph, and a 
Boeing 747 can do 920 kph.
Doubling the length of a wing gives a flying 
machine four times the lift (and drag), but it also 
increases the weight by a factor of 8. The best-
 designed wings produce a lot of lift while suffering 
little drag. The largest flying animals alive today 
are the soaring birds such as the 10-kg wandering 
albatross, with a wingspan of 3.5 meters. Lift rela-
tive to drag gets worse as wings get smaller, and 
gliding becomes impossible with wing lengths of 
less than 1 mm.10 As a point of reference, ordinary 
airplanes have a lift/drag ratio of 10–100, whereas 
that of a micromachined airplane fabricated from 
Si by Kubo et al. (1.56 mm long and with a mass 
of 10.8 mg) was measured at 0.4.11 The low lift/drag 
ratio of the latter is due to the influence of viscosity, 
which gets more pernicious the smaller the flying 
object. When a glider descends, the angle depends 
entirely on the ratio of lift to drag. The larger this 
ratio, the more horizontal the glide. Kubo et al.’s 
micromachined airplane had an AOA less than 45°, 
so it could not glide. Small flying animals use fast-
beating wings to produce both lift and thrust. Their 
wings not only beat up and down but to some extent 
also fore and aft. The drag force produced by down 
beating must exceed that produced by up beating.
Scaling in Surface Tension and Adhesion 
Inertia and gravity forces rule the world of large 
organisms and machines, while the forces of attrac-
tion between molecules rule the world of minute 
organisms. A large and lumbering elephant cares 
little about viscosity and even less about surface ten-
sion and diffusion, but insects are similar in size to 
many human-made miniature machines, and vis-
cosity, surface tension, and diffusion play an impor-
tant role for both.

[Page 375]
Scaling Laws   375
Capillary forces, as we saw above, are caused by 
surface tension and provide a striking example of 
scaling laws. The mass of a liquid in a capillary tube, 
and hence the weight, scales as l3 and decreases more 
rapidly than the surface tension, which scales as l, as 
the system becomes smaller. That is why it is more 
difficult to empty liquids from a capillary than to 
spill coffee from a cup.
One easily recognizes how insects take advantage 
of surface tension and several other scaling phenom-
ena: some insects can walk on water (e.g., a water 
strider), and most jump farther in proportion to their 
size than humans can. Walking on water is based on 
the surface tension at the water surface (l1), which 
easily supports an insect’s weight (l3). A 10-mg, mos-
quito-sized insect needs a mere millimeter of total 
foot edge to be supported by surface tension; a 60-kg 
human would need 8000 m of foot edge. The effort 
for a jump is proportional to the mass (m) and the 
height (h) to which that weight is raised. In other 
words, E ~ m × h. The biological force in a muscle 
available for this work is proportional to the mass of 
the muscle or to the mass of the animal. It follows that 
h is, or tends to be, a constant. As a consequence, 
animals tend to jump to the same actual height inde-
pendent of their size. Insects have other advantages: 
to circumvent problems with excessive heat loss, 
insects are cold-blooded. Having adapted so well to 
so many niches in nature, it is no wonder insects are 
so abundant (Figure 7.6).
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 7, molecular 
adhesive forces increase in proportion to the sur-
face l2. The strength of the attraction force between 
two solid surfaces drops off very quickly, though, as 
the distance between the two solids increases (see 
Volume I, Equation 7.26 and Table 7.8). The larger 
the bodies, the smaller the chance they come in 
close contact, and intimate contact is greatly aided 
by small size. Bonner suggested that adhesive forces, 
just like surface tension, scale as l1. In Figure 7.9, fol-
lowing Bonner,4 we plot the forces due to mass (l3) 
and molecular cohesion (l1) (both surface tension 
and adhesion) as a function of length in a log-log 
plot. The vertical axis measures force in arbitrary 
units. The lines for l3 and l1 are made to cross arbi-
trarily at 1  mm, based on the empirical observa-
tion that structures of that length have to deal in 
equal amounts with the impact of gravity and cohe-
sion forces. This graph helps explain how creatures 
below a certain size, can walk on walls and ceilings. 
Protuberances on the feet of these creatures function 
to enhance the molecular adhesion. From Figure 7.9, 
we see that small insects and other wall-walking ani-
mals must operate below a critical size at which the 
line proportional to body weight intersects the line 
proportional to cohesive force.
Kellar Autumn et al. confirmed, using a MEMS 
force sensor, that in the case of a gecko, the gecko 
setae (microhairs) are responsible for the remark -
able van der Waals-based dry adhesion to walls.12 
This effect is almost exclusively based on the size 
and shape of the gecko’s foot hair or setae and is quite 
independent of surface chemistry. Gecko foot hair is 
made of five microdiameter seta fibers, and each of 
these fibers is equipped with between 100 and 1000 
nanofibers (spatulae), which are 200 nm in diam-
eter (see Figure 7.10 for a picture of a gecko, a gecko 
foot, setae, and spatulae). In order for this type of 
dry and clean adhesion (the hairs are hydrophobic 
in nature) to work, only a small preload force nor-
mal to the surface is required to force the compliant 
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
10
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–3
103
1.0
Length (m)
Single cells
Man
Cohesion (slope = 1)
Mass (slope = 3)
Force (arbitrary units)
1
}
FIGURE 7.9 Log-log plot of forces due to mass (l3) and 
molecular cohesion (l2) (both surface tension and adhe-
sion) as a function of length. The vertical axis measures 
force in arbitrary units. The lines for l3 and l1 are made to 
cross arbitrarily at 1 mm.4

[Page 376]
376   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
hairs to configure themselves properly to a rough or 
smooth surface. The adhesion force can be as high 
as 10 N per 1 cm2 area, and the foot will remain on 
until peeled off. Menon et al. have been working on 
synthetic gecko hair to enable gecko inspired climb-
ing robots.13 For an update on gecko adhesion, visit 
http://www.lclark.edu/~autumn/PNAS. 
Scaling and Diffusion 
Diffusion plays a particularly significant role in the 
lives of very small organisms. Diffusion is the con-
sequence of the endless and random wandering of 
every molecule of every gas or liquid at tempera-
tures above 0 K. Diffusional effects come into play 
at yet a smaller length scale than surface tension. 
For a spherical molecule, the Stokes-Einstein dif-
fusion coefficient, D (m2/s), we saw in Volume I, 
Chapter 6, is given by (Volume I, Equation 6.29) the 
following:
 
D
k T
6
r
B
=
πη  
(Volume I, Equation 6.29) 
where kB = Boltzmann constant (1.38 × 10 m–23J K–1)
T = absolute temperature (K)
η = absolute viscosity (kg/m·s)
r = hydrodynamic radius
A small molecule, with a molecular weight of 
between 500 and 1000, will have a diffusion coeffi-
cient of about 5 × 10–5 m2/s. According to the random 
walk equation, the diffusion length, x, of a molecule 
in solution is given by the Einstein-Smoluchowski 
expression (Volume I, Equation 6.100):
 
x
2D
=
τ 
(Volume I, Equation 6.100)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 7.10 A gecko (a), gecko foot (b), setae (c), and spatulae (d). (Courtesy of Dr. K. Autumn, http://www.lclark.
edu/~autumn/PNAS.) 

[Page 377]
Scaling Laws   377
where τ is the time required for a molecule to diffuse 
over a distance x. From Volume I, Equation 6.100, 
diffusion of a molecule in the bulk of a liquid over 
a length of 10 µm is a million times faster than dif-
fusion over 1 cm. Table 7.514,15 illustrates how the 
volume of a drop of liquid (say, of a saline solution, 
in liters), relates to the linear dimension of a cube 
containing it. Assuming a diffusion constant D of 
10–5 cm2s–1, the table also lists the time it takes for 
a molecule to diffuse across one side of the contain-
ment volume; it will take a molecule about 500 s 
to diffuse over a distance of 1 mm but only 0.5 ms 
to cross a distance of 1 µm. Finally, the table lists 
the total number of molecules the various volumes 
filled with a 1 µM solution contain.
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics, 
mixing, although only mediated by diffusion, is very 
fast at the microlevel and should allow for reaction 
times to be determined by inherent kinetics rather 
than the time it takes for reactant species to meet in 
solution. In nature, only the smallest animals rely 
on diffusion for transport; animals made up of more 
than a few cells cannot rely on diffusion anymore 
to move materials within themselves. They augment 
transport with hearts, blood vessels, pumped lungs, 
digestive tubes, etc. These distribution networks 
typically constitute fractals. Fractals are an optimal 
geometry for minimizing the work lost due to the 
transfer network while maximizing the effective sur-
face area. Along this line, one can envision making 
arrays of parallel microchemical reactors. Mixing 
small amounts of fluid in a large set of these par-
allel microreactors leads to a much higher mixing 
and reaction efficiency than when mixing the same 
total amount of reagents in one big reactor vessel all 
at once. Based on the latter, it is possible to design 
chemical reactors where scaling up is perfectly lin-
ear, a feat not possible when scaling up chemical 
reactors in the traditional mode from milliliters to 
hundreds of liters in big tanks.
Mixing of liquids in small microfluidic manifolds 
is addressed in Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics.
Scaling of Strength-to-Weight  
Ratio and Inertia
From the previous section, we recognize the impor-
tant role of gravity for larger systems. Gravity, for 
example, does not allow large creatures to support 
themselves with surface tension on the surface of 
water. It makes large objects fall faster than small 
ones and necessitates that larger aircraft fly faster 
to stay aloft. To counteract gravity, large land mam-
mals have stiffer bones than small animals and 
require thicker legs. The legs of the elephant appear 
as rather straight, stubby columns, while those of an 
insect are long and spindly. The diameter of a tall 
homogeneous body such as a tree must grow as the 
power 3/2 of its height, which accounts for Goethe’s 
Es ist dafür gesorgt, dass die Bäume nicht in den Himmel 
wachsen* in Dichtung und Wahrheit.16 Human design 
reflects the same influence. If we build two geometri-
cally similar bridges, the larger will be the weaker 
of the two, and it will be so in the ratio of their lin-
ear dimension, l. The strength of the iron girders in 
the two bridges varies with the square of the linear 
dimension, that is, l2, but the weight of the whole 
structure varies with the cube of its linear dimension, 
* Translation: It has been arranged for trees not to grow all the way into 
heaven.
TABLE 7.5 A Drop of Saline Solution in a Small Bucket
Volume 
1 µL
1 nL (10–9 L)
1 pL (10–12 L)
1 fL (10–15 L)
1 aL (10–18 L)
Length of each cube 
side
1 mm
100 µm
10 µm
1 µm
100 nm
Time to diffuse over a 
cube side
500 s
5 s
0.050 s
0.5 ms
0.05 ms
Number of molecules 
in a 1 µM solution
6 × 1011
6 × 108
6 × 105
600
6
Sources: Manz, A., J. Harrison, E. Verpoorte, J. Fettinger, A. Paulus, H. Lüdi, and H. Widmer. 1992. Planar chips 
technology for miniaturization and integration of separation techniques into monitoring systems: 
Capillary electrophoresis on a chip. J Chromatogr 593:253–58;14 and Brown, P. R., and E. Grushka, eds. 
1993. Advances in chromatography. New York: Marcel Dekker.15

[Page 378]
378   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
that is, l3. Scaling up the entire bridge by a factor of 
two gives us columns that are four times as strong 
but must also bear eight times the load—the safety 
factor is halved. The girders, being thicker, also suf-
fer greater self-loading, which requires them to be 
thicker yet. To engineer around gravity, stiffer mate-
rials and alternative designs are required. The larger 
the structure is, the more severe the strain. By reduc-
ing the size of a device, the structural stiffness gener-
ally increases relative to inertia-imposed loads.
The strength-to-weight ratio scales as l–1 (area over 
weight, i.e., l2/l3), and as a consequence small things 
are relatively stronger. Consider the strength com-
parison between a human and an ant. The human 
body is 300 times that of an ant, and a human can 
carry approximately one body weight. The strength-
to-weight ratio law predicts that a 1/300th scale 
human Lilliputian could carry 300 times its body 
weight. Although not exactly right, an ant can carry 
objects 10–50 times (but not 300 times) its own 
weight. The discrepancy is caused by the difference 
between a scaled human form to that of an ant. 
Because of the increased strength-to-weight ratio, an 
ant is proportionately more slender than a human; 
in other words, an ant scaled to human size would 
have legs far too thin to support its own weight.
Inertia is the tendency of both fluids and solids to 
remain at rest or to keep moving. The force involved 
in starting a movement or stopping it equals the 
mass of the object times the acceleration or decelera-
tion. The highest-order scaling laws are those involv-
ing moments of inertia, that is:
 
I
r dm
2
= ∫
 
(7.29)
with l5. Small things are easier to start and stop. An 
example of this is small motors, electric or combus-
tion, which are able to reach top speed in a fraction 
of a second; large motors may require several sec-
onds to reach full speed.
An important bottleneck in the development of 
microactuators in general is that resistive forces, such 
as viscous drag (l2) and surface tension (l), exceed 
motive forces [mass (l3) × surface (l2) = (l5)] in the 
microdomain. Miniaturization engineers look for 
driving forces that scale more advantageously, such 
as electrostastics (l2) and capillary force (l).
The above scaling examples constitute but a few 
illustrations; many more scaling examples can 
be found in Chapter 8, this volume, on actuators; 
Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics; Chapter 9, this vol-
ume, on power and brains in miniature devices; and 
throughout the book.
Breakdown of Scaling Laws
Introduction
Scaling laws break down when the continuum 
theory for the phenomenon under study no lon-
ger applies. The latter occurs any time boundary 
conditions for the  macroscale case are violated. 
Many examples of breakdown of scaling laws can 
be found throughout the book. A detailed exam-
ple was worked out in Volume I, Chapter 7, where 
we saw that electrochemical detectors with elec-
trodes of the size of the diffusion boundary layer 
thickness display noncontinuum behavior. Here 
we give as an additional example, namely that of 
electrostatic devices with electrode spacing of the 
size of the mean free path of the surrounding gas 
molecules.
Scaling in Electrostatics
Boundaries and Continuum 
Theory in Electrostatics
Electrostatic charges, we will see in Chapter 8, on 
actuators, arise from buildup or deficit of free elec-
trons in a material. An electrically charged material 
can exert an attractive force on oppositely charged 
objects or a repulsive force on similarly charged 
ones. To appreciate scaling issues in electrostatics, 
we follow Trimmer’s analysis of isometric scaling 
of the maximum stored energy in a simple para llel 
plate capacitor. The ability of a capacitor, C, to store 
charge is its capacitance, C, and the capacitance is 
related to the applied potential V as C = Q/V. From 
Gauss’s law (Volume I, Equation 5.37) applied to two 
plates of cross-sectional area A, containing a dielec-
tric (and hence charge density Q/A), one obtains 
the following:
 
E
r
0
=
ε ε
Q / A 
(7.30)

[Page 379]
Scaling Laws   379
and since C = Q/V and E is given by V/d, where d is 
the distance between the two plates of the capacitor, 
Equation 7.30 can be rewritten as follows.
 
C
A
d
r
0
= ε ε
 
(7.31)
From Equation 7.31, it is clear that the greater the 
relative permittivity εr, of the material between the 
capacitor plates, the greater the capacitance. This 
can be understood as follows, since a dielectric is 
an insulator all a gap material can do in response 
to a charge on the capacitor plates is to accumulate 
a countercharge. The greater the relative permittiv-
ity, the greater the effect of this charges redistribu-
tion; thus the greater the effective “stored charge.” 
Based on Equation 7.30, the insertion of a dielectric 
reduces the electric field inside the dielectric by a 
factor εr.
The dimensions of the capacitor in Figure 7.11 are 
w, v, and d, and they all scale with l. We first calcu-
late the incremental work dW to add charge dQ to 
this capacitor at voltage V:
 
dW
V(Q) dQ
Q
C
dQ
=
⋅
=
⋅
 
(7.32)
The total work W to charge to Q and thus the energy 
stored in the capacitor is then given as follows:
 
U
W
1
C Q dQ
1
2
Q
C
CV
0
Q
2
2
=
=
=
=
∫
1
2
 
(7.33)
Above a critical voltage, Vb, the electrostatic forces 
polarizing the molecules in the gap are so strong 
that electrons are torn free and charge flows and the 
maximum electrostatic potential energy, Um, stored 
in the capacitor in Figure 7.11 is then given by the 
following:
 
U
1
2 CV
w vV
2d
m
b
2
r
0
b
2
=
= ε ν
 
(7.34)
where Vb = electrical breakdown voltage and εr ε0 × 
w × v/d = capacitance C. The permittivity of vacuum, 
ε0, and the relative permittivity, εr, remain unchanged 
with scaling, so we can assign them an l0 dimension. 
We also assume, for now, that Vb scales linearly with 
d. Intuitively, we expect a smaller gap, d, to result, 
indeed, in a lower breakdown voltage, Vb. However, 
as we shall see next (contrary to our macrointuition), 
at very small capacitor plate separation, the linear 
relationship between Vb and d breaks down. The 
breakdown voltage of the capacitor actually starts 
increasing with decreasing plate separation (see 
discussion below on continuum breakdown in 
electrostatics and the discussion on the Paschen 
curve below, in Figure 7.12).
Writing out all the dimensions in Equation 7.34 
in terms of l, we obtain the following:
 
U
l l l l (l
l
l
m
0
0
1
1
1
1
3
∝
=
)2
 
(7.35)
and the maximum energy stored in the capacitor 
scales as l3. It follows that if l decreases by a factor of 
10 (i.e., w, v, and d all decrease simultaneously), the 
stored maximum potential energy in the capacitor 
decreases by a factor of 1000.
The maximum electrostatic energy density, U′m (in 
J/m3), between the capacitor plates is obtained from 
Equation 7.34 by dividing the maximum potential 
energy, Um, by the volume, V0, of the capacitor gap, 
V0 = w × v × d:
 
ʹ =
U
2
m
r
0
2
ε ν Eb  
(7.36)
d
v
w
z
x
y
FIGURE 7.11 A parallel plate capacitor of plate size w × v 
and separation d stores a maximum potential energy of 
Um.
1 800
1 600
1 400
1 200
1 000
800
600
400
200
0
1
2
Paschen's law
Air
Breakdown voltage (V)
CO2
H2
SO2
SO2
CO2
NO
H2
NO
Air
Pa × d (m)
3
4
FIGURE 7.12 Breakdown voltage between two conduc-
tors, plotted as a function of the product of the distance 
between them and the surrounding gas pressure (P).

[Page 380]
380   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
This expression for the energy density is general 
and is not restricted to the special case of a con-
stant field in a parallel plate capacitor. In the case of 
an air capacitor, Eb is limited to approximately 3 × 
106 Vm–1 by the electrical breakdown of air. Thus, the 
stored energy for an air capacitor is about 40 Jm–3.17 
In power capacitors (see Chapter 9, on power and 
brains in miniature devices), with special dielectrics 
and a field of 10 × 106 Vm–1, energy densities of 1 
kJm–3 have been achieved.
We are interested in using electrostatic force in 
all types of actuators (see Chapter 8, on actuators), 
and that force, F, is the negative spatial derivative 
of the energy, U. In a case where we move the plate 
of a capacitor with respect to the other plate, the 
electric force will be the spatial derivative, in that 
direction, of the stored energy U. A translational 
movement of one plate with respect to the other in 
a microactuator in the direction x leads to a force, 
Fx, as follows:
 
F
U
x
V
2
C
x
l
l
l
x
2
3
1
2
= −
=
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
 
(7.37)
where V is the applied voltage. The electrostatic force 
for a constant field is thus found to scale as l2. This 
is often an advantage, because the mass and, hence, 
inertial forces scale as l3. The electrostatic force 
gains over inertial forces as the size of the system is 
decreased. A decrease in size by a factor of 10 leads 
to a decrease of the inertial forces by a factor of 1000, 
whereas the electrostatic force decreases by a factor 
of only 100. It is thus not hard to exert rapid accel-
erations in microsystems with the aid of electrical 
fields. These are the type of features we will explore 
further in different types of electrostatic actuators 
in Chapter 8.
Breakdown of Continuum 
Theory in Electrostatics
We will now consider where macroscopic electro-
static laws err in the microscopic regime. The funda-
mental boundary condition in a gas pertains to the 
main free path, λ, the average distance traveled by 
a molecule between two successive collisions. The 
mean free path, λ, can be derived from the kinetic 
theory of gases as follows:
 
λ =
π
π
1
2 na
kT
2 Pa
2
2
=
 
(7.38)
where n =  density (the number of molecules per unit 
volume)
T = temperature
k = Boltzmann constant
P = pressure
a = size of the molecule
Using Avogadro’s number, we know that at room 
temperature and 1 atmosphere, 1 cm3 contains 
2.69  ×  1019 molecules. Assuming that oxygen and 
nitrogen have a molecule size of about 3 Å, one cal-
culates then a mean free path in air of about 60 nm. 
Electrostatic charges, we saw earlier, arise from 
buildup or deficit of free electrons in a material. An 
electrically charged material can exert an attractive 
force on oppositely charged objects or a repulsive 
force on similarly charged ones. At small distances 
between two conductors in air, the electrical field is 
not isotropic as assumed above. This can be gleaned 
from the so-called Paschen curve in Figure 7.12. This 
figure represents the breakdown voltage between 
two conductors, plotted as a function of the product 
of the distance between them and the surrounding 
gas pressure (P). In the case of an air capacitor, the 
field strength required to cause sparks between the 
two electrodes (Eb), we saw in the section above, is 
approximately 3 × 106 Vm–1. The general shape of 
the Paschen curve can be understood more easily 
by assuming that the pressure, P, remains constant 
at 1 atm, thus making the x-axis a simple distance 
axis. We notice that, on the right side of the Paschen 
curve, at large electrode distances, the field is con-
stant and the scaling laws introduced above all per-
tain. But for smaller electrode gaps (below about 
5 µm in air), the curve sharply reverses, bending 
upward and leading to higher electrical breakdown 
fields for thinner air gaps. Electrical breakdown in 
these small gaps does occur at much larger voltages 
than those predicted from linear scaling. From Bart 
et al.17 and Busch-Vishniac18 and references therein, 
we quote observed electrical fields of 108 × Vm–1 
(1.5-µm air gap), 1.7 × 108 Vm–1 (2-µm air gap), and 
3.2 × 107 Vm–1 (12.5-µm air gap). The upper limit is the 
electrical field measured for small gaps in vacuum, 
that is, 3.0 × 108 Vm–1.19 Surface roughness results in a 

[Page 381]
Scaling Laws   381
lower average breakdown voltage, but even then, these 
fields are significantly higher than the 3 × 106 Vm–1 
quoted above for breakdown of capacitors with large 
air gaps. Assuming a field strength of 3 × 108 Vm–1, 
Equation 7.36 predicts an energy density of about 
4 × 105 Jm–3, compared with 40 Jm–3 without the 
Paschen effect. This unexpected result derives from 
the fact that there are not enough ionizing collisions 
to induce an avalanche between electrodes with a 
separation comparable to the mean free path of the 
surrounding gas. When the gap between two con-
ductors approaches the mean free path of the mole-
cules (λ), statistically fewer molecules are present to 
be ionized between those closely spaced conductors. 
Higher fields and higher-energy densities can be 
achieved before the critical breakdown voltage, Vb, is 
reached. The Paschen curve also illustrates, how, in 
terms of influencing the breakdown voltage, reduc-
ing the gap between two electrodes is equivalent to 
reducing the surrounding gas pressure: the x-axis 
is the product of pressure (P) and distance (d), and 
they exert the same effect on the breakdown voltage. 
One can thus actually say that reducing the distance 
between two conductors in a gas is equivalent to 
reducing the pressure in a macroscopic set-up.
In addition to the advantage of higher-energy den-
sities in micromachined electrostatic systems, the 
Paschen effect suggests yet another advantage. The 
scaling of the electrical field (Eb) in the nonisotropic 
region is more like l–1/2. According to Equation 7.37, 
in the macroregime, the force on a capacitor scales 
as l2, or as a surface force. In the Paschen regime, 
the force scales with l so that with a factor of 10 size 
reduction, the inertial force still decreases by a fac-
tor of 1000, but the electrostatic force decreases only 
by a factor of 10. On the basis of Equation 7.23, we 
further see that acceleration and transit times are 
also higher than for the isotropic system.
Working on the left side of the Paschen curve ren-
ders high-field operation possible for a wide vari-
ety of electrostatic microdevices without incurring 
 catastrophic sparking. Examples include the electro-
static motors illustrated in Figure 8.5, the electro-
static switch in Figure 8.19, and the author’s volcano 
ionization sources presented in the example below.
Example: Ion Mobility Spectrometer
In an ion mobility spectrometer (IMS), ions pro-
duced at atmospheric pressure in an ionization cell 
by a 63Ni beta source are accelerated in a drift cham-
ber (uniform field of 150–250 V/cm), where they are 
separated according to their mobilities, detected as 
a current on a Faraday plate, and plotted on a time 
axis in accordance with their time of arrival (see 
Figure 7.13). About twenty years ago, this author set 
out to micromachine some critical components of 
an IMS instrument. We recognized that field uni-
formity, temperature, and pressure could be con-
trolled with micromachined Si sensors. Our aim, 
though, was to substitute the 63Ni ionization source 
0
10
20
R
Collector
current
63Ni
ionizer
Reaction
region
Electric ﬁeld
Sample
in
A
A
R±
C±
C±
C±
C±
C±
C±
C±
C±
B±
B±
B±
B±
B±
B±
B±
B±
A±
A±
A±
A±
A±
A±
A±
A±
R±
R±
R±
R±
R±
R±
R±
R±
B±
A±
B±
A±
C±
R±
A±
R±
A
β–
β–
A
B
B
B
B
CC
C
C
Signal
out
Shutter
grid
Drift
region
Aperture
grid
Collector
A
B
C
30
ms
40
50
60
FIGURE 7.13 Ion mobility spectrometry with a Ni ionization source.

[Page 382]
382   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
with a less fragmenting ionization source employ-
ing a “softer” field ionization (FI) technique. In FI, 
one creates mainly positive parent ions (M+), and 
thus simpler spectra for complex environmental gas 
mixtures result. FI is well known from FI mass spec-
trometry (FIMS). But mass spectrometry is carried 
out in vacuum, and considering the extreme electric 
fields required for FI, one might expect that, under 
atmospheric pressure conditions, catastrophic elec-
trical breakdown between the ionizing electrodes 
would occur. The idea about how to avoid break-
down or sparking at atmospheric pressures is based 
on the peculiar behavior of microelectrodes operat-
ing at the left side of the Paschen curve (see Figure 
7.12), where much higher voltages are required for 
breakdown to occur.
For an ionization source operating on the left side 
of the Paschen curve, we microfabricated an array 
of microvolcanoes with a typical throat opening of 
1 µm and a volcano rim to gate distance of less than 
1 µm. Both the volcano rim and gate electrode may 
be made from a variety of inert metals. A scanning 
electron microscope (SEM) photomicrograph of a 
single microvolcano and an array of microvolcanoes 
is shown in Figure 7.14a (the metal used in this case 
is Pt). Given the small dimensions of the micro-
volcanoes, the intense electric fields required for 
field ionization can be produced with significantly 
1 µm
Viewing angle = 45°
Viewing angle = 60°
(a)
10 µm
(b)
Suction
pump
Scrubber
Heater
Volcano
Dimethylsilicone
membrane
and valve
AC generator
T, P, Valve
AC, DC, Clock
Heater
Mobility
Identiﬁcation
Drift tube
with P, T sensors
and electrodes
N2
circulating
pump
Pulsed
DC source
t
Scope
Microcomputer
i
FIGURE 7.14 Ion mobility spectrometry with micromachined volcano sources. (a) Scanning electron microscope image of 
micromachined volcanoes. (b) Setup for ion mobility spectrometry with microvolcano ionization sources.

[Page 383]
Scaling Laws   383
lower voltages than other FI sources. Referring back 
to the Paschen curve, it is clear that the microvol-
cano sources should operate at atmospheric pressure 
with voltages up to several hundred volts and per-
haps as high as a kilovolt before they induce spark-
ing. In collaboration with Dr. M. Coggiola, at SRI 
International, we did show that these sources can 
indeed resist electrical breakdown at atmospheric 
pressure and produce usable current levels from 
positive ions formed from gases such as pyridine, 
butane, and toluene in a setup like that shown in 
Figure 7.14b.20
The fabrication process of the microvolcanoes, 
which are embedded in a brittle 1-µm-thick Si diox-
ide layer, was very problematic, and failure rate was 
very high. Sturdier, more reliable volcano sources 
are needed to continue this type of development. 
Today, much better, high-aspect-ratio micromachin-
ing techniques are available, and it would be very 
worthwhile to reinitiate such a study.
Questions
 Questions by Omid Rohani, UC Irvine
7.1: 
 What do you expect will be the influence of 
miniaturization on a potentiometric sensor 
and on an amperometric sensor?
7.2: 
 Explain in detail the scaling laws for flying 
and swimming.
7.3: 
 The surface waves in water are characterized 
by an angular velocity ω and a wave number 
k = 2πλ (λ, wavelength). In this problem we 
intend to find a dispersion relation expressing 
ω as a function of k.
 
(a)  Using Buckingham’s π theorem, find a 
dispersion relation containing ω and k. 
Accept that the depth d, the wave height 
h, the acceleration of gravity g, the waters 
density ρ, and the water surface tension γ 
play roles in this problem and neglect the 
water viscosity.
Appendix 7A: Common Dimensional Numbers
Parameter
Definition
Qualitative Ratio
Importance of Effects
Reynolds number
RE = ρUL/µ
Inertia/Viscosity
Always
Mach number 
MA = U/A
Flow speed/Sound speed 
Compressible flow
Froude number 
Fr = U2/gL
Inertia/gravity
Free surface flow
Weber number
We = ρU2L/γ
Inertia/Surface tension
Free surface flow
Cavitation number 
(Euler number)
Ca = (p – pv)/ρU2
Pressure/Inertia
Cavitation
Prandtl number
Pr = Cpµ/k
Dissipation/conduction
Heat convection
Eckert number
Ec = U2/cpTo
Kinetic energy/enthalpy
Dissipation
Specific heat ratio
γ = cp/cv
Enthalpy/internal energy
Compressible flow
Strouhal number
St = ωL/U
Oscillation/mean speed
Oscillating flow
Roughness ratio
ε/L
Wall roughness/Body length 
Turbulent, rough walls
Grashof number
Gr = β∆TgL3ρ2/µ2
Buoyancy/viscosity
Natural convection
Temperature ratio
Tw / To 
Wall temperature/stream 
temperature 
Heat transfer
Pressure coefficient
Cp = (p–po)/0.5ρU2 
Static pressure/dynamic 
pressure
Aerodynamics, 
hydrodynamics
Lift coefficient
CL = L/0.5ρU2A
Lift force/dynamics force
Aerodynamics, 
hydrodynamics
Drag coefficient
CD = D/0.5ρU2A
Lift force/dynamics force
Aerodynamics, 
hydrodynamics
Euler number
Eu = gc∆P/ρV2
Friction head × velocity head
Momentum transfer, fluid 
frictions 
Weber number
We = DV2 ρ/gcσ
Inertial force/surface tension 
force 
Momentum transfer

[Page 384]
384   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 
(b)  Now suppose that the water is deep com-
pared to the wave length and the wave 
height is small compared to the wave 
length. Also suppose that the waves are 
long. Try to write the relation you got in 
part (a) in a simpler form expressing ω just 
as a function of k.
7.4: 
 Explain the DC breakdown voltage versus elec-
trode distance curve and how it is relevant to 
dry etching. How is miniaturization of an elec-
trode set equivalent to creating a local vacuum?
7.5: 
 Why is the range of sizes in water-based life 
much greater than terrestrial life range? 
Discuss both above and below limits of these 
ranges.
7.6: 
 Fill in the blank with the correct number for 
these scaling laws.
 
(a) Mass scales with a factor of _______.
 
(b) Stress scales with a factor of _______.
 
(c)  Natural frequency scales with a factor 
of _______.
 
(d)  Viscous damping scales with a factor 
of _______.
 
(e)  Coulomb damping scales with a factor 
_______.
 
(f)  Elastic coulomb damping scales with a 
factor of _______.
 
(g)  Surface adhesion scales with a factor of 
_______.
 
(h) Power scales with a factor of _______.
7.7: 
 How is the number of steps one animal must take 
per unit distance related to the animal’s weight?
7.8: 
 How does velocity scale with size (ignore drag/
damping)? (A short two- or three- equation 
answer—the solution may be surprising.)
7.9: 
 What methods do you recommend to over-
come the problem of retention of liquids 
caused by large surface-to-volume ratios in 
small biosensors?
7.10:  A simple and accurate viscometer can be made 
from a length of capillary tubing. If the flow 
rate and pressure drop are measured, and the 
tube geometry is known, the viscosity can be 
computed. A test of a certain liquid in a capil-
lary viscometer gave the following data: 
 
◾
flow rate: 880 mm3/s
 
◾
tube diameter: 500 µm
 
◾
tube length: 1 m
 
◾
pressure drop: 1.0 MPa
 
Determine the viscosity of the liquid
7.11:  The accepted transition Reynolds number for 
flow in a circular pipe is Re ∼2300. For flow 
through a 6 cm dia. pipe, at what velocity will 
this occur at 20°C for (a) airflow and (b) water 
flow?
7.12:  What are the forces that play an important role 
for (a) very large and (b) very small devices?
7.13:  Explain Kleiber’s law. What is the generic prin-
ciple underlying Kleiber’s law?
7.14:  How do the following forces scale?
 
(a)  Electrostatic force in a constant electric field
 
(b)  Pneumatic and hydraulic forces caused by 
pressure
7.15:  How does the acceleration, transit time, and 
produced power for each case scale in problem 
7.14?
7.16:  The required power in a stirring device in a 
tank is a function of diameter of the device 
d, number of rotations of the motor per unit 
time N, density of liquid ρ and viscosity of the 
liquid η.
 
(a)  Using Buckingham’s π theorem, obtain a 
relation between power P and d, N, ρ, η.
 
(b)  Supposing that the power P is proportional 
to the square of N, determine by what fac-
tor would P be expected to increase if d is 
doubled.
7.17:  A centrifugal pump for pumping the lubricat-
ing oil at 15°C rotates at 1000 rpm. For test-
ing this pump, we make a model pump which 
works with 20°C air. Assuming the diameter 
of model is 4 times the diameter of the proto-
type, find the speed at which the model pump 
should run. 
7.18:  Complete similarity between a ship model and 
a full-sized ship requires the same Reynolds 
and Froude numbers. Suppose that
 
Re = ρVL/µ = 11 × 108 and Fr –1 = gL/V2 = 33.25
 
 Assuming a model 1/100 the size of the ship, 
can you design an experiment having full 
similarity?
7.19:  In the miniaturization of analytical instru-
ments, scaling laws and breakdown of scaling 

[Page 385]
Scaling Laws   385
laws often determine whether miniaturization 
will favor sensitivity or not. What will happen 
to the sensitivity of the following techniques 
upon miniaturization: (a) the optical path in 
UV spectrometer; (b) a potentiometric sensor 
(e.g., a pH sensor); (c) an amperometric sensor 
(e.g., an oxygen gas sensor); (d) the column in 
a GC?
7.20:  If you miniaturize an absorption-based opti-
cal analytical instrument and one based on 
luminescence, which one scales down more 
favorably? Explain why.
7. 21:  What is the primary assumption of contin-
uum mechanics? Give examples where con-
tinuum theory breaks down and how MEMS, 
in some cases, may take advantage of this 
breakdown.
7.22:  Using dimensional analysis, derive the flow Q 
of an ideal liquid through an orifice in terms 
of the density of the liquid ρ, the pressure dif-
ference ΔP, and the diameter of the orifice d.
References
 
1. Trimmer, W. S., ed. 1997. Micromechanics and MEMS classic 
and seminal papers to 1990. New York: IEEE.
 
2. Schmidt-Nielsen, K. 1984. Scaling: Why is animal size 
so important? Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge 
University Press.
 
3. McMahon, T., and J. T. Bonner. 1985. On size and life. New 
York: Scientific American Library.
 
4. Bonner, J. T. 2006. Why size matters: from bacteria to blue 
whales. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
5. Dodds, S., D. H. Rothman, and J. S. Weitz. 2000. Re- 
examination of the “3/4-law” of metabolism. J Theor Biol 
209:9–27.
 
6. Gillooly, J. F., A. P. Allen, G. B. West, and J. H. Brown. 2005. 
The rate of DNA evolution: Effects of body size and tem-
perature on the molecular clock. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
102:140–45.
 
7. Langhaar, H. L. 1951. Dimensional analysis and the theory of 
models. New York: Wiley.
 
8. Morowitz, H. J. 1985. Mayonnaise and the origin of life. New 
York: Berkley Books.
 
9. Hayashi, T. 1994. Micromechanism and their characteris-
tics. IEEE International Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan, January 25–28, 1994, 
pp. 39–44.
 10. Fujimasa, I. 1996. Micromachines: A new era in mechanical 
engineering. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University 
Press.
 11. Kubo, Y., I. Shimoyama, and H. Miura. 1993. Study 
of insect-based flying microrobots. IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation. Atlanta, GA, May 
1993, pp. 386–91.
 12. Autumn, K., Y. A. Liang, S. T. Hsieh, W. Zesch, W. P. Chan, 
T. W. Kenny, R. Fearing, and R. J. Full. 2000. Adhesive force 
of a single gecko foot-hair. Nature 405:681–85.
 13. Menon, C., and S. Metin. 2006. A biomimetic climbing 
robot based on the gecko. J Bionic Eng 3:115–25.
 14. Manz, A., J. Harrison, E. Verpoorte, J. Fettinger, A. Paulus, 
H. Lüdi, and H. Widmer. 1992. Planar chips technology for 
miniaturization and integration of separation techniques 
into monitoring systems: Capillary electrophoresis on a 
chip. J Chromatogr 593:253–58.
 15. Brown, P. R., and E. Grushka, eds. 1993. Advances in chro-
matography. New York: Marcel Dekker.
 16. Thompson, D. W. 1992 (reprint of 1917 edition). On 
growth and form, Canto ed. Cambridge, United Kingdom: 
Cambridge University Press.
 17. Bart, S. F., T. A. Lober, R. T. Howe, J. H. Lang, and M. F. 
Schlecht. 1988. Design considerations for micromachined 
electric actuators. Sensors Actuators 14:269–92.
 18. Busch-Vishniac, I. J. 1992. The case for magnetically driven 
microactuators. Sensors Actuators A A33:207–20.
 19. Bollee, B. 1969. Electrostatic motors. Philips Tech Rev 
30:178–94.
 20. Madou, M. J., and S. R. Morrison. 1991. High-field opera-
tion of submicrometer devices at atmospheric pressure. 
1991 International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators. San Francisco, June 24–28, 1991, p. 145.

[Page 386]
[empty page]

[Page 387]
387
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Electric Actuators
Electrostatics
Correspondence between Electrical 
and Mechanical Circuits
Dynamics of Electrostatic Actuators
Fundamental Frequency and 
Quality Factor of Electrostatic 
Resonators
Piezoelectricity
Overview of Types of Acoustic 
Waves 
Piezoelectric Applications
Acoustic Sensing of Mass
Acoustic Imaging
Piezoelectricity Summary
Dielectric Induction
Electrostriction
Pyroelectricity
Thermoelectricity
Electrets
Electrorheological Fluids
Magnetic Actuators
Examples of Magnetic Actuators
Comparing Magnetic with 
Electrostatic Actuation
Magnetostriction
Magnetohydrodynamic Pumping
Magnetorheological Fluids, 
Ferroﬂuids, and Ferrowaxes
Superconductivity
Thermal Actuators
Types of Thermomechanical 
Actuators 
Comparison of Actuator Principles 
in Commercial Valves 
Other Actuators and Some Final 
Actuator Comparisons: Final 
Comparison
Questions
References
8
Actuators
Their knowledge did not lead one to the contemplation of divinity or 
liberation; their science was action: nature obeyed them, and in their 
cities the power of the rich and strong was less oppressive. The old magic 
was now in reach of everyone who knew the formula for the spell.
Octavio Paz in a passage on the science and technology  
of the West in In Light of India
Introduction
An actuator, like a sensor, is a device that converts energy from one form 
to another (Figure 8.1). In the case of an actuator, one is interested in 
the ensuing action, while in the case of a sensor what is of interest is the 
information gained. On the subject of sensor/actuators, we review elec-
trical, magnetic, thermal, chemical, and electrochemical phenomena. 
From the previous chapter, we know that the dominant physical quanti-
ties may change as a function of length scale. In this context, we saw how 
gravitational (inertial) forces become less effective in the microdomain, 
whereas van der Waals forces, electrostatic forces, and surface tension 
forces become dominant. In this chapter we compare different sensor/
actuators on the basis of their scaling behavior and other properties, 
 MEMS electrostatic comb actuator. (Courtesy of MEMX.)

[Page 388]
388   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
which, besides size and cost, include dynamic range, 
displacement (linear or angular), force or torque, 
response time, and power consumption (see Table 
8.1). The results of these comparisons must be seen 
as guideposts toward a decision only on what actua-
tor to use; yet other  considerations (e.g., size of the 
absolute forces involved, the potential for integra-
tion with electronics, materials choice, and manu-
facturability) may influence the design rules for a 
particular micro sensor or microactuator.
 
1. Sensitivity. The sensitivity of a sensor/actuator 
is defined in terms of the relationship between 
input signal and output signal. The sensitivity 
is, in general, the ratio of a small change in out-
put signal to a small change in input signal. As 
such, it may be expressed as the derivative of 
the transfer function* with respect to the input 
signal. A typical unit is volts/kelvin. A ther-
mometer would have high sensitivity if a small 
temperature change resulted in a large voltage 
change.
 
2. Span or bandwidth. The range of input signals 
that may be converted to output signals by the 
sensor/actuator. Signals outside of this range 
are expected to cause unacceptably large inac-
curacy. This span or dynamic range is usually 
specified by the sensor/actuator supplier as the 
range over which other performance character-
istics described in the data sheets are expected 
to apply.
 
3. Accuracy. Generally defined as the largest 
expected error between actual and ideal output 
signals. Sometimes this is quoted as a fraction 
of the full-scale output. For example, a ther-
mometer might be guaranteed to be accurate 
within 5% of full-scale output (FSO).
 
4. Hysteresis. Some sensors/actuators do not 
return to the same output value when the input 
stimulus is cycled up or down. The width of the 
expected error in terms of the measured quan-
tity is defined as the hysteresis. A typical unit is 
percentage of full-scale output.
 
5. Nonlinearity (often called linearity). The maxi-
mum deviation from a linear transfer function 
over the specified dynamic range. There are sev-
eral measures of this error. The most common 
compares the actual transfer function with the 
“best straight line,” which lies midway between 
the two parallel lines that encompass the entire 
transfer function over the specified dynamic 
* The functional relationship between input signal and output signal. 
Usually, this function is represented as a graph showing the relation-
ship between the input and output signal, and the details of this 
relationship may constitute a complete description of the sensor/
actuator characteristics. For expensive sensors/actuators which are 
individually calibrated, this might take the form of a certified cali-
bration curve.
Termal
Mechanical
Electrical
Termoelectric,
Joule heating,
thermal resistive . . .
Piezoelectric,
piezoresistive . . .
Termal expansion,
T-dependent phase
transformation . . .
FIGURE 8.1 Energy conversion in sensor and actuator 
systems.
TABLE 8.1 Sensor/Actuator Design Principles and 
Considerations. Numbers refer to the numbered 
explanations below the table
• Operational principle (e.g., electrostatic capacitor, 
shape memory effect, solenoid inductor, 
thermoelectric effect, piezoelectric, thermal 
expansion, and themoresistive)
• Scaling behavior
• Size and cost
• Materials choices
• Process feasibility
• Size of absolute forces obtained
• Sensitivity (signal-to-noise ratio) (1)
• Accuracy (3)
• Output force/energy/power
• Dynamic range of frequency response (8)
• Hysteresis (4)
• Resolution (7)
• Nonlinearity (also linearity) (5)
• Noise (6)
• Span or bandwidth range (2)
• Limitations: quality factor, failure mode
• Temperature (or other factors) dependence
• Reliability
• Manufacturability
• Integration and packaging

[Page 389]
Actuators   389
range of the device. This choice of comparison 
method is popular because it makes most sen-
sors/actuators look their best.
 
6. Noise. All sensors/actuators produce some out-
put noise in addition to the output signal. This 
noise limits the performance of the system. 
Noise is generally distributed across the fre-
quency spectrum. Many common noise sources 
produce a white noise distribution, which is to 
say that the spectral noise density is the same 
at all frequencies. Since there is an inverse rela-
tionship between the bandwidth and measure-
ment time, it can be said that the noise decreases 
with the square root of the measurement time.
 
7. Resolution. The resolution of a sensor/actua-
tor is defined as the minimum detectable 
signal fluctuation. Since fluctuations are tem-
poral phenomena, there is some relationship 
between the timescale for the fluctuation and 
the minimum detectable amplitude. Therefore, 
the definition of resolution must include some 
information about the nature of the measure-
ment being carried out.
 
8. Dynamic range or frequency response. All 
sensors/actuators have finite response times 
to an instantaneous change in input signal. 
In addition, many sensors have decay times, 
which would represent the time after a step 
change in physical signal for the sensor output 
to decay to its original value. The reciprocal of 
these times correspond to the upper and lower 
cutoff frequencies, respectively. The bandwidth 
of a sensor is the frequency range between these 
two frequencies.
Jargon from different science disciplines and vari-
ous application fields often makes interdisciplin-
ary microelectromechanical system (MEMS) and 
nanoelectromechanical system (NEMS) discussions 
challenging. A useful scheme for standardizing the 
classification of miniaturized sensors and actuators 
would make communication between researchers 
from different disciplines (manufacturers, immu-
nologists, mechanical engineers, market researchers, 
etc.) easier. Several such attempts have been made in 
that direction. We state our favored approach here. 
White1 describes a classification scheme derived from 
a Hitachi Research Laboratory communication. He 
distinguishes ten different domains or fields:
 
1. Acoustic
 
2. Biological
 
3. Chemical
 
4. Electrical
 
5. Magnetic
 
6. Mechanical
 
7. Optical
 
8. Radiant
 
9. Thermal
 10. Other
Middlehoek and Audet2 follow Lion3 and contract 
this list to six domains:
 
1. Radiant
 
2. Mechanical
 
3. Thermal
 
4. Electrical
 
5. Magnetic
 
6. Chemical
For simplicity, we adopt the latter list here. Based 
on Gopel et al.4 and Habekotte,5 Table 8.2 exempli-
fies sensing/actuating principles in these six signal 
domains. Since the listed energy domains can be 
energy input as well as energy output, a 6 × 6 matrix 
results. The table also presents an example device in 
each field. We may have a mechanical sensor/actuator 
converting mechanical energy into thermal energy 
(i.e., a thermomechanical device such as a friction 
calorimeter), but also a thermal sensor/actuator con-
verting thermal energy into mechanical energy (e.g., 
a mechanothermal sensor such as a bimetallic strip).
In the literature, no logic seems to be applied 
concerning the use of “thermo-optical” or “opto-
 thermal.” Middlehoek and Audet2 further distin -
guish between self-generating and modulating 
sensors/actuators. A device based on a  modulating 
principle requires an auxiliary energy source. An 
example of a modulating sensor is a fiber-optic 
 magnetic-field sensor in which a magnetostrictive 
jacket is used to convert a magnetic field into an 
induced strain in the optical fiber. A sensor/actuator 
based on a self-generating principle does not require 
an auxiliary energy source (e.g., a thermo couple in 

[Page 390]
390   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
which a change in temperature directly results in an 
electrical signal that can be measured). The differ-
ence between the two is illustrated in Figure 8.2.6 
Since the modulating sensor needs another energy 
input, one also refers to such sensors as passive, 
whereas the self-generating sensors are active.
Irrespective of the fact of dealing with a small sen-
sor, an actuator, or a microsystem, we can always 
describe the function of the miniaturized device in 
terms of the matrix in Table 8.2.
There are many reasons for wanting to miniaturize 
systems, actuators, power sources, sensors, and com-
ponents. In some cases, the reason is favorable scal-
ing—for example, smaller devices tend to be faster 
and consume less power. Scaling may also disfavor 
miniaturization, as often happens with actuators 
TABLE 8.2 Example of Transduction Principles
Input 
(Primary 
Signal)
Output (Secondary Signal)
Mechanical 
(Mechano-)
Thermal 
(Thermo-)
Electrical 
(Electro-)
Magnetic 
(Magneto-)
Radiant 
(Photo- or Radio-)
Chemical 
(Chemo-)
Mechanical Acoustics, fluidics
Friction 
calorimeter, 
cooling effects
Piezoelectricity, 
piezoresistivity
Piezomagnetic 
effect
Photoelasticity, 
Doppler effect
Motor 
proteins
Thermal
Thermal 
expansion, 
bimetallic strip
Pyroelectricity, 
Seebeck effect
Radiant emission
Reaction 
activation
Electrical
Piezoelectricity, 
electrometer
Joule heating, 
Peltier effect
Langmuir probe
Biot-Savart’s 
law
Electroluminescence, 
Kerr effect
Electrolysis
Magnetic
Magnetostriction, 
magnetometer
Thermomagnetic Magnetoresistance
Faraday effect, 
Cotton-Moulton 
effect
Radiant
Radiation 
pressure
Thermopile, 
bolometer
Photoelectric, 
dember
Optical bistability
Photoreactions
Chemical
Hygrometer 
Calorimeter, 
thermal 
conductivity
Amperometry, 
flame ionization, 
Volta effect
Nuclear 
magnetic 
resonance
Chemiluminescence
Self-generating (active) transducer
Energy
form 1
Energy
form 2
Transducer
Example:
Mechanical
pressure
Electrical
charge
Transducer
Modulating (passive) transducer
Energy
form 1
Energy
form 2
Transducer
Energy form 2
Example:
Magnetostrictor
Optical ﬁber
Detector
Magnetic
ﬁeld
Mechanical
strain
Optical
Electrical
FIGURE 8.2 Comparison of self-generating (active) transducer and modulating (passive) transducer; the  piezoelectric 
sensor represents a self-generating transducer, and the fiber optic magnetic field sensor represents a modulating 
 transducer. (After National Research Council.)

[Page 391]
Actuators   391
and power sources; smaller actuators exert less force, 
and smaller power sources harness less power.
Finally, actuator materials are often called smart 
materials, which refers to materials that undergo 
precise transformations through physical inter-
actions. Examples include piezoelectric materials, 
shape memory alloys (SMAs), conductive polymers, 
electrochromic materials, smart gels, rheological 
materials, biomaterials, electrostrictive materials, 
magnetostrictive materials, and electrorheologi-
cal fluids. All these materials have potential uses in 
actuators that control chatter in precision machine 
tools, improved robotic parts that move faster and 
with greater accuracy, smaller microelectronic cir-
cuits in machines ranging from computers to pho-
tolithography printers, and health-monitoring fibers 
for bridges, buildings, and utility poles.
Electric Actuators
Under electric actuators, we consider all  actuators 
that involve electrical fields (DC or AC); this includes, 
 foremost, electrostatic and piezoelectric actuators, 
which we study in the most detail. Besides electro-
static and piezoelectric devices, we consider dielec-
tric induction effects on particles in liquids and on 
liquids themselves, where one speaks about dielec-
trophoresis (covered in Volume I, Chapter 6) and elec-
trohydrodynamics (EHD), respectively. Finally, under 
electric actuators, we also explain how electrostric-
tive materials, pyroelectrics, thermoelectrics, elec-
trets, and electrorheological fluids work.
Electrostatics
Introduction
In electrostatic sensors and actuators, electrically 
charged materials are used. These materials can exert 
an attractive force on oppositely charged objects or 
a repulsive force on similarly charged ones. We start 
by introducing the simplest of electrostatic actuators, 
namely a parallel plate capacitor. This is followed 
by an introduction to electrical and mechanical 
equivalent circuits and the correspondence of their 
respective elements. This gives us the background for 
considering the dynamic behavior of a parallel plate 
capacitor. We then further describe the two most 
important characteristics of electrostatic actuators, 
i.e., their natural frequency and quality factor. We 
also introduce some other electrostatic actuators, 
such as wobble motors and switches, and compare 
them with other types of actuators. We finish this 
section with a summary about electrostatic actuators 
and a more general approach to modeling them.
Parallel Plate Capacitor Based Actuators
A parallel plate capacitor, as shown in Figure 8.3, is 
an example of a simple electrostatic actuator. We cal-
culate the stored energy density in a capacitor with 
plate area A and distance between the plates d as 
follows:
 
U 
A
d V
Ad E
0
r
= 1
2 ε ε
=
ε
   
 
 
      (
)
2
2
1
2
 
(8.1)
(see also Equation 7.34, with ε = εr ε0 wv = A and 
Vb = V).
The stored energy density is then obtained by 
dividing U from Equation 8.1 by the volume of the 
capacitor (Ad), or:
 
U
E
2
ʹ= 1
2 ε
=
⋅
2
1 D E  
(8.2)
where we bolded D and E to remind the reader that 
we are dealing with vectors here (see also Equation 
7.36, modified to describe all fields, E, not just the 
breakdown field, Eb, and with ε = εr ε0):
The electrostatic surface force is given by the fol-
lowing equation (a generalization of Equation 7.37):
 
F   
U
= −
 
(8.3)
A
V
d
FIGURE 8.3 Parallel plate capacitor.

[Page 392]
392   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Let us now consider parallel- and vertical-driven 
parallel plate capacitor actuators, as depicted in 
Figure 8.4.
If the two plates of the parallel capacitor in a 
microactuator are displaced perpendicular to each 
other (d changes along the x-direction), the force of 
attraction in the x-direction, based on Equations 8.1 
(with εr = 1) and 8.3, is given as follows:
 
F
U
x
A
x
V
x
0
2
2
= −
=
∂
∂
ε
1
2
 
(8.4)
Vertically driven resonant microstructures oper-
ate in this mode (see Figure 8.5a). Vibration in the 
x-direction in this case is excited electrostatically, 
and motion is detected electrostatically as well; that 
is, by sensing the change in capacitance.7
In Chapter 7, we saw that the electrostatic force, 
Fx, for a constant field, scales as l2, since:
 
F
U
x
V
C
x
x = −
=
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
2
3
1
2
2
1
1
1  
(7.37)
where V is the applied voltage. This l2 scaling of the 
electrostatic force often constitutes an advantage 
compared with other forces when miniaturizing 
an actuator. For example, mass and hence inertial 
forces scale as l3, and from Chapter 7, we know that 
the lower the exponent of l, the more important the 
force becomes in the microdomain (see also below 
and Figure 8.8).
A large displacement in a micromachined elec-
trostatic actuator element can best be achieved if 
one plate (the actuator) moves parallel to the other 
capacitor plate rather than perpendicular to it (see 
Figures 8.4b and 8.5b). For a parallel movement 
of the plates (in the y-direction or z-direction), 
Equations 8.1 and 8.3 result in a force of attraction 
parallel to the plates, which for the y-direction is 
given by the following equation:
 
F
z
d V
y = 1
2
0
2
ε
 
(8.5)
Notice that the force is constant for a y directional 
translation, i.e., the force is scale-independent in 
+
V
–
+Q
Area: A
d
y
x
z
–Q
V
–Q
d
y
z
x
+Q
+
l
y
Fy
–
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.4 Vertical-driven (a) and parallel-driven (b) parallel plate capacitor actuators.
(c)
Polysilicon
microbridge
Underlying
electrode
(a)
(b)
∆x
Fx
+ Parallel plates—good drive and sense 
− Fringing ﬁelds—weak drive and sense 
− Amplitude limited to less than 1/3 of gap + Larger vibration amplitudes 
− Squeeze-ﬁlm damping in air 
+ Couette ﬂow—damping less dissipative 
− Diﬃcult to couple mechanically 
+ Enables a variety of mechanical coupling 
Vertical resonator
Horizontal resonator
FIGURE 8.5 Electrostatic actuation. (a) Vertically driven polysilicon microbridge. (b) Laterally driven electrostatic actua-
tor. (After Tang, W. C.-K. 1990. Electrostatic comb drive for resonant sensor and actuator applications. PhD thesis, 
University of California, Berkeley.7) (c) Summary of the pros and cons of vertical and lateral resonators, from a lecture by 
Dr. Bill Tang (University of California, Irvine).

[Page 393]
Actuators   393
that direction (F ∼ l0V2). In this case, the force par-
allel to the plates wants to realign the plates. This 
is exploited, for example, in laterally driven linear 
and rotary electrostatic motors or side-drive motors 
(see Figure 8.6a and b). The lateral force remains 
constant during the movement as long as the fring-
ing fields can be neglected (see Figure 8.5b). Besides 
longer strokes, driving and sensing of planar micro-
structures parallel to the substrate have two other 
major advantages over a vertical movement of the 
plates: the forces change linearly with distance (see 
Equation 8.5), and dissipative squeeze damping is 
avoided.8–10 The latter is related to the magnitude of 
the viscous losses when moving structures displace 
fluids (usually air) from small separator gaps. Losses 
are larger for vertical displacement of fluids, leading 
to squeeze-film damping and a resultant low-qual-
ity factor (Q) (see below) for resonating elements. 
Couette flow (see Volume I, Chapter 6, on fluidics) 
in the gap between the structure and the substrate 
for lateral motion of the actuator is much less dis-
sipative than squeeze-film damping, and higher Q 
resonators are obtained. Figure 8.5c summarizes 
the pros and cons of vertical and  lateral resonators.
Lateral electrostatic actuation is very important in 
linear resonators with comb-like structures, such as 
the device shown in the header of this chapter. These 
comb drives are used, for example, in accelerometers 
[see the Analog Devices’ ADXL-50 accelerometer, 
with a surface micromachined capacitive sensor 
(center), on-chip excitation, self-test, and signal-
conditioning circuitry in Volume II, Figure 7.92]. By 
applying a voltage, a movable shuttle moves toward 
a fixed part (Volume II, Figures 7.76 and 7.93). For a 
rectangular design of the resonator beams, the force 
and the microactuator displacement is proportional 
to the ratio of structure height, T, versus separation 
gap, d, that is, the achievable aspect ratio and the 
number of fingers, N:
 
F 
1
2
TN
d
V
=
ε
 
 
0
2 
(8.6)
An efficient comb drive with a large F can thus be 
achieved by designing many high comb fingers with 
narrow gaps. In polysilicon surface micromachin-
ing, the thickness, T, is typically limited to about 
2–3 µm, whereas with LIGA or pseudo-LIGA meth-
ods, a thickness of several hundred micrometers is 
possible (Volume II, Chapter 10). Clearly, the latter 
machining methods have the potential to produce 
the strongest electrostatic actuators. Mohr et al. fur-
ther showed that by making the comb fingers trap-
ezoidal in shape, the maximum displacement of 
the interdigitated fingers can be further increased, 
(a)
(b)
Insulator
Conductor
Insulator
Silicon
wafer
A
A
A’
B’
B
A’
B’
B
FIGURE 8.6 (a) Linear electrostatic motor: when a volt-
age is applied to the misaligned plates A-A’, a force is 
exerted, which aligns plates A-A’. Now, plates B-B’ are 
misaligned and in a position to be activated to cause a 
motion. (After Trimmer, W. S. N., and K. J. Gabriel. 1987. 
Design considerations for a practical electrostatic micro-
motor. Sensors Actuators 11:189.11) (b) Rotational electro-
static motor: scanning electron microscope micrograph of 
a polysilicon 12:8 salient pole micromotor. The rotor sits 
atop a 0.5-mm-thick layer of polysilicon that acts as an 
electrostatic shield. Rotor, hub, and stators are formed 
from 1.5-mm-thick polysilicon. A 2.0-mm-thick polysilicon 
disk is attached to the rotor. In turn, the hub overlaps 
this disk to pin the rotor onto the substrate. (Courtesy 
of D. Koester, MCNC-MEMS Technology Applications 
Center.) The first polysilicon motors were made at 
University of California, Berkeley (Fan, Tai, and Muller), 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and AT&T. Typical 
starting voltages were >100 V, and operating voltages 
were >50 V.

[Page 394]
394   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
as smaller capacitor gaps are possible this way.12 
For a more rigorous mathematical derivation of 
Equation 8.6, we refer to the finite-element simula-
tion of comb drives by Tang.7
When a dielectric or a metallic slab is moved 
between the two plates of a parallel plate capacitor 
as shown in Figure 8.7, Equation 8.5 must be modi-
fied as follows:
 
F
z
d
V
y
d
0
=
ε
ε
ʹ
1
2
2
(
)
−
 
(8.7)
for a dielectric slab of thickness d′ and dielectric 
constant εd (Figure 8.7a). For a metal slab of thick-
ness d′ inserted in the capacitor gap, one derives the 
following equation (Figure 8.7b):
 
F
zd
d(d
d ) V
y = 1
2
0
2
ε
ʹ
−ʹ
 
(8.8)
It is important to be able to evaluate the relative 
importance of different competing forces as one 
downscales an actuator. In Figure 4.39, we compare 
gravity, van der Waals, electrostatic, and surface ten-
sion forces that are involved when picking and plac-
ing small objects during assembly. From this graph 
it is clear that surface forces become more dominant 
as structures become smaller. Here we detail the rel-
ative importance of gravitational versus electrostatic 
forces for deciding upon an actuator mechanism in 
the microworld. In Figure 8.8, we consider compet-
ing gravitational and electrostatic forces working 
on a cube of material with length L, density ρ, and 
charge q. The gravitational force, Fg, working on the 
cube is given as follows:
 
F
g V
g L
g = ρ
= ρ 3 
(8.9)
Based on Equation 8.4, with σ = q/A (A = L2) and 
AE  = q/ε, the electrostatic force Fe (≡ Fx) working 
upon the cube is given by the following equation:
 
F
2 AE
2 L
e =
=
1
2
2
2
ε
σ
ε
 
(8.10)
Hence, when:
 
L
g
< σ
ρε
2
2
 
(8.11)
electrostatics dominates (the intersection of the red 
and blue line in Figure 8.8 occurs at Fg = Fe). The elec-
trostatic force, as we learn in Chapter 7, gains over 
inertial forces as the size of the system is decreased: 
the electrostatic force, with the lowest exponent in 
l, becomes the dominant force in the microdomain 
(surface force is l2 vs. l3 for gravitation). A decrease 
in size by a factor of 10 leads to a decrease of the 
inertial forces by a factor of 1000, whereas the elec-
trostatic force decreases by a factor of only 100. It is 
thus not hard to exert rapid accelerations in micro-
systems with the aid of electrical fields.
+Q
Dielectric
Conductor
y
d'
d
z
x
–Q
V
+
–
+
–
V
x
y
z
d'
d
+Q
–Q
C3
C1 C2
l
y
l
y
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.7 Dielectric (a) or metallic (b) slabs of material are moved into the gap of a parallel plate capacitor.
100
10–2
10–4
10–6
10–8
10–10
10–12
10–14
10–6
10–5
10–4
Cube size
Force (N)
10–3
= Gravity
= Electrostatic
 force
10–2
FIGURE 8.8 Competing gravitational and electrostatic 
forces working on a cube of length L, charge q, and den-
sity ρ (see also Figure 4.39).

[Page 395]
Actuators   395
Correspondence between Electrical 
and Mechanical Circuits
In this section we briefly introduce the corre-
spondence between electrical and mechanical 
circuits.
For modeling of electrostatic actuators as shown 
in Figure 8.7, it is useful to make abstractions of 
the electrical and mechanical system elements as 
illustrated in Table 8.3. In this table we list the cor-
respondence between the parameters in electrical 
and mechanical circuits. In the inset in this table, 
the gap of the electrostatic actuator is marked with 
the letter g, not to be confused with the gravita-
tional constant. Movement of the electrostatically 
actuated structure with spring constant k is in the 
z-direction. 
We will come back to modeling electrostatic actu-
ators at the end of “Electrostatics.”
Dynamics of Electrostatic Actuators
Dynamics is the branch of classical mechanics that 
is concerned with the motion of bodies. Here we 
consider the dynamics of an electrostatic actuator. 
In the electrostatic actuator shown in Figure 8.9, the 
electrostatic force, Fe (V) (see Equation 8.4, with x 
replaced by g, the instantaneous gap spacing, and ε0 
replaced by ε) works against a mechanical restraint 
Fs = kz. The latter is Hooke’s law, with k the spring 
constant and z the displacement of the movable 
plate, z = g – g0, with g0 the initial gap spacing, i.e., 
the gap without applied voltage.
A stable equilibrium results when the electro static 
and mechanical force are equal in absolute magni-
tude but opposite in sign, i.e., Fe = –Fs, or as follows:
 
F
AV
g
kz
k(g
g)
e
2
2
0
=
−
1
2
ε
=
=
−
 
(8.12)
TABLE 8.3 Equivalent Electrical and Mechanical Terms
Displacement, g
⇔
Charge, q
Force, F
⇔
Voltage, V
Velocity, dz/dt
⇔
Current, I (= dq/dt) 
Mass, m 
⇔
Inductance, L
Spring, k
⇔
Capacitance, 1/C
Damping, b (dashpot)
⇔
Resistance, R
Mechanical and electrical equivalent circuits.
Fixed plate
Spring k
z
g
°œ
°–
V
I
Inset
°œ
°–
V
°œ
°–
F
U(q,g)
C
dg/dt
1/k
dz/dt
I
m
k
z
V
z
g0
g0
1/3
Vsnap
V
g
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.9 (a) Schematic of an electrostatic actuator. (b) At the snap voltage, Vsnap, there is an electrostatic instability or 
a pull-in of the electrostatic actuator, where g0 is the initial gap spacing and the snap voltage occurs at 1/3 of the initial 
gap spacing.

[Page 396]
396   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
This relationship is illustrated in Figure 8.10 for 
three different voltage values. Notice that the blue 
line (Hooke’s law) intersects the lowest red Fe 
(V)-curve (electrical force) at two points and touches 
the next red Fe (V)-curve at only one point. These 
inter section points and the contact point are now 
analyzed further.
From Figure 8.10, we recognize that at g = g0 (z = 
0), when there is no voltage applied, Fs = 0. When 
the electrostatic actuator pull-in has shunted the 
capacitor plates, the gap g = 0 (z = –g0), and the force 
Fs = kg0.
On the basis of Equation 8.12, we derive the fol-
lowing voltage dependence on z:
 
V
kz
A g
z
=
−
2
0
ε
(
) 
(8.13)
This is plotted in Figure 8.9b. When the applied volt-
age, V, is larger than Vsnap (the snap or pull-in  voltage), 
an unstable situation results (the system loses equi-
librium) and the capacitor plates snap together. Let 
us analyze the conditions for this electrostatic insta-
bility in a bit more detail. An equilibrium point is 
unstable if in the presence of a small perturbation the 
net force does not tend to return the system back to 
the equilibrium position. The net force is the sum of 
the electrostatic and mechanical force, Fnet = Fe + Fs, 
or, from Equation 8.12:
 
F
AV
g
k g
g
net = −
−
   
    (
)
ε
+
2
2
0
2
 
(8.14)
For a stable equilibrium point, the variation of 
the net force (δFnet) should be of the opposite sign to 
the perturbation (δg), i.e., δFnet/δg < 0. We calculate 
ΔFnet as follows:
 
δ
∂
∂
δ
ε
δ
F
F
g
v
g
AV
g
k
g
net
net
3
=
=
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
 
(8.15)
When δg > 0, the system becomes unstable if δFnet > 
0, and the system becomes stable if δFnet < 0, or for 
a stable equilibrium, one must have the following 
condition:
 
k > AV
g
2
3
ε
 
(8.16)
At the electrostatic instability voltage, pull-in 
voltage or snap voltage, Vsnap (the peak of the curve 
in Figure 8.9b: δV/δz = 0), the net force Fnet = 0, and 
one obtains the following:
 
k
AV
g
snap
2
snap
3
= −ε
 
 
(8.17)
and:
 
F
kg
2
k (g
g
net
snap
0
snap
= −
   
)   
+
−
= 0 
(8.18)
From Equation 8.18, we derive for the value of 
gsnap:
 
g
g
snap = 2
3
0  
(8.19)
The value for Vsnap, the electrostatic instability or 
snap voltage, is then as follows:
 
V
kg
27 A
snap
0
3
=
8
ε
 
(8.20)
Representing a normalized displacement as:
 
ζ =
−
z
g
g
g
0
0
1
=
 
(8.21)
And a normalized voltage as:
 
ν =
V
Vsnap
 
(8.22)
The equilibrium condition can be represented as:
 
4
27 1
2
2
ν
ζ
ζ
(
)
−
=  
(8.23)
F
Fe(V)
kg0
–Fs
d0
x
FIGURE 8.10 Positioning of a capacitor plate. The blue 
line is simply Hooke’s law, and the three red lines are the 
electrostatic force for three different voltages.

[Page 397]
Actuators   397
The two intersection points merge when ζ = 1/3 
(gsnap = 2/3g0) and ν = 1 (V = Vsnap), and this point 
corresponds to the pull-in point. As shown in 
Figure 8.10, this is the point where the blue line just 
touches the red curve. In Figure 8.11, we plot the 
force, F, as a function of ζ (with ν = 0.8). The spring 
force is marked by a solid line and the electrical force 
by an arched one.
Fundamental Frequency and Quality 
Factor of Electrostatic Resonators
Introduction
Two very important characteristics for electrostatic 
actuators are the fundamental frequency and the 
quality factor of the moving parts in these systems. 
The fundamental frequency of a resonating part is 
the frequency at which a free system vibrates. There 
are two different common definitions of the Q of a 
resonator. One is via the energy storage, where the 
Q is given as 2π times the ratio of the stored energy 
to the energy dissipated per oscillation cycle, or 
equivalently the ratio of the stored energy to the 
energy dissipated per radian of the oscillation. The 
other definition is via the resonance bandwidth in 
which the Q is the ratio of the resonance frequency 
f0 and the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) 
bandwidth, Δf, of the resonance. Both definitions 
are equivalent only in the limit of weakly damped 
oscillations, i.e., for high Q values.
Fundamental Frequency
The fundamental or natural frequency, f0, of a simple 
spring-mass system resonator is given by:
 
f
k
m
0
1
2
=
π
 
(8.24)
and:
 
ω
π
0
0
2
=
=
f
k
m
 
(8.25)
with k the spring constant (defined as load/deflec-
tion), m the mass, and ω0 the natural circular fre-
quency. The spring constant k in the two preceding 
equations scales as l, and m scales as l3; it follows 
that the resonance frequency scales as f0 ~ l–1, con-
firming that the smaller the resonator the higher its 
resonant frequency.
For a more complicated resonator, of the type 
shown in the header of this chapter, the same funda-
mental equation holds but with the spring constant 
k replaced by K, that is, the effective spring constant 
(also stiffness constant or stiffness matrix), and m 
replaced by M, that is, the effective mass or mass 
matrix of the structure. The stiffness matrix varies 
with geometry as well as with the induced stresses.
With reference to Table 8.3, we recognize that just 
as a spring-mass combination has a natural (reso-
nant) frequency determined by the stiffness of the 
spring and the magnitude of the mass, so too do the 
values of an inductor and capacitor determine the 
natural oscillating frequency of an electrical induc-
tance-capacitance (LC) circuit. The larger the induc-
tance, the longer it takes a given moving charge to 
set up a magnetic field. Since a given charge pro-
duces only a small voltage across a large capacitor, 
the larger the capacitance the longer it will take to 
charge and discharge that capacitor. The natural 
oscillating frequency of an LC circuit is given by the 
following expressions:
 
f
2
LC
0
1
1
=
π
 
(8.26)
and:
 
ω =
π
=
0
0
2
1
f
LC
 
(8.27)
1
0.8
Electrical force
Spring force
V increasing
Stable equilibrium point
0.6
Force
0.4
0.2
00
0.2
0.4
0.6
ζ
0.8
1
FIGURE 8.11 Force, F, as a function of ζ (with ν = 0.8). The 
spring force is marked by a solid line and the electrical 
force by an arched line (see also Figure 8.10).

[Page 398]
398   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Quality Factor
The Q of a resonator, in one of the two prevailing 
definitions (see introduction above), is given as the 
ratio of stored over lost energy in one cycle.
 
Q
E
E
T
=
=
=
2
2
0
π
π τ
τω
Δ
 
(8.28)
For a mechanical system as sketched in the inset in 
Table 8.3, the mechanical quality factor is then cal-
culated as follows:
 
Q
m
b
km
b
=
=
τω
ω =
0
0
 
(8.29)
with b the damping in the system. From the discus-
sion in the introduction above, m and k should be 
replaced by M and K for more complex resonator 
structures.
Analogously, for an electrical system, the quality 
factor is given by the following:
 
Q
L
R
R
L
C
=
=
=
τω
ω
0
0
1
 
(8.30)
with L the inductance and C the capacitance (see 
Table 8.3).
Typical mechanical quality factors for laterally 
driven polysilicon resonant microstructures (see fig-
ure in the header of this chapter) are about 100 or 
less.8 A poly-SiC lateral resonator, a material with a 
high Young’s modules and thus a high k, at <10–5 
Torr, has been micromachined and features Q values 
>100,000.13 In a good vacuum, b in Equation 8.29 
becomes very small, further improving the factor Q. 
For NEMS devices, Qs attained today in moderate 
vacuum are in the range of 103 to 105. This greatly 
exceeds typical Qs from electrical resonators. A high 
Q is linked to small internal dissipation (D = 1/Q), 
imparting, in turn, low operating power levels and 
high attainable force sensitivity to nanodevices.14
Merits of Electrostatic Devices
To analyze the merits of electrostatic actuators, we 
start by deriving the maximum energy density one 
can store in such an actuator. In Chapter 7, on scal-
ing, we saw that the maximum electrostatic energy 
density, U′m (in J/m3), between the capacitor plates of 
an electrostatic actuator is obtained by dividing the 
maximum potential energy, Um, by the volume, V0, 
of the capacitor gap, V0 = w × v × d (see Figure 7.11):
 
ʹ
U
E
2
m
r
b
2
= ε ε
 
0
 
(7.36)
where Eb represents the highest attainable electric 
field in the actuator, i.e., the electric breakdown 
field strength. For an air capacitor, Eb is limited to 
approximately 3 × 106 Vm–1 by the electrical break-
down of air. Thus, the stored energy for an air 
capacitor is about 40 Jm–3. Electrostatics is a surface 
force, and the surface force density, F′, is given by the 
following (derivative of Equation 8.4):
 
F
F
A
E
r
ʹ
∂
∂
ε ε
=
=
0
2
2
 
(8.31)
where A stands for the surface area. The surface 
force density equals the energy density in the field. 
Hence, one wants to use the maximum field possible 
for the largest possible force. In Chapter 7, we saw 
that this force scales as l2, which is favorable in the 
microdomain where forces with the lowest exponent 
win out (e.g., electrostatics with l2 win out over the l4 
scaling of magnetic actuators).
Our reasoning so far involves isotropic electrical 
fields only. In Chapter 7 we saw that besides favor-
able scaling, the Paschen effect represents another 
advantage for microelectrostatic systems. Working 
on the left side of the Paschen curve (see Figure 7.12) 
renders very high-field operation possible for a wide 
variety of electrostatic microdevices without incur-
ring catastrophic sparking. Examples include the 
electrostatic motors illustrated in Figure 8.6b, the 
electrostatic switch in Figure 8.13, and the author’s 
volcano ionization sources presented in Example 
7.1 at the end of Chapter 7 (Figure 7.14). The field 
in the nonisotropic Paschen regime scales more 
nearly as l–1/2, whereas the force scales as l1. With a 
factor of 10 reduction in size, the inertial force still 
decreases by a factor of 1000, but the electrostatic 
force decreases only by a factor of 10. Acceleration 
and transit times are also higher than for the isotro-
pic system. Superficially, this seems to put magnetic 
motors, based on volume forces, at a disadvantage 
compared with electrostatic micromotors. We shall 
see, however, that this is not the end of the story. 
For example, magnetic field energy can be made two 

[Page 399]
Actuators   399
orders of magnitude greater than the best one can 
achieve with electrostatic fields and small air gaps in 
air or vacuum.15
We are interested in using electrostatic force in 
all types of actuators: not only simple parallel plate 
capacitors but also linear and rotational motors. As 
we saw earlier, the force, F, is the negative spatial 
derivative of the energy, U, in the system (Equation 
8.3). In the case we move the plate of a capacitor with 
respect to another plate, the electric force will be the 
spatial derivative, in that direction, of the stored 
energy U. The translational movement of one plate 
with respect to the other in a linear motor moving in 
the x-direction leads to a force, Fx, as follows:
 
F
U
x
V
C
x
x = −
=
=
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
2
3
1
2
2
1
1
1  
(7.37)
where V is the applied voltage. The electrostatic force 
for a constant field is thus found to scale as l2. This 
is often an advantage, because the mass and, hence, 
inertial forces scale as l3. The latter point was clearly 
illustrated in Figure 8.8.
From Equation 7.37 translational motor action 
is associated with a change in the capacitance: an 
increase in capacitance for a motor, a decrease in 
capacitance for a generator. For a rotational motor 
a rotational force, Fr, by analogy to Equation 7.37 is 
defined as follows:
 
Fr      
= −∂
∂θ
U 
(8.32)
where ∂θ is the differential angular displacement 
in radians. From Equations 7.37 and 8.32, Fr can be 
expressed in terms of the change in capacitance.
 
F
V
2
C
q
2C
C
r
2
2
2
= −
= −
   
 
     
 
∂
∂θ
∂
∂θ
 
(8.33)
The second expression on the right is obtained by 
introducing the relation V = qC–1, where q is the total 
charge on the capacitor plates. Detailed calculations 
of the capacitance of electrostatic motors/genera-
tors can be found in Mahadevan16,17 and in Kumar 
et al.18 Torque of a rotational motor is given by the 
following:
 
T
r
Fr
=
×
 
(8.34)
With r the radius and Fr perpendicular, Equation 
8.34 simply becomes T = r·Fr. The power, P, gener-
ated by the motor can easily be calculated from the 
torque as follows:
 
P = Tω = T2πf 
(8.35)
where ω represents the angular frequency  and  f 
the  frequency at which the motor rotates. 
From Equation 8.35, one would expect that as 
electrostatic motors decrease, the inherent increase 
in frequency  could help to offset the decrease in 
torque. However, static and dynamic frictional 
forces (surface forces!) come into play and are a 
major barrier. Despite these problems, surface-
micromachined electrostatic motors of the type 
shown in Figure 8.6b, with rotational speeds of 
15,000 rpm and continuous operation for over 
a week, have proven to be possible at voltages 
below 300 V.19 Friction-reduction methods include 
deposition of a silicon nitride sliding surface; 
electrostatic, magnetic, or other types of levitation; 
and replacing sliding contacts with rolling contacts 
in wobble or harmonic motors.20,21
In harmonic motors, the rotor rolls on the inside 
of the stator without slipping and rotates slightly 
in the process (Figure 8.12). It is this slight rotation 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
FIGURE 8.12 Wobble or harmonic motors. (a) The rotor is 
touching the edge of the hole to the left. The white dot 
marks a point on the rotor; (b)–(f) show the rotor as it 
progressively rolls around the hole in a clockwise man-
ner. Note the position of the white dot in (f) after one 
rotation. The rotor has twisted about its axis slightly in 
a counterclockwise direction. As the rotor rolls repeat-
edly around the hole, the twisting motion produces an 
output torque.

[Page 400]
400   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
of the rotor that produces the output motion of the 
motor. Applying voltages between the rotor and 
electrodes in the stator hole electrostatically drives 
the rotor. Each of the rotations of the rotor about 
the stator hole produces another small twist of the 
rotor axis, producing a beneficial gear reduction. 
Advantages of this type of motor are the rolling 
motion, which avoids sliding friction, the closeness 
of the rotor and stator, enabling a higher electrostatic 
energy density, and the gear reduction, producing 
a large torque. Harmonic motors do not scale up 
well, however, and Trimmer compares large wobble 
motors to an unbalanced washing machine.22 In the 
microdomain, inertial effects decrease, and these 
unbalanced forces are insignificant for microhar-
monic motors.
To drive a load several hundred micrometers 
in thickness and width and several millimeters in 
diameter, the required torque of a motor is of the 
order of 10–5 Nm. However, the torque generated 
with a typical surface-micromachined electrostatic 
motor, 100–150 µm in diameter and with an air 
gap of about 2 µm, is only in the nano-newton-
meter or pico-newton-meter range (see Figure 
8.6b).21 Calculation for an outer rotor, surface-
micromachined wobble motor,* with copper electro -
plated structural elements, indicates that to achieve 
a torque of 10–4 to 10–5 Nm, the stator radius must 
be a few millimeters, and the thickness needs to 
be of the order of 10 µm.24 As frequently observed, 
actuators do not scale advantageously in the micro-
domain. Torque is a volume effect, and small-size 
devices have a limited range of force available for 
actuation. In view of this recognition, perhaps an 
excessive amount of research has gone into surface-
micromachined electrostatic motors. These flat 
surface  micromachined micromotors could still 
find a use, though, as shutters for charged particle 
or photon beams, memory writing/reading devices, 
masks with movable parts, etc.—in other words 
for applications in which the required forces are 
minimal. Below, we will compare electrostatic motors 
with the more complicated and typically larger 
* A detailed description of an electrostatic eccentric drive micromotor 
(wobble motor) can be found in Price et al.23
micromachined magnetic motors that, it appears, 
can perform a broader range of work more readily.
Besides different types of monolithic electrostatic 
micromotors,19,25 electrostatic actuators have  been 
used for hybrid mounted micromotors;26 micro-
valves;28 mechanical resonators for use in, for 
example, gyros and accelerometers;7 displacement 
actuators for optical components (e.g., for position-
ing micromirrors);28 and switches.29 An electrostatic 
microswitch developed by this author is illustrated 
in Figure 8.13. Upon applying a bias between the 
cantilever and the substrate, two metal gold pads 
make physical contact enabling large currents to 
flow. A mechanical switch as shown has advantages 
over an electronic switch, as its off-impedance (air 
gap) is infinite and its on-impedance (metal contact) 
is very low.
Summary Electrostatic Actuators: 
Performance and Modeling
Electrostatic fields can exert great forces, but gen-
erally only across very short distances (1 µm). The 
extremely low current consumption associated with 
electrostatic devices makes for highly efficient actua-
tion and the high speeds (up to 100 kHz) and ease 
of fabrication of electrostatic devices has enabled 
many applications (see above). In Figure 8.14, where 
(a)
(b)
Deflection metal
Insulating cantilever
Gold contacts
Silicon substrate
FIGURE 8.13 Electrostatic microswitch. (a) Schematic; 
(b) Scanning electron microscope micrograph, looking 
straight into the opened contact. Switch built by the 
author’s research group.

[Page 401]
Actuators   401
we plot frequency versus force, we summarize some 
of the most salient electrostatic actuator character-
istics in comparison to actuators based on other 
principles.
In Figure 8.15 we generalize the description of 
the dynamics of an electromechanical system. We 
employ x as the direction of displacement (instead of 
z; see above) and K for a combined stiffness constant 
(instead of k; see above). The differential equation, 
describing the electrical equivalent circuit shown 
here (Figure 8.15b), is as follows:
 
L d
dt
dQ
dt
R dQ
dt
C Q(t)
Vi
+
+ 1
=
and with  
d
dt
dQ
dt
Q(t) and dx
dt
Q(t)
=
=
ɺɺ
ɺ
 
LQ(t)
R
ɺɺ
+
ɺQ(t)
C Q(t)
Vi
+ 1
=
 
(8.36)
where Vi is the input voltage and V0 the output volt-
age. L is inductance, R is resistance, and C is capaci-
tance. For the mechanical equivalent circuit (Figure 
8.15a), the differential equation is as follows:
 
m d
dt
dx
dt
b dx
dt
Kx(t)
F
+
+
=
with
 
d
dt
dx
dt
x(t) and
dx
dt
x(t)
=
=
ɺɺ
ɺ
 
mx(t)+
ɺɺ
bx(t)+Kx(t)
F
ɺ
=
 
(8.37)
where the external force F is the input, the displace-
ment x is the output, b is damping, m is the mass, 
and K is the stiffness.
The modeling equations gathered above are in the 
time domain, but often analysis of a system is easier 
Freq. (Hz)
100,000
10,000
1,000
100
1
1
10
100
8. Maximum electrostatic energy density, U΄m (in J/m3): 4.0×105 Jm–3
7. Maximum electric field before breakdown (approximately
6. Footprint: 10 μm to 1 mm
5. Voltage: ~100 V
4. Easy to fabricate
3. Intermediate force density
2. Maximum speed: 100 kHz
1. Stroke: 1 μm
1,000
10,000
Force (µN)
Electromagnetic
Thermomechanical
Electrostatic
Piezo
3 ×108 Vm–1)
FIGURE 8.14 Summary of electrostatic actuators.
b
(a)
(b)
K
Input: external force, F
Output: displacement, x
mx(t) + bx(t) + Kx(t) = F
m: mass; d: damping; K: stiffness
Transfer function:
1
m
H(s) =
=
x(t)
F
s2 +
+
s
b
m
K
m
Input: voltage, Vi
Output: voltage, V0
Lq(t) + Rq(t) + 
q(t) = Vi
1
C
L: induct; R: resist; C: capacity
Transfer function:
1
LC
H(s) =
=
V0
Vi
s2 +
+
s
R
L
1
LC
m
F
x
Vi
V0
L
R
C
FIGURE 8.15 General description of the dynamics of an electromechanical system.

[Page 402]
402   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
to perform in the frequency domain. In order to con-
vert these equations to the frequency domain, we 
apply the Laplace transform to determine the trans-
fer function [H(s)] of the system. As a consequence 
functions with a real dependent variable (such as 
time) are converted into functions with a complex 
dependent variable (such as frequency, often rep-
resented by s), which are easier to manipulate. The 
transfer function of the system then is the ratio of 
the output Laplace transform to the input Laplace 
transform assuming zero initial conditions. Many 
important characteristics of dynamic or control sys-
tems can be determined from the transfer function. 
The general procedure to find the transfer function 
of a linear differential equation from input to out-
put is to take the Laplace transforms of both sides 
assuming zero conditions and to solve for the ratio 
of the output Laplace over the input Laplace. For the 
electrical case the transfer function is as follows:
 
H s
V
V
LC
s
R
L s 
LC
i
( )
 
 
=
=
+
+
0
2
1
1  
(8.38)
And for the mechanical case, it is as follows:
 
H s
x(t)
F
m
s
b
m
 s 
K
m
( )   
   
 
 
=
=
+
+
1
2
 
(8.39)
Piezoelectricity
Introduction
In 1880, Pierre Curie and his brother Paul-Jacques 
discovered that external forces applied to single 
crystals of quartz and some other minerals (e.g., 
Rochelle salt) generate a charge on the surface of 
these crystals. The charge, they found, is roughly 
proportional to the applied mechanical stress (force 
per unit area). This is called the direct piezoelectric 
effect.  The effect received its name in 1881 from 
Wilhelm Hankel, and it remained a curiosity until 
1921, when Walter Cady discovered that a quartz 
resonator could be used for stabilizing electronic 
oscillators.30 Piezoelectric materials exhibit the 
inverse effects as well: an applied voltage generates 
a deformation of the crystal (Figure 8.16). Lipp-
man predicted this effect from thermodynamic 
principles,  and the Curie brothers confirmed it 
experimentally a year later (1881). In the direct 
case, the crystals work like sensors; in the indirect 
case, piezoelectrics exhibit an actuation behavior. 
The mechanical waves generated by piezoelectrics 
are also called acoustic waves. Acoustic wave devices 
are so named because their detection mechanism 
is a mechanical, or acoustic, wave. Piezoelectric 
acoustic wave sensors apply an oscillating electric 
field to create a mechanical wave, which propagates 
through the substrate and is then converted 
back to an electric field for measurement. As the 
acoustic wave propagates through or on the surface 
of the piezoelectric material, any changes to the 
characteristics of the propagation path affect the 
velocity and/or amplitude of the wave. Changes 
in velocity can be monitored by measuring the 
frequency or phase characteristics of the sensor 
and can then be correlated to the corresponding 
physical  quantity  being measured. Virtually all 
acoustic wave devices and sensors use a piezoelectric 
material to generate the acoustic waves.
Piezoelectric actuators follow mammalian muscle 
as the most ubiquitous actuator principle in nature. 
For example, bones possess piezoelectric proper-
ties.31 Other biological materials that have been 
found to be piezoelectric include tendon, dentin, 
ivory, intestine, silk, elastin, wood, and the nucleic 
acids.
Piezoelectricity is not to be confused with fer-
roelectricity, discovered in 1920 by J. Valasek. 
Ferroelectricity is the property of a spontaneous 
or induced electric dipole moment. In crystals of 
Rochelle salt (NaKC4H4O6 ⋅ 4H2O), the unit cells 
Change in length per unit applied voltage
∆l
∆l
C∆l
1.23 nm/V
Note: ∆l is independent of  l! It only depends on
the voltage ∆V, and on material properties
ε0εr∆l
ε0εr
∂E
≈
=
=
=
=
=
ε0εr∆l
∆z
Vz
ε0εr
∆V
∆V
PZT
∆Q
ldF
ldσ
dE
FIGURE 8.16 The inverse piezoelectric effect. Used to 
build actuators.

[Page 403]
Actuators   403
have a spontaneous asymmetric charge distribu-
tion, and the orientation of this polarization can be 
switched by applying a field strong enough to drag 
the unsymmetrically placed ions into equivalent 
positions in the opposite direction. All ferroelectric 
materials are piezoelectric, but the converse is not 
always true. Piezoelectricity relates to the crystalline 
ionic structure; ferroelectricity relates to electron 
spin. Above the so-called Curie temperature, sponta-
neous polarization of a ferroelectric is lost, because 
thermal vibrations randomize the dipole orienta-
tions. The transition from a nonferroelectric to a fer-
roelectric state is analogous to the magnetic ordering 
transition in a ferromagnet below its Curie tempera-
ture. Ferroic materials are multifunctional materials, 
materials having both sensing and actuation func-
tions. A large number of applications of ferroelectric 
materials exploit an indirect consequence of ferro-
electricity, such as dielectric, piezoelectric, pyroelec-
tric, and electrooptic properties. The biggest use of 
ferroelectric materials is as dielectrics in capacitors, 
ferroelectrics for thin films for nonvolatile memo-
ries, piezoelectric materials for medical ultrasound 
and imagining and actuators, and electrooptical 
materials for data storage and displays. Ferroelectric 
materials exhibit strong electrostriction.
Electrostriction, covered below, is a secondary 
coupling in which the strain is proportional to 
square of the electric field. Electrostriction, a prop-
erty of all dielectrics but pronounced only for fer-
roelectrics, is similar to the piezoelectric effect in 
that it involves an increase in length parallel to an 
applied electric field. In electrostrictive materials, 
in contrast to piezoelectric materials, the direction 
of this small change in geometry does not reverse if 
the direction of the electrical field is reversed.
Mechanism of Piezoelectricity
A simplified model of piezoelectricity entails the 
notion of anions (–) and cations (+) moving in 
opposite directions under the influence of an electric 
field or a mechanical force. The forces generated by 
this motion cause lattice deformation for noncentro-
symmetric crystals because of the presence of both 
high- and low-stiffness ionic bonds. The effect for 
quartz is illustrated in Figure 8.17. If the cell shown 
here is deformed along the x- or y-axis, the O-ion 
is displaced, and positive or negative charges are 
formed. As a result, all piezoelectric materials are 
necessarily anisotropic; in cases of central symme-
try, an applied force does not yield an electric polar-
ization. By applying mechanical deformations to 
piezoelectric crystals, electric dipoles are generated, 
and a potential difference develops when changing 
those mechanical deformations. Silicon is not piezo-
electric because it is cubic and covalent rather than 
Ion charges
neutralized
in unstrained
crystal
(a)
(b)
Unbalanced ions
charge surface of
strained crystal
Stress
Strain
Oxygen
negative
Silicon
positive
Z (3)
Z (3)
X (1)
X (1)
C
a
Fy
Fy
Fz
Fz
Y (2)
Y (2)
Voltage
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
FIGURE 8.17 Piezoelectricity in an ionic crystal such as quartz. (a) Ion position in quartz lattice with and without applied 
stress. (b) Element cut from quartz crystal under stress.

[Page 404]
404   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
ionic and noncentrosymmetric. It is important to 
remember that the potential and the associated cur-
rents in piezoelectric materials are a function of the 
contin uously changing mechanical deformation. 
Therefore, typical and practical uses are in situations 
involving dynamic strains of an oscillatory nature.32
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 2, the thousands 
of crystals found in nature can be grouped into 230 
space groups on the basis of symmetry elements. Since 
the relative position of the symmetry elements in a 
crystal is not important, and only their orientation 
counts, the 230 space groups can be reduced to just 
thirty-two point groups. The thirty-two point groups 
further divide over the seven well-known crystal sys-
tems: triclinic, monoclinic, orthorhombic, tertrago-
nal, trigonal, hexagonal, and cubic. Of the thirty-two 
point groups, twenty-one do not have a center of sym-
metry (i.e., they are noncentrosymmetric). The lat-
ter crystals possess one or more crystallographically 
unique directional axes, and all, except the 432 point 
group, show the piezoelectric effect along unique 
directional axes. Piezoelectric properties are thus 
present in twenty of the thirty-two different crystal-
lographic point groups, although only a few of them 
are used. They are found also in amorphous ferro-
electric materials. Of the twenty crystallo graphic 
classes, only ten display ferroelectric properties.
A more detailed understanding of piezoelectric-
ity is based on an understanding of the piezoelectric 
equations describing the coupling between electric 
and mechanical strains in a piezoelectric material. 
Polarization and stress are vector and tensor prop-
erties, respectively, and in general, arbitrary com-
ponents of each can be related via the piezoelectric 
effect. For this reason, piezoelectricity is a compli-
cated property, and up to eighteen constants may 
be required to specify it. When a stress, σ (FA–1), is 
applied to a slab of material cut from a piezoelectric 
material such as quartz, the resulting one-dimen-
sional strain, ε, in the elastic range, can be written as 
(see Volume I, Chapter 4, “Stress-Strain Curve and 
Elasticity Constants”):
 
ε  =  Sσ 
(8.40)
which represents Hooke’s law, where S stands for 
the compliance (S–1 = E = Young’s modulus). With 
a potential difference applied across the faces of the 
piezoelectric, an electric field, E (Vm–1), is estab-
lished and we obtain the following (see Volume I, 
Equation 3.37):
 
D
E
E(1
P
r
0
= ε
= ε
+ χ) =
 
(8.41)
where D =  electric displacement (or electric flux 
density)
εr =  relative permittivity of the material 
(dimensionless)
E = electric field
ε0 = permittivity of vacuum in A × s V–1 × m–1
χ = electrical susceptibility
P =  polarization, that is, the electric dipole 
moment per unit volume of material
Equation 8.40 contains only mechanical quan-
tities, and Equation 8.41 contains only electri-
cal parameters. Piezoelectric materials possess a 
special interlocking behavior in which electrical 
charges are  produced by straining the material, 
and mechanical forces are produced by subjecting 
the material to an electric field.33 For a one-dimen-
sional piezoelectric material with electric field and 
stress in the same direction, according to the prin-
ciple of energy conservation from thermodynam-
ics, we can describe this situation as follows:34
 
D
d
d) E
=
σ + ε(
σ
 
(8.42)
 
D
e
d) E
=
ε + ε(
ε
 
(8.43)
where d represents a piezoelectric constant (charge 
density/applied stress) expressed in coulombs 
divided by newtons (C/N), and ε(d)σ is the per-
mittivity at constant stress [we added a “(d)” to dis-
tinguish the dielectric constant from the strain ε]. 
To work with d coefficients is useful when charge 
generators are contemplated, for example, in piezo-
electric accelerometers. In the second expression, e 
stands for a piezoelectric constant (charge density/
applied strain) in Cm–1, and ε(d)ε is the dielectric 
constant at a constant strain. Solving for E, we can 
rewrite Equations 8.42 and 8.43 as follows:
 
E
g
D
d
= −
+
σ
ε
σ
( )
 
(8.44)
 
E
h
D
d
= −ε +
ε( )ε  
(8.45)

[Page 405]
Actuators   405
where g = d/ε (d)σ is a piezoelectric constant 
(field/applied stress), also called a voltage constant, 
in V/m/N, and h = e/ε (d)e is a piezoelectric con-
stant (field/applied strain) in V/m. The above set of 
equations describes the direct piezoelectric effect. 
The equations for the inverse effect are written as 
follows:
 
ε =
+
σ
dE
SE  
(8.46)
 
ε =
+
σ
gD
SD
 
(8.47)
where d and g =  piezoelectric constants given in 
mV–1 and mC–1, respectively
SE = compliance at constant field
SD =  the compliance at constant electric 
flux density
Solving Equations 8.46 and 8.47 for σ results in 
the following:
 
σ = −
+
ε
eE
E(Y)E  
(8.48)
 
σ = −
+ (
ε
hD
E Y)D  
(8.49)
where e =  d/SE and h = g/SD = piezoelectric constants 
given in N/V/m and N/C, respectively
E(Y)E =  Young’s modulus [we added a “(Y)” here 
to distinguish the Young’s modulus from 
the electric field E] under constant electri-
cal field
E(Y)D =  Young’s modulus under constant electric 
flux density
Equations 8.42 to 8.49 are known as the piezo-
electric constitutive relations. They are summarized in 
Table 8.4, together with the definition of the four 
piezoelectric constants d, e, g, and h.
If no external field is imposed, according to 
Equations 8.41, 8.42, and 8.43, a stress, σ, will lead 
to the following polarization, P, or direct effect:
 
P = dσ 
(8.50)
and, according to Equations 8.46 and 8.47, if there is 
no external stress applied, a field, E, will lead to the 
following strain and converse effect, ε:
 
ε = dE 
(8.51)
so that the same constant—the piezoelectric coeffi-
cient d—is used for the direct and reverse effects.
The ratio of the converted energy of one kind 
(mechanical or electrical) stored at any instant in a 
piezoelectric to the input energy of the second kind 
(electrical or mechanical) is defined as the square of 
the coupling coefficient:
 
k 
mechanical energy stored
electrical ener
= 
gy applied
electrical energy stored
mecha
 
 
=
nical energy applied
 
(8.52)
The electromechanical coupling coefficient, k, is 
thus a measure of the interchange of electrical and 
mechanical energy. It can be shown that k equals the 
geometric mean of the piezoelectric voltage coeffi-
cient (g) and the piezoelectric stress coefficient (e) 
and is indicative of the ability of a material to both 
detect and generate mechanical vibrations:35
 
k 
ge
=
 
(8.53)
To activate the maximum piezoelectric strain in 
a given crystal, the orientation dependence of the 
piezoelectric effect should be carefully considered. 
TABLE 8.4 Piezoelectric Constitutive Equations and Definitions of Piezoelectric 
Parameters
Piezoelectric 
Equations
Equation Number 
in Text
Definitions of Constants
SI Units
D = dσ + ε(d)σ Ε
8.42
d = charge density/applied stress
C/N 
D = eε + ε(d)εΕ
8.43
e = charge density/applied strain
C/m
E = –gσ+ D/ε(d)σ
8.44
g = field/applied stress
V/m/N
E = –hε + D/ε(d)ε
8.45
h = field/applied strain
V/m
ε = dE + SEσ
8.46
d = strain/applied field
m/V
ε = gD + SDσ
8.47
g = strain/applied charge density
m/C
σ = –eE + E(Y)Eε
8.48
e = stress/applied field
N/V/m
σ = –hD + E(Y)Dε
8.49
h = stress/applied charge density
N/C

[Page 406]
406   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
For the general case of a piezoelectric crystal, rather 
than a one-dimensional piezoelectric as treated 
above, the piezoelectric constitutive relations must 
be generalized. The generalized elastic response of a 
piezoelectric crystal to an electric field (see Equation 
8.51) may then be expressed as follows:
 
εk
i
=
=∑d E
ik
i
1
3
 
(8.54)
and the polarization in the absence of a field, from 
Equation 8.50, as follows:
 
P
d
i
ik
k
= ∑
σ
k=1
6
 
(8.55)
In these equations, i = 1, 2, and 3 make up the 
indices of the components of polarization and k = 1, 
2, …, 6 the indices of the components of mechanical 
stress and strain. In the piezoelectric constants, the 
first subscript refers to the direction of the field; the 
second subscript refers to the direction of the stress. 
The subscripts 1, 2, and 3 indicate the x-, y-, and 
z-axes, respectively. For example, in d33, i = 3 indicates 
that the polarizing electrodes are perpendicular to 
the 3-axis (i.e., z-axis), and the piezoelectric-induced 
strain or applied stress is in the 3-direction (along 
the z-axis) as well. For the coupling coefficient, k 
(Equation 8.53), the same notation is used. The 
above expressions are equivalent to writing (strain 
tensor)  = (d tensor) × (electric field vector) and 
(polarization vector) = (d tensor) × (stress tensor), 
respectively. Piezoelectricity, we saw in Volume I, 
Chapter 2, on crystallography, is an example of 
a vector-tensor effect; an electric field (vector) 
causes a mechanical deformation (tensor). Elastic 
deformation under the influence of a stress tensor 
is an example of a tensor-tensor effect.
On the basis of this notation, we can now general-
ize the constitutive relations as:
 
D
d
d
E
i
ik
ik
i
   
 
=
+
σ
ε
σ
κ
( )
 
(8.56)
and:
 
ε =
+
σ
k
ik
i
ik
E
k
d E
S
 
   
 
(8.57)
where Di = electric displacement vector (3 × 1), C/m2
Ei = electric field vector (3 × 1), V/m
σi = stress (force/unit area) tensor (6 × 1), N/m2
εk =  strain (relative displacement) tensor (6 × 1) 
dik =  a matrix of piezoelectric constants (3 × 6), 
m/V
ε(d)ik =  permittivity measured at constant stress 
(3 × 3), As/Vm
SE
ik =  elastic compliance matrix when sub-
jected to a constant electric field (6 × 6), 
m2/N
The other equations in Table 8.4 may be general-
ized in the same fashion.
From Volume I, Equation 4.83, we recall that the 
strain tensor has six components: σx, σy, σz for com-
pression or tension and τxy, τxz, and τyz for the shear 
components. The piezoelectric behavior of a crystal 
can be completely described if the set of data related 
to the piezoelectric constants (dik), elastic compli-
ances (Sik), and permittivities [ε(d)σ
ik] is given. This 
set can be introduced with a 9 × 9 matrix in which 
columns are associated with mechanical stresses 
and field strengths and rows refer to strains and 
polarizations:36
σ
σ
σ
τ
τ
τ
ε
ε
x
y
z
xy
xz
yz
x
y
z
x
y
E
E
E
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
11
12
13
14
15
16
21
22
23
24
25
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
z
xy
xz
26
31
32
33
34
35
36
41
42
43
44
45
46
51
52
53
ε
γ
γ
54
55
56
61
62
63
64
65
66
11
12
13
14
15
16
21
22
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
d
d
d
d
d
d
P
d
d
yz
x
y
γ
d
d
d
d
P
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
z
23
24
25
26
31
32
33
34
35
36
11
21
31
12
22
32
13
23
33
14
24
34
15
25
35
16
26
36
11
12
13
21
22
23
31
32
33
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
 
 
(8.58)
This matrix is symmetrical (Sik = Ski, dik = dki, and 
εik = εki) and reduces to forty-five different terms, 
including twenty-one compliances, six permittivi-
ties, and eighteen piezoelectric constants. In the 
top left of this matrix (rectangular box), we recog-
nize Equation 4.83, but because of the presence of 
piezoelectricity, the matrix is this much larger. For 
simplicity, we have replaced ε(d)ik
σ by εik in the above 
matrix. A further simplified notation with one sub-
script is often introduced for dielectric constants: 
ε11 = ε1, ε22 = ε2, and ε33 = ε3. For the defined orienta-
tion of the crystallographic axes, εik = 0 for i ≠ k.

[Page 407]
Actuators   407
For crystalline quartz, the eighteen remaining 
piezoelectric constants further reduce to two:
 
d
d
d
0
d
0
0
0
0
0
0
d
d
0
0
0
0
0
0
ik
11
12
14
25
26
=
 
(8.59)
with d11 = –d12 = –d26/2 = 2.31 pC/N and d14 = –d25 = 
0.73 pC/N. The meaning of d14 is as follows: a tor-
sion stress of 1 N/m2 around the axis 1 (x) of quartz 
(direction 4, or xz) induces a charge density of 0.73 
pC/N in two metal plates on the material in direc-
tion 1 (x).
Exercise 8.1:
A piezoelectric ceramic of 1 cm thickness in the 
3-direction and 10 cm length in the 1-direction 
is subjected to a potential of 0.01 volts in the 
3-direction, and the resulting change in length 
is 10–11 cm. What is the numerical value and sub-
script of the d constant? Answer: d31 = strain 
developed/field applied = (10–11 cm/10 cm)/(0.01 
V/0.01 m) = 10–12 mV–1.
Exercise 8.2:
If a voltage V is applied across the thickness of a 
piezoelectric slab, the displacements ΔL, ΔW, and 
Δt along the length, width, and thickness direc-
tions, respectively, are given by ΔL = d31  × V  × 
L/t, ΔW = d31 × V × W/t, and Δt = d33 × V, where 
L and W are the length and width of the plate, 
respectively, and t is the thickness or separation 
between the electrodes. When a force F is applied 
along the length, width, or thickness direction of 
the same slab, a voltage V is measured, given in 
each of the three cases as V = d31 × F/ε × L, V = 
d31 × F/ε × W, and V = d33 × F × t/ε × L × W.
At frequencies far below the resonance, piezoelec-
tric transducers are fundamentally capacitors. Since, 
in a capacitor, the voltage V is related to the charge 
Q via the capacitance C (Q = CV), the charge coef-
ficients dik are related in the same way to the voltage 
coefficients gik via εik, or:
 
d
(d)
g
ik
ik
ik
0
= ε
.
.ε
σ
 
(8.60)
with ε0 being the permittivity of free space. At reso-
nance, the dielectric constant is reduced by a factor 
of (1 – k), where k is the coupling coefficient of the 
mode in question.
For an in-depth mathematical treatise of piezo-
electricity, we refer to The Theory of Piezoelectric Shells 
and Plates.37 Other excellent references are by Cady38 
and Zelenka.39
Overview of Types of Acoustic Waves 
Introduction
Acoustic wave devices involve piezoelectric sub-
strates or the coupling of piezoelectric materials to 
nonpiezoelectric structures to (e.g., a Si cantilever 
equipped with a thin film of piezoelectric ZnO). 
These devices are described by the mode of sound 
wave propagation through the piezoelectric sub-
strate or through the linked nonpiezoelectric mate-
rial. Primarily, their velocities and displacement 
directions distinguish sound wave types. It is impor-
tant to remember here that acoustic waves are the 
result of induced particle vibration that depends on 
the elastic properties of the solid. In Table 8.5 we 
summarize several, but not all, of the wave modes 
possible in solids.
Metal transducers launch acoustic waves at ultra-
sonic frequencies and the type and resonant fre-
quency of such waves are fixed by the piezoelectric 
crystal orientation, the thickness (t) of the piezoelec-
tric used, and the geometry of the metal transducers. 
The resulting mechanical waves are called transverse 
or shear waves when the particle displacement is 
perpendicular to the direction of the wave propaga-
tion. Shear waves cannot propagate in fluids, and in 
a solid they typically travel at half the velocity of 
a longitudinal wave in the same material. In con-
trast, compressional or longitudinal acoustic waves 
are defined when particle displacement is parallel to 
TABLE 8.5 Acoustic Wave Types in Solids
Wave Type
Particle Vibrations
Longitudinal
Parallel to wave direction
Transverse (shear)
Perpendicular to wave direction
Surface (Rayleigh)
Elliptical orbit, symmetrical mode
Plate (Lamb)
Component perpendicular to 
surface (extensional wave)
Plate (Love)
Parallel to plane layer, 
perpendicular to wave direction

[Page 408]
408   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the direction of the acoustic wave travel, and these 
waves can be transmitted in solids and liquids.
Bulk Acoustic Wave Devices
While bulk acoustic waves (BAWs) propagate through 
the volume of the piezoelectric substrate, the propa-
gation of surface acoustic waves (SAWs) or Rayleigh 
waves is restricted to a distance of about one acoustic 
wavelength from the piezoelectric substrate surface. 
Rayleigh waves are somewhat similar to water waves 
in that the motion of particles is both longitudinal 
and transverse in a plane containing the direction of 
propagation and the normal to the surface.
A commonly used BAW device is the thickness 
shear mode (TSM) resonator shown in Figure 8.18. 
In TSM mode, bulk transverse waves with particle 
displacement parallel to the surface of the sensor are 
generated. Such waves, on propagation into a liquid, 
suffer severe attenuation of the acoustic energy due 
to the viscous forces in the liquid. The device pic-
tured in Figure 8.18 is more commonly known as a 
quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) and is used, among 
other things, to measure deposited metal thickness 
in an evaporation station (see Volume II, Figure 7.2a). 
It consists of an AT-cut quartz disc with metal elec-
trodes on opposite sides to effect the application of an 
oscillating electric field. A quartz AT cut is made nor-
mal to the y-axis but rotated 35.25° from the z-axis. 
In this direction, quartz has a zero temperature coef-
ficient at 40°C, making the AT cut ideal for frequency 
control applications. Quartz is a hexagonal crystal 
(see Figure 8.17), and if the electrical field is aligned 
with the y-axis, the resulting deformation is a shear 
along the neutral z-axis. To achieve a shear motion, 
the cut must be normal to the y-axis so that charg-
ing electrodes placed on the two faces of the wafer 
can produce the field. The thickness (t) of the quartz 
plate determines the wavelengths (λ) of the funda-
mental (n = 1) and harmonic resonances through 
the expression λ = 2t/n (n = 3, 5, 7). Consequently, 
the resonant frequency for the fundamental mode is 
restricted by the thickness t of the quartz wafers to 
the range of approximately 5–20 MHz. 
A more recent type of BAW device is a film bulk 
acoustic resonator (FBAR) that is used in mobile 
telephones. FBARs feature a Q > 400 at 1.9 GHz and 
often use aluminum nitride (AlN) as the piezoelec-
tric material. The major difference between an FBAR 
and the QCM of Figure 8.19 is that the AlN thin film 
piezoelectric is much thinner than the quartz cut. 
Two types of FBAR constructs are shown in Figure 
8.19. Figure 8.19a involves the etching of a sacrificial 
support layer below the piezofilm film. Figure 8.19b 
consists of etching the substrate from the back of the 
wafer to the front surface creating a so-called pothole 
structure.
Surface Acoustic Waves
It was Lord Rayleigh, in 1887, who discovered the 
surface acoustic wave (SAW) mode of sound propaga-
tion and predicted their properties. Named for their 
discoverer, Rayleigh waves have a longitudinal and a 
vertical shear component that couple with a medium 
in contact with the device’s surface. Rayleigh waves 
are also of interest to geologists since these surface 
waves are excited by earthquakes.
A SAW device, as illustrated in Figure 8.20, com-
prises a thick ST-cut quartz plate and two interdigi-
tal metal transducers (IDTs).* In a typical “delay 
line” configuration, input and output IDTs gener-
ate or receive Rayleigh waves on the same side of a 
piezoelectric substrate. It was White and Voltmer40 
* An interdigital transducer (IDT), or interdigitated transducer, is 
a device which consists of two interlocking comb-shaped metallic 
coatings.
Quartz crystal microbalance unit
FIGURE 8.18 Quartz crystal microbalance.
FBAR
Electrode
Air
Substrate
(a)
(b)
Piezo
film
(Film bulk acoustic resonator)
Substrate
Backside
etch
Electrode
Piezo
film
FIGURE 8.19 Two methods to make film bulk acoustic 
resonators (FBARS). The piezo film is typically aluminum 
nitride (AlN).

[Page 409]
Actuators   409
who pioneered the marriage of piezoelectricity with 
microelectronics through the demonstration that 
photolithographic techniques could be employed 
to deposit IDTs on piezoelectric substrates to excite 
Rayleigh waves. Rayleigh waves have a velocity that 
is ~5 orders of magnitude less than the correspond-
ing electromagnetic wave, making Rayleigh surface 
waves among the slowest to propagate in solids. The 
wave amplitudes are typically ~10 Å, and the wave-
lengths range from 1 to 100 µm. The frequency of a 
SAW device is determined by the “finger” spacing of 
the IDTs ranging from 30 to 500 MHz (so they can 
be more than ten times faster than a QCM).
The surface particles in a Rayleigh wave move 
elliptically, resulting in a wave consisting of both 
shear and compressional components. The latter 
provokes an important attenuation effect in liq-
uids that prevents the application of SAW devices 
in such media. An exception to this loss of sound 
energy occurs for devices using waves that propagate 
at a velocity lower than the sound velocity in the 
liquid. Regardless of the displacement components, 
such modes do not radiate coherently and are thus 
relatively undamped by liquids [see next section, on 
flexural plate wave (FPW) devices]. 
Flexural Plate Waves
A final important category of surface-launched acous-
tic wave sensors is those composed of very thin plate 
devices, where the thickness of a piezoelectric sub-
strate is reduced to a dimension on the order of the 
acoustic wavelength itself. These devices use a thin 
piezoelectric substrate, or plate, as an acoustic wave-
guide that confines the acoustic energy between the 
upper and lower surfaces of the plate. The devices 
that generate such waves are termed FPW devices, 
as illustrated in Figure 8.21, and the waves they 
generate are called Lamb waves. Although surface-
excited, the generated Lamb waves travel through 
the bulk of the piezoelectric membrane, and since 
both surfaces undergo displacement, detection may 
occur on either side. This is a very important advan-
tage, as one side may feature the IDTs that must be 
isolated from, say, conducting liquids or corrosive 
gases, while the other side can be used as a sensing 
surface. Lamb waves generated in a plate of finite 
thickness can be of both symmetric and antisym-
metric modes when referring to the median plane of 
the plate. Since the piezoelectric plate is so thin, the 
operating frequencies of FPW devices are substan-
tially lower than for other surface-launched acoustic 
wave devices (2–7 MHz). As a consequence of the 
minimal thickness of the plate, the wave velocity is 
lower than the compressional velocity of sound in 
liquids. Accordingly, compressional waves are not 
coupled in liquids, resulting in less attenuation of 
acoustic energy. This is a consequence of Snell’s law: 
the acoustic wave is trapped in the plate much as a 
light wave is trapped in an optical waveguide. This 
means that FPWs can even be used in liquids.
A practical FPW device, as shown in Figure 8.21, 
has a design similar to that of a SAW device. The basic 
elements of an FPW device consist of a composite 
plate of low-stress thin substrate material (e.g., 0.8–
4-µm silicon nitride), a thin zinc oxide film (0.3–1.5 
µm) as piezoelectric, and a pair of aluminum IDTs 
on the ZnO layer. IDTs are positioned in a way to 
form a delay-line configuration. A metal ground 
plane (0.2–05 µm thick) is sandwiched between the 
silicon nitride and piezoelectric layer. A chemical 
sensitive film may be deposited on the opposite side 
of the membrane. The IDTs launch and receive the 
plate waves (e.g., the 0th-order antisymmetric Lamb 
waves*) and, together with an amplifier, form a feed-
* Lamb waves are associated with Rayleigh waves on a plate whose 
thickness is smaller than the acoustic wavelength. They can be con-
sidered as two Rayleigh waves propagating on both sides of the thin 
plate. Two kinds of waves can propagate through the plate indepen-
dently, namely the symmetric and the antisymmetric waves. The A0 
wave is the antisymmetric Lamb wave with the lowest phase velocity. 
This makes the wave suitable for liquid sensing because the A0 wave 
does not excite compressional waves in a loading liquid and thus 
reduces scattering energy if its phase velocity is lower than the sound 
velocity of liquid. The A0 mode Lamb wave sensor is also called the 
FPW sensor.
Vin
Surface acoustic
Wave
Vout
Receiving IDT
Transmitting
interdigital transducer (IDT)
Piezoelectric substrate
FIGURE 8.20 Surface-acoustic wave device; see also the 
hygrometer in Figure 8.26.

[Page 410]
410   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
back oscillator whose output frequency may provide 
a measure of the mass per unit area of the mem-
brane, including a chemically sensitive film depos-
ited on it. Summarizing the differences between an 
FPW device and a SAW device: 1) FPW devices oper-
ate at lower frequencies (a few megahertz as opposed 
to hundreds of megahertz for SAW sensors); 2) the 
IDTs are deposited on the opposite side of the FPW 
sensing material, and thus the sensor can be easier 
applied to liquids because the IDT electrodes are 
insulated from the liquid; and 3) the plate thickness 
is much smaller than the acoustic wavelength. FPW 
devices offer high mass sensitivity at much lower 
operating frequency than SAW devices.
Piezoelectric actuators generally produce very 
strong forces and very small motions that can be 
amplified, for example, by making the piezoelec-
tric material part of a bimorph or a stack (Figure 
8.22). Stacked structures attain larger displacements 
but are more difficult to implement in a miniatur-
ized device. Piezo materials operate at high speed 
and return to a neutral position when the power is 
switched off. Alternating currents produce oscilla-
tions in a piezoelectric, and operation at the speci-
men’s fundamental resonant frequency produces 
the largest elongation and at the highest power 
efficiency.
Overview of Piezoelectric Materials
The first extensively used piezoelectric  materials 
were  naturally occurring crystals —quartz and 
Rochelle salt (NaKC4H4O6·4H2O). Quartz has 
great physical and chemical stability but only a 
small  coupling coefficient, k. Applications of quartz 
includes oscillators and resonators (see, for exam-
ple, the quartz angular rate sensor based on a tun-
ing fork in Figure 5.1). Rochelle  salt has a great 
piezoelectric effect, but it is soluble in water and 
has poor temperature characteristics. It has been 
used in various transducers such as phonograph 
pickups.
In synthetic piezoelectrics, ceramics formed by 
many tightly compacted crystallites are most pop-
ular. Many piezoelectric materials, such as barium 
titanate (BaTiO3), lead titanate (PbTiO3), lead zir-
conate titanate (PZT), lead lanthanum zirconate 
titanate (PLZT), lead magnesium niobate (PMN), 
potassium niobate (KNbO3), potassium sodium 
niobate (KxNa1-xNbO3), and potassium tantalate nio-
bate [K(TaxNb1-x) O3], have a perovskite structure, that 
is, a structure of the type ABO3. These ceramics are 
all ferroelectrics. As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 2, 
this absence of a center of symmetry in the crystal 
structure gives rise to spontaneous polarization. The 
crystal structure is cubic above the Curie tempera-
ture and tetragonal as it cools down. To align the 
Top view
Cross-section
Device well: 3 mm × 8 mm × 0.5 mm
Si - 500 μm
Al Fingers
Al - 0.3 μm
ZnO - 2.0 μm
Si3N4 - 2.7 μm
In+
In–
Out+
Out–
Feedback
Ampliﬁer
Frequency counter
4.491777 MHz
FIGURE 8.21 Construction and operation of a flexural pate wave device. (Courtesy of Dr. Dick White, University of 
California, Berkeley.)
Piezo. mat.
+
–
+
–
Piezo. mat.
Stacked design
F
U
∆L = d33· n · U
∆L
L
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.22 Piezoelectric stack actuator (a) and piezo-
electric bimorph actuator (b).

[Page 411]
Actuators   411
dipoles in the compacted monocrystals in the same 
direction (i.e., to polarize or pole them), they are 
subjected to a strong electric field during their fab-
rication process. Above the Curie point, the dipole 
directions in ferroelectric materials have random 
orientations. To align the dipoles, fields of 10 kVcm–1 
are common at temperatures slightly above the 
Curie temperature. The ceramic is then cooled while 
maintaining the field. When the field is removed, the 
crystallites cannot reorder in random form because 
of the mechanical stresses accumulated, resulting in 
a permanent electric polarization.
Barium titanate was the first material to be devel-
oped as a piezoceramic (see also Volume I, Figure 
2.10, where the use of this material as a pyroelec-
tric was highlighted). It was discovered indepen-
dently, in the United States (Waigner and Salomon, 
1942), the Soviet Union (Wul and Goldman, 1945), 
and Japan (Miyake and Ueda, 1946). Applications 
include detection of mechanical vibration, construc-
tion of actuators, and generation of acoustic and 
ultrasonic vibrations. 
PZT is a solid solution of PbTiO3 (tetragonal, with 
six poling directions) and PbZrO3 (rhombohedral, 
with eight poling directions). This piezoceramic 
comes in various compositions such as PZT-4, PZT-5, 
PZT-5A, and PZT-5H. It was discovered in 1955 by 
Takagi, Shirane, and Sawagachi in Japan and Jaffe in 
the United States. The material has a high Curie tem-
perature and is used in devices such as ceramic fil-
ters and piezoelectric igniters. Important for MEMS, 
PZT can be fashioned in thin film form by RF sput-
tering and rapid thermal annealing and subsequent 
poling. Alternatively, a sol-gel process is used to fab-
ricate these films. One obtains a piezoelectric mate-
rial with a relative dielectric constant of more than 
1000 this way.41 Abe and Reed42 prefer sputtering 
and argue that the sol-gel technique is less attractive 
for MEMS applications, given that a 1-µm-thick film 
would require repeated spin coatings and pyrolysis 
steps. They prepared PZT films by sputtering from a 
composite target and found substrate heating dur-
ing deposition to be crucial to transform the films 
into the perovskite phase during subsequent anneal-
ing. Piezoelectric thin films, such as PZT, zinc oxide 
(ZnO), and aluminum nitride (AlN), have the cost 
advantage over crystalline materials. Among these 
three, the electromechanical coupling effect of PZT 
is 3 to 9 times larger and the dielectric constant 
100 times larger than that of AlN and ZnO, which 
makes PZT potentially the best candidate for thin 
film acoustic sensors. However, the polycrystalline 
structure of PZT and the required heat treatment dur-
ing the coating process complicate the realization. A 
problem with all these polycrystalline materials in 
general relates to their temperature sensitivity and 
aging (loss of piezo properties) when approaching 
the Curie temperature.
Polymers such as polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), 
lacking central symmetry, also display piezoelec-
tric properties. This piezopolymer is also pyroelec-
tric, capable of converting changes in temperature 
to electrical output (see below). Compared with 
quartz and ceramics, piezofilm is obviously more 
pliant and lighter in weight. In addition, it is rugged, 
quite inert, and low cost. This engineering material 
could provide a sensing solution for vibration sen-
sors, acceleration and shock sensors, passive infra-
red (IR) sensors, solid state switches, and acoustic 
and ultrasonic sensors. It should be noted that the 
peak reversible stress and strain developed by PVDF 
approximate 3 MPa and 0.1%, respectively. The lat-
ter values are rather small, and as for piezoelectric 
ceramics and magnetostrictive materials (see below), 
mechanical amplifiers are required to produce the 
larger displacements needed for many applications. 
A 200-fold mechanical amplification is required to 
make PVDF’s peak strain similar to that of mam-
malian muscle.43 Table 8.644,45 summarizes some of 
the physical properties making PVDF an interesting 
sensor material.
AlN is a wide-bandgap semiconductor and 
an excellent candidate for the integration of 
acoustic wave devices on chips with silicon-based 
electronics. AlN is a stiff and light material that 
exhibits excellent piezoelectric properties, including 
an electromechanical coupling coefficient of 0.088 
and a high in-plane acoustic velocity of ~5700 m/s. 
As a piezoelectric ceramic, aluminum nitride is 
compatible with standard silicon MEMS processing 
and has found widespread use in FBARs (see Figure 
8.19) and SAW devices (Figure 8.20) AlN may also 
prove to be useful for the integration of mechanical 
devices and in the field of packaging of bio-MEMS 

[Page 412]
412   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
devices because of its superior thermal conductivity 
130–140 (W/mK, room temperature to 100ºC) 
and nontoxicity. The material is often grown by 
DC magnetron sputtering or by LPCVD on a (001) 
sapphire substrate (heated to 300–400°C) and can 
also be epitaxially grown on <111> silicon. Even 
atomic layer deposition (ALD) has been used to 
deposit AlN.
The last piezoelectric material we cover here is 
ZnO, a very versatile piezoelectric that has been 
used in cantilever-beam accelerometers, gas sensors, 
FPW  devices, IR detectors, anemometers, tactile 
sensor arrays, etc. A typical change in length per 
electric field unit (perpendicular to the field E) for 
ZnO equals 5  × 10–10 C/N compared with 100–
200 × 10–10 C/N for PZT-type thin film ceramics. 
Techniques that have been used for zinc-oxide 
thin film deposition include RF and dc sputtering, 
chemical vapor deposition, ion plating, reactive 
magnetron sputtering, and planar magnetron 
sputtering (in Polla and Muller46 and references 
therein). For thin film deposition of ZnO, planar 
magnetron sputtering appears to give the best 
piezoelectric and pyroelectric characteristics; using 
this technique highly oriented ZnO films have been 
deposited on SiO2, polycrystalline silicon, and bare 
silicon substrates. The compatibility of ZnO with 
silicon processing is demonstrated, for example, in 
the commercially available acoustic sensor from 
Honeywell Corporation, shown in Figure 8.27. The 
microphone chip illustrated here incorporates ZnO 
deposited on a silicon substrate, including signal-
conditioning circuitry. Muller47 found the best thin 
film crystallinity at a sputtering power of 200 W 
with a 10 mTorr46 ambient gas mixture consisting 
of an equal mix of oxygen and argon. The distance 
between the substrate and target measures about 4 
cm, with the substrate temperature maintained at 
230°C during deposition. Tjhen et al.48 characterized 
the thin film properties of sputtered ZnO and found 
the electrical properties to be sensitive to substrate 
material, stress, and surface condition.
The considerations in designing sensors with AlN, 
ZnO, or PZT films include the following:
 
1. Value of electromechanical coupling
 
2. Good adhesion to the substrate
 
3. Resistance to environmental effects (e.g., 
humidity, temperature)
 
4. VLSI process compatibility
 
5. Cost effectiveness
To further improve the mechanical properties 
of piezoelectric sensors, piezoelectric composite 
materials are sometimes used. These are heteroge-
neous systems consisting of two or more different 
phases, of which at least one shows piezoelectric 
properties. Hirata et al.,49 for example, used LIGA 
to make arrays of PZT rods with diameters below 
20 µm and an aspect ratio of over 5. The PZT rods 
are embedded in a polymer matrix to make a PZT/
polymer composite. The PZT slurry, average particle 
size 0.4 µm, is injected into a LIGA resist mold (for 
information on slurry casting of piezoceramics see 
Preu et al.50 and Lubitz51). After solidification, the 
resist is removed by plasma etching, and the array of 
TABLE 8.6 Typical Properties of Piezofilm (Uniaxially 
Oriented Film)
Film Thickness (µm)
10–100
Piezoelectric strain constants (pC/N)
d31
d33
28
–35
Young’s modulus (109/m2)
E33
5.4
Poisson ratio
ν21
ν31
ν32
0.25
0.57
0.45
Pyroelectric coefficient (10–6 C/m2K)
–30
Mass density (103 kg/m3)
1.78
Temperature range (°C)
–40 to 145
Breakdown voltage (V/µm)
80
Maximum operating voltage (V/µm)
30
Yield strength (106 N/m2)
45–55
Permittivity (10–12 F/m) at 10kHz
106–113
Capacitance (pF/cm2) at 10 kHz
380
Electromechanical coupling factor, 10 Hz
k31
k32
13%
1.7%
Piezoelectric stress constant (10–3 m/mC/m2)
g31
g33
216
–339
Volume resistivity (Ω ∙ m)
>1013
Sources: AMP. 1993. Piezo film sensors. Valley Forge, PA: AMP;44 
and Nalwa, H. S., ed. 1995. Ferroelectric polymers: 
Chemistry, physics, and applications. New York: Marcel 
Dekker.45

[Page 413]
Actuators   413
ceramic posts is cast in an epoxy resin. Resolution of 
acoustic-imaging transducers, for example, for medi-
cal applications, should gain resolution as the PZT 
rods undergo further miniaturization as a result of 
minimized cross-talk in the array.
Typical piezoelectric materials are compared in 
Table 8.7. For a survey of inorganic ferroelectrics, refer 
to Ferroelectric Transducers and Sensors.35 For a detailed 
review of ferroelectric polymers, refer to Ferroelectric 
Polymers: Chemistry, Physics, and Applications.45
Piezoelectric Applications
Overview
When the characteristics of an acoustic path change, 
a change in acoustic output results. As the acous-
tic wave propagates through or on the surface of a 
piezoelectric material, changes to the characteris-
tics of the propagation path affect the velocity and/
or amplitude of the wave. Those changes in velocity 
can be monitored by measuring the frequency or the 
phase characteristics of the piezoelectric device and 
can then be correlated to the corresponding physi-
cal quantity being measured. In principle, then, all 
acoustic wave devices are sensors in that they are 
sensitive to many different physical parameters. The 
range of phenomena that can be detected by acous-
tic devices can be further expanded dramatically 
by coating the piezoelectric material or a structure 
coupled to it with materials that undergo changes 
in their mass, elasticity, or conductivity upon expo-
sure to some physical or chemical stimulus. These 
sensors then may become pressure, torque, shock, 
and force detectors if under an applied stress the 
dynamics of the propagating medium change. They 
become mass, or gravimetric, sensors when particles 
are allowed to contact the propagation medium, 
changing the stress on it. They are turned into vapor 
sensors when a coating is applied that absorbs only 
specific chemical vapors. These devices work by 
measuring the mass of the absorbed vapor. A heating 
element under the chemical film can also be used 
to desorb chemicals from the device. If the coating 
absorbs specific biological chemicals in liquids, the 
detectors become biosensors.
Bulk ceramic piezoelectric devices, say on the 
basis of PZTs, have been widely used for decades, 
but thin film applications are more recent arrivals. 
Telecommunications constitutes the largest market 
today, accounting for about 3 billion acoustic wave 
filters annually, primarily for mobile cell phones. 
This use involves SAW devices, and lately, FBARs. 
These components are used as bandpass filters. 
Some of the new emerging applications for acoustic 
wave devices include all types of sensors for automo-
tive applications (accelerometers and torque and tire 
pressure sensors), medical applications (chemical 
TABLE 8.7 Comparison of Some Important Piezoelectric Materials
Material 
Piezoelectric Constant d (pC/N)
Dielectric 
Constant
Young’s 
Modulus E 
(GPa)
Curie 
Temperature (°C)
Maximum 
k (Coupling 
Coefficient)
AlN
–0.48 (d15)
–0.58 (d31)
1.55 (d33) 
9.4
E11 = 410 ± 10
E12 = 149 ± 10
E13 = 99 ± 4
E33 = 389 ± 10
E44 = 125 ± 5
Not known 
(>1150 ºC)
Quartz
2.31 (d11)
0.73 (d14)
ε1 = 4.52
ε3 = 4.63
107
550
0.1
PZT (depending 
on 
composition)
80–593 (d33)
–94 to 
–274 (d31)
494–784 
(d15)
ε3 = 425−1900
53
193–490
0.69–0.75
PVDF (Kynar)
23 (d31)
4 (d32)
–35 (d33)
12
3
>MP (150)
0.2
ZnO
–12 (d15)
12 (d33)
(–4.7) (d31)
ε3 = 8.2
123
BaTiO3
78 (d31)
190 (d33)
1,700
Sources: Based on Pallas-Areny, R., and J.G. Webster. 1991. Sensors and signal conditioning. New York: Wiley;34 Khazan, A.D. 1994. Transducers 
and their elements. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PTR Prentice Hall;36 and Flynn, A.M., L.S. Tavrow, S.F. Bart, R.A. Brooks, D.J. Ehrlich, K.R. 
Udayakumar, and L.E. Cross. 1992. Piezoelectric micromotors. J Microelectromech Syst 1:44.41

[Page 414]
414   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
sensors), and industrial and commercial applica-
tions (vapor, humidity, temperature, and mass sen-
sors). Some of these sensors are capable of being 
passively and wirelessly interrogated (no sensor 
power source required). The use of piezoelectrics in 
actuators is also a growth area and includes micro-
motors, ignitors, bimorphs, impact printer heads, 
speakers, microphones, precision positioning stages, 
microscale surgical tools,52 pumps, inchworm step-
ping motors, and tip-positioning stages for scanning 
tunneling microscope systems.
The small strains, usually less than 0.1%, and 
high stresses (e.g., 35 MPa) generated by piezoelec-
tric devices have spawned a diverse range of actua-
tor applications, as noted above (see also Figure 8.23 
below; see Figure 1.11 for a micropiezopump from 
Animas-Debiotech’s). Bulk piezoelectric transduc-
ers have also been used for a long time in medical 
ultrasound, in both passive and active modes.53 In 
the passive mode, the transducer acts as a sound 
receiver only; it converts mechanical sound energy 
into an electrical signal. In the active mode (the 
converse effect), the transducer is an active sound 
transmitter; electrical energy is transformed into 
mechanical sound energy. Mostly, piezoelectrics are 
used in a pulse echo mode in which the transducers 
are used to simultaneously perform active and pas-
sive functions. A sound wave is propagated into the 
surrounding medium, and a faint echo is received 
after a small time gap due to the acoustic mismatch 
between the interface materials. This principle is 
used for ultrasonic imaging applications. When used 
in the human body with a sound velocity of 1500 
ms–1, the resolution varies from 1 mm to 50 µm for 
the frequency range of 1.5–3 MHz. The maximum 
frequency is dictated by the attenuation in the body, 
that is, 0.5 dB/cm MHz.
In the following we detail four of the applications 
mentioned above, namely, micromotors, pumps, 
 acoustic-based chemical sensors, and acoustic imaging.
Piezoelectric Motors
Piezoelectric actuators, as Flynn et al.41 point out, 
offer significant advantages over both electrostatic 
(see above) and electromagnetic (see below) actua-
tors. With motors, for example, the greater the energy 
density that can be stored in the gap between rotor 
and stator, the greater the potential for converting 
Stator
Advancing direction
of traveling waves
Advancing direction
of rotating body
(A)
(B)
Stator
structure
Carriage
Linear top
electrodes
Titanium/platinum
Nitride membrane
Titanium/platinum
bottom electrode
Gold top electrode
Si
Glass lens
rotor
Stator
structure
Si
PZT
PZT
Piezoelectric
ceramics
Steel body
Rotor
Nitride
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.23 Piezoelectric motors. (A) Schematic of commercially available Panasonic ultrasonic motor: an electrically 
induced wave of mechanical deformation travels through a piezoelectric medium in the stator, moving the rotor body 
along through friction. (B) Thin-film lead zirconate titanate (PZT) motors. (a) Linear motor: the PZT stator is patterned 
onto a silicon membrane. The stator can deflect more because the nitride membrane is thin; titanium and platinum form 
the ground electrode, and the linear gold stripes are the top electrodes. A carriage is deposited on the stator by hand. 
(b) Rotary motor: identical to the linear motor except that the top electrodes are patterned in a circle. (After Flynn, 
A.M., L.S. Tavrow, S.F. Bart, R.A. Brooks, D.J. Ehrlich, K.R. Udayakumar, and L.E. Cross. 1992. Piezoelectric micromotors. 
J Microelectromech Syst 1:44.41)

[Page 415]
Actuators   415
that energy to torque or useful work. In what fol-
lows, we compare the energy density one can store in 
the rotor/stator gap for various motor mechanisms. 
For electrostatic motors, the maximum energy den-
sity storable in the air gap, is determined by Eb, the 
maximum electric field before breakdown (approxi-
mately 3 × 108 Vm–1 for 1-µm gaps). From Chapter 7 
we recall:
 
ʹ
U
E
2
m
r
b
2
= ε ε
 
0
  
(7.36)
where εr = εair represents the permittivity of air 
(almost equal to that of free space). This results in 
an energy density of 4.0 × 105 Jm–3. With a piezo-
electric motor made from ferroelectric material such 
as PZT, the energy density again is determined by 
the maximum electric field before breakdown. Thin 
film PZT can withstand high electric fields, about 
the same as an air gap (Eb = 3 × 108 Vm–1), but the 
dielectric constant is 3 orders of magnitude larger 
(εPZT = 1300 εair) than air:
 
ʹ =
U
E
m
pzt
0
b
 ε
ε
2
2
 
(8.61)
In principle then, the energy density also should be 
3 orders of magnitude larger. In case of magnetic 
motors, the magnetic energy density, U′m, stored in 
an air gap is given by:
 
U′m = B2/2µ0 
(8.62)
where B is the magnitude of the magnetic flux 
density in the gap and µ0 the magnetic permeability 
of free space (see further below Equation 8.80). 
With magnetic actuators, the gap energy density, 
by pushing B into saturation (about 1.5 T), leads to 
950,000 Jm–3. The energy density stored in the rotor/
stator gap for magnetic, electrostatic, piezoelectric, 
and SMA actuation (see below) are compared in 
Table 8.8.
Obviously, piezoelectric ultrasonic motors have 
an energy advantage. Other advantages, summa-
rized from Flynn et al.,41 include the following:
 
◾Low voltages: no air gap is needed; mechani-
cal forces are generated by applying a voltage 
directly across the piezoelectric film. With a 
0.3-µm thin film, only a few volts are required, 
as opposed to hundreds of volts needed in air 
gap electrostatic motors.
 
◾Geardown: motors can be fabricated without 
the need of a gearbox. Electrostatic wobble 
motors are also able to produce an inherent 
gear reduction but do not have the high dielec-
tric advantage.
 
◾No levitation: with electrostatic motors, levita-
tion and flatness are very important in obtain-
ing good sliding motion of the rotor around the 
bearing. The piezoelectric motor depends on 
friction so that no levitation is required, and it 
can be freely sized.
 
◾Axial coupling: electrostatic motors require 
axial symmetry around the bearing. Since 
height is difficult to obtain with most nontra-
ditional micromachining techniques (except 
for LIGA and pseudo-LIGA methods), a limited 
area is available for energy transduction. With 
the piezoelectric traveling-wave motors, linear 
or rotary motors can be built. As the stator is 
flat, with the rotor sitting on top of it, planar 
technologies are very capable of creating extra 
area to couple power out.
 
◾Rotor material: the rotor can be of any mate-
rial. A very important factor is that the con-
ductivity of fluids being pumped with such 
motors does not affect the device, whereas an 
TABLE 8.8 Comparing Energy Densities for Magnetic, Shape Memory Alloy, Electrostatic, and 
Piezoelectric Actuation
Principle
Maximum Work Energy Density
Equation
Special Drive Condition
Magnetic
9.5 ×105 Jm–3
½ B2/µ0
1.5 T
Shape memory alloy
10.4 ×106 Jm–3 (from stress-strain isotherms)
1.4 W mm–3
Electrostatic
4 × 105 Jm–3
½ ε0εairEb2
3 × 108 Vm–1,1-µm gap in air
Piezoelectric
5.2 × 107 Jm–3
½ ε0εPZTEb2
3 × 108 Vm–1,1-µm-thick lead 
zirconate titanate film

[Page 416]
416   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
electrostatic motor would be shunted by a con-
ductive liquid.
 
◾Holding torque: because they are based  on 
friction, piezoelectric ultrasonic motors can 
maintain holding torque even in the absence of 
applied power.
A schematic of a commercially available piezoelec-
tric motor from Panasonic, which uses an ultrasonic 
traveling wave, is shown in Figure 8.23A. Two bulk 
ceramic PZT layers, each segmented with alternat-
ing poled regions, are placed on top of one another. 
For a given polarity of the applied bias, one segment 
contracts and the neighboring segment expands. 
With the two ceramic pieces put on top of each other 
with their segmented areas out of phase, any point 
on the stator then moves with the rotor being pulled 
along the stator surface through frictional coupling.
Thin film PZT linear and rotary motors by Flynn 
et al.41 and Udayakumar et al.54 are illustrated in 
Figure 8.23B. The stators in both cases are micro-
fabricated using lithography techniques. Carriages 
and rotors may be made out of any type of material 
(in the rotational case, a glass lens was used for a 
rotor). The work demonstrates that, for a 5-V excita-
tion, 1.6 × 10–12 N/m/V2 normalized torque could 
be achieved, as opposed to 1.4 × 10–15 N/m/V2 for 
electrostatic motors operating at 100 V.
The piezoelectric effect scales down with the bulk 
of the material; therefore, miniaturization oppor-
tunities are limited, and hybrid-type microactua-
tors, where larger pieces of piezoelectric material 
are glued onto a substrate, are sometimes more rea-
sonable. This has been the approach followed, for 
example, in the fabrication of piezoelectric micro-
pumps (see below and Figure 1.11),55,56 linear step-
per motor,57 and microvalves.58
Piezoelectric Pumping 
In a tube vibrating with acoustic energy, an axially 
directed, acoustic-streaming force is generated along 
the inner surface.59 This driving force can be gener-
ated along the entire length of a narrow tube to cre-
ate a distributed pump that moves fluids without an 
externally applied pressure. The pump surface area 
and the driving force per unit volume of enclosed 
fluid increase as the tube diameter decreases 
(pumping force F ~ l–1). The axially directed, steady 
state force acting on the fluid is proportional to the 
square of the acoustic-wave amplitude and dimin-
ishes exponentially with distance from the wall. 
This force is sketched in Figure 8.24a. Because the 
force reaches a maximum near the walls of the tube, 
blunt flow is established in the fluid, as shown in 
Figure 8.24b, establishing an attractive technology 
to choose for miniaturization.
Unique properties of acoustic streaming pumps 
include the ability to pump without directly contact-
ing the fluid so that a wide variety of liquids and 
gases may be pumped, and a simple compact 
struc ture with zero internal dead-volume. Tens 
of individual acoustic pumps could be operated 
in coordination to make an active network of 
interconnecting channels. One implementation  of 
a  piezopump is based on a flexural plate wave 
(FPW) delay line (see also Figure 8.21). An FPW 
device consists of a thin (~1 µm thick) membrane 
supported on all sides by a silicon chip. The 
membrane is coated with a piezoelectric film (say, 
ZnO) and aluminum interdigital transducers (IDTs). 
An RF voltage is applied to one IDT, producing 
mechanical stress in the piezoelectric layer, which 
generates flexural acoustic waves in the membrane 
(see Figure 8.25). The first IDT thus provides the 
electric field necessary to displace the substrate 
and form an acoustic wave. This wave propagates 
F
(a)
(b)
Acoustic
transducer
lining pipe
v
FIGURE 8.24 Acoustic streaming in a fluid inside a pipe. 
(a) Streaming force generated by an axially directed, 
traveling acoustic wave that grazes the inside walls of the 
tube. (b) The resulting steady state velocity distribution 
(blunt flow).

[Page 417]
Actuators   417
through the substrate, where it is converted back to 
an electric field at the second IDT. Magnified, these 
waves look like the ripples in a flag waving in the 
breeze, as sketched in the inset of Figure 8.25. This 
wave motion induces acoustic streaming in the fluid 
next to the membrane. Wave propagation and fluid 
velocity both operate from left to right as shown in 
the figure. The structure generates large acoustic-wave 
amplitudes and is particularly effective for producing 
streaming; it has been proven to move air at speeds 
of 30 mm/s and water at 0.3 mm/s with only 5 V 
of RF drive.60,61 Moroney et al. both translated and 
rotated small polysilicon blocks (2  µm thick and 
50 µm square to 250 by 500 µm) using traveling 
ultrasonic flexural waves.60 Acoustic streaming has 
also been established with the related SAW delay 
line.62 As shown in Figure 8.20, a SAW device is 
fabricated by depositing interdigitated electrodes 
on the surface of a piezoelectric (typically LiNbO3, 
LiTaO3, and more recently also PZT thin films). An 
elastic wave generated at the input IDT travels along 
the surface and is detected by the output IDT. Besides 
their use for delay lines and filters in mobile phones, 
television and microwave communications, SAW 
devices have been used for many chemical sensor 
applications (see next) and in streaming experiments 
as discussed here.63 Miyazaki et al., using a thin 
metal pipe flattened and bonded to a piezoelectric 
plate, produced a head pressure of about 10 mmH2O 
and a flow rate of 0.02 cm3/s at 40 V, peak to peak, 
applied to the piezoelectric ceramic plate.62 
Acoustic Sensing of Mass
Introduction
In this section we say a few words about chemical and 
biological sensing by weighing with acoustic devices. 
Loading it directly onto a piezoelectric material can 
sense the mass of an analyte; alternatively, a thin 
layer of piezoelectric material might drive another 
resonator structure on which the mass accumulates 
as in microcantilever beams and resonator-comb 
drives. The main difficulty with mass sensors is 
achieving selectivity. In these applications, the 
adsorption of chemicals of interest is usually 
accomplished through polymer layers as sensitive 
coatings. One approach to improve selectivity 
further is to fabricate an array of sensors, each 
having a different partially selective film and using a 
pattern recognition algorithm to identify the species 
present (see artificial nose in Chapter 10). Another 
approach is to couple a front end to the sensor, such 
as a gas chromatograph, which separates the species 
and enables identification based on time of arrival 
at the sensor. These devices typically offer a signal-
to-noise (S/N) ratio on the order of 100, with limits 
of detection (LOD) around 10 ppm. Mass sensitive 
piezotransducers used for chemical sensing are 
categorized by operating principle as bulk quartz 
resonators (BAWs), FBARs, SAW devices, FPW 
devices, cantilever beam resonators (see Example 
8.1), and comb drive resonators.
Silicon nitride (0.8 - 4 µm)
Metal ground plane (0.2 - 0.5 µm)
Piezoelectric zinc oxide (0.3 - 1.5 µm)
RF drive
voltage
Interdigital
transducers
Direction of wave
propagation and
fluid movement
Fluid (gas or liquid)
Inset
Aluminum interdigital
transducer (0.2 - 0.5 µm)
Si substrate
FIGURE 8.25 Micromachined flexural plate wave pump. The RF drive voltage applied to the piezoelectric interdigital 
transducers induces the flexural wave motion shown in the inset. Fluid motion is induced near the surface by acoustic 
stress. (Courtesy of Dr. R. White, University of California, Berkeley.)

[Page 418]
418   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
As we saw above, all acoustic sensors will 
function well in gaseous or vacuum environments, 
but only a subset operates efficiently in contact with 
liquids. The shear horizontal wave does not radiate 
appreciable energy into liquids, allowing liquid 
operation without excessive damping.
Mass-Sensing BAW Devices
The mass sensitivity of a quartz crystal microbal -
ance (QCM) or a BAW device, as derived by 
Sauerbrey64 in 1959, is given by:
 
Δ
Δ
Δ
f
f
A
m
Cf
A
m
0
2
q
q
0
2
= −2
ν ρ
= −
 
(8.63)
with:
 
C 
q
q
= ν ρ
  2
where ∆f  =  frequency shift due to the added mass 
in hertz
C = a constant
f0 =  fundamental frequency of the oscillator 
in Hz
Δm/A = surface mass loading in kg/m2
νq = shear wave velocity in quartz (= 3340 ms–1)
ρq = density of quartz crystal (= 2648 kgm–3)
Assumptions in the derivation of this equation are 
that the sensor film is thin and rigidly coupled to 
the resonator surface, the density and acoustic prop-
erties of the film are identical to that of the quartz 
resonator (for very thin coatings, the influence of the 
coating layer on the acoustic properties is assumed 
to be negligible), the film is uniform and evenly 
coated onto the mass-sensitive electrode surface, 
no mechanical stress is applied to the crystal by the 
film, and no interfacial slip occurs at the quartz/film 
boundary. The equation does not apply to non-New-
tonian fluids, viscoelastic films, thick films, and liq-
uid environment. In essence, this treats any added 
layer on the device as being composed of quartz; 
that is, the new film is considered as extending the 
acoustic wavelength of the device. The equation pre-
dicts that the sensitivity of the BAW sensor is pro-
portional to the square of the natural frequency. 
In practice, though, the natural frequency is lim-
ited since it cannot increase without decreasing the 
thickness of the crystal. A practical lower thickness 
of about 150 µm imposes a frequency upper limit of 
approximately 10 MHz. This frequency determines 
the maximum sensitivity, which based on this equa-
tion is calculated to be 0.23 kHz/µg.
In order to compare the various gravimetric sens-
ing devices reviewed here, it is convenient to define 
the mass sensitivity of a sensor as follows:
 
S
lim f
f
m
f
df
dm
m
m 
   
   
     
 
=
=
→0
1
1
 
(8.64)
where Δm and dm are normalized to the active 
sensor area of the device. The sensitivity is thus 
the fractional change of the resonant frequency of 
the structure with addition of mass to the sensor. 
Another important characterization is the sensors’s 
minimum detection limits. If the limit of mass reso-
lution is defined as a mass sensitivity resulting in a 
frequency shift three times larger than the oscilla-
tor fluctuation (which is say 0.1 Hz), the minimum 
detectable mass density (MDMD) may be derived by 
rearranging Equation 8.64 as follows:
 
m
S
f
f
min
m
=
1
min  
(8.65)
where ∆mmin and ∆fmin (say 0.3 Hz) are the MDMD 
and minimum detectable frequency change, respec-
tively.
Based on Equation 8.64, for a thickness shear 
mode (TSM) device (a QCM), the theoretical sensi-
tivity, Sm, varies as 1/ρqd, where d is the device thick-
ness. In the case of a 1-cm by 1-cm device operating 
at 6 MHz and with a typical thickness (d), an MDMD 
of 5 ng/cm2 is calculated (Equation 8.65). This result 
is shown in Table 8.9.
Thin-film bulk acoustic resonators combine very 
high frequencies (GHz) with very thin deposited 
piezoelectrics (~1 µm or less). White and coworkers 
made an aerosol monitor using an FBAR device (see 
Figure 8.19) and calculated a theoretical mass limit 
of detection of 0.001 ng for it.65 An FBAR is not only 
much more sensitive than a QCM, it is also signifi-
cantly smaller.
Mass-Sensing SAW Devices
In the previous section, we saw that thinner BAW 
devices operate at higher frequencies and increase 
the mass sensitivity. However, thinning down 

[Page 419]
Actuators   419
quartz plates beyond the normal range results in 
fragile devices that are difficult to manufacture 
and to handle. For this reason, SAW devices have 
been investigated for gravimetry, typically operat-
ing at 100 MHz. Chemical vapor sensors based on 
SAW devices were first reported in 1979.67 Most of 
them rely on the mass sensitivity of the detector, 
in conjunction with a chemically selective coating 
that absorbs the vapors of interest and results in an 
increased mass loading of the device. One disadvan-
tage of the SAW devices is that Rayleigh waves are 
surface-normal waves, making them poorly suited 
for liquid sensing. When a SAW sensor is contacted 
by a liquid, the resulting compressional waves cause 
an excessive attenuation of the surface wave.
Often one works with two SAW devices, one of 
which is used as a reference, effectively minimiz-
ing the effects of temperature variations. As we saw 
above, SAWs are sound waves that travel parallel 
to the surface with their displacement amplitude 
decaying into the material so that they are confined 
to within roughly one wavelength of the surface. 
Interdigitated electrodes deposited on the piezoelec-
tric material generate the acoustic waves and receive 
the signal. The pitch of the transducer defines the 
wavelength. SAW detectors, as shown in Figures 
8.20 and 8.26, typically have a higher natural fre-
quency than BAW detectors (30–500 MHz vs. a few 
MHz), and since signal strength is proportional 
to the fundamental frequency squared (Equation 
8.63),  they are more sensitive than quartz crystal 
microbalances. For the detailed derivation of the 
sensitivity Sm and MDMD for a SAW device,  consult 
Ballantine et al.63 They  calculated Sm = –K(σ)/ρλ, 
where λ is the wavelength and K(σ) is a function 
of the Poisson ratio, σ. As reflected in Table 8.9, the 
mass sensitivity of a SAW device might be up to 
50 times higher than that for a QCM, while a SAW 
device is typically somewhat smaller in size.
The superior sensitivity of a SAW device over a 
QCM may also be understood by recognizing that 
the sensitivity of the acoustic mass sensor is propor-
tional to the amount of acoustic energy in the prop-
agation path that is being perturbed. Bulk acoustic 
wave sensors typically disperse the energy from the 
sensing surface through the whole bulk of the mate-
rial all the way to the other surface. This distribution 
of energy minimizes the energy density on the sur-
face, which is where the sensing is done. SAW sen-
sors, conversely, focus their energy on the surface, 
tending to make them more sensitive. However, 
SAW detectors are susceptible to changes in stiffness, 
dielectric constant, and relative permittivity relative 
to the surface mass, which can degrade sensitivity. 
BAW detectors have the principal advantage of negli-
gible influences from conductivity and permittivity.
For both TSM and SAW sensors, to obtain 
higher sensitivity, one must increase the operating 
frequency.
SAW Example Application: Dew 
Point/Humidity Sensor
If a SAW sensor is temperature controlled and 
exposed to the ambient atmosphere, water will 
TABLE 8.9 Gravimetric Sensitivities of Acoustic Sensors
Sensor 
Device 
Description 
Theoretical 
Mass 
Sensitivity, 
Sm (cm2/g) 
Typical Operating 
frequency (MHz) 
Theoretical 
Mass Limit of 
Detection (ng) 
Typical Size 
Thickness shear mode or 
quartz crystal microbalance
AT-cut quartz 
–1/ρd 
6 
5 
1 × 1 cm
Surface acoustic wave
ST-cut quartz 
–K(σ)/ρλ
20–500 
0.1 
2 × 6 mm 
Flexural plate wave
ZnO, SiN, Al 
–1/2ρd 
2–5 
0.002 
1 × 6 mm
Film bulk acoustic resonator
AlN, SiN, Al, Au
–1/ρd 
1000–2000 
0.001 
100 × 100 µm
Microcantilever with mass 
loading distributed evenly 
over the cantilever surface
Sm ~ 1/ρd
5–0.02 
0.02
Micrometer-size (see 
Figure 8.77, where t 
is used for thickness)
Sources: Ballantine, D.S., R.M. White, S.L. Martin, A.J. Ricco, E.T. Zellers, G.C. Frye, and H. Wohltjen. 1997. Acoustic wave sensors: Theory, 
design, and physico-chemical applications. San Diego, CA: Academic Press;63 and Kobrin, P., C. Seabury, A. Harker, and R. O’Toole. 
1999. Thin-film resonant chemical sensor with resonant acoustic isolator. US Patent 5936150.66

[Page 420]
420   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
condense on it at the dew point temperature, making 
it an effective dew point sensor. Current commercial 
instruments for high-precision dew point measure-
ments are based on optical techniques, which have 
cost, contamination, accuracy, sensitivity, and long-
term stability issues. At Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
as part of a Micro Weather Station development 
program, a new microhygrometer operating on 
accurate dew point measuring principles was dem-
onstrated. A schematic illustrating the SAW hygro-
meter is shown in Figure 8.26. This device precisely 
measures the dew point/frost point temperature of 
ambient air. A quartz SAW microsensor detects the 
presence of thin layers of water on its surface as its 
temperature is varied by a miniature thermoelectric 
cooler. A fast digital feedback loop is used to control 
the sensor’s temperature such that the amount of 
water on the sensor is held constant. This tempera-
ture is the dew point or frost point. This approach 
is functionally similar to the conventional chilled 
mirror hygrometers. However, the SAW moisture 
sensor provides much higher sensitivity and faster 
response for small amounts of water than does the 
optical detectors used in conventional hygrometers. 
This advantage, coupled with a high-performance 
digital feedback loop and precise measurements of 
the sensor temperature, enables accurate measure-
ments with a response over an order of magnitude 
faster than conventional airborne hygrometers. 
Mass-Sensing FPW Devices
FPW devices with sorbent polymer films respond to 
vapors in a manner similar to SAW devices coated 
with the same polymer. The FPW vapor sensor, 
however, is slightly smaller (see Table 8.9) and 
offers lower absolute noise levels and hence lower 
vapor detection limits. Earlier we listed other advan-
tages associated with using an FPW or Lamb wave 
device for mass sensing. Lamb waves can propagate 
along a substrate even when immersed in water. 
Even though particle displacement is in the direc-
tion normal to the substrate, the low velocity of the 
acoustic waves preclude them from leaking into the 
environment. The accompanying electronics neces-
sary for Lamb wave device applications also work 
at lower frequencies than those of SAW devices and 
are thus easier to design and cheaper to implement. 
Most importantly, as shown in Table 8.9, the mass 
sensitivity of a Lamb wave sensor is considerably 
greater than that of a SAW or Rayleigh wave sensor. 
The sensitivity calculated by Ballantine et al. for an 
FPW is given as Sm ~ –1/2ρd.63 In an FPW device, 
higher sensitivity is reached by reducing the plate 
thickness, d (this may be made less than a microm-
eter!). Mass sensitivity increases as membranes 
thickness decreases, and frequency decreases at the 
same time. This scaling law is in contrast to SAW 
devices, where mass sensitivity increases as fre-
quency increases.
Acoustic Imaging
There is substantial interest in two-dimensional 
arrays of acoustic transducers for three-dimensional 
acoustic imaging. Such arrays may be used in hand-
held diver’s sonar, medical ultrasound imaging, and 
SAW
oscillator
SAW oscillator
Temp. sensor
• Rayleigh wave conﬁned to surface
• High sensitivity to condensed water
Top
Side
(a)
(b)
Two stage
Termoeletric cooler
FIGURE 8.26 Surface acoustic wave (SAW) hygrometer. (a) schematic of the direct dew point sensor.68 (Courtesy of 
Dr. M. Hoenk, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA.) (b) photograph of SAW hygrometer. The SAW device (long, 
rectangular bar) is mounted next to a platinum temperature sensor (square white package), on top of a miniature 
two-stage thermoelectric cooler. The device size is approximately 1 × 1 cm.

[Page 421]
Actuators   421
nondestructive testing. Bernstein et al.69 microfab-
ricated a 16 × 16 array of PZT pixels (3 µm thick 
and 0.4 × 0.4 mm each) for imaging purposes. The 
PZT pixels were deposited by sol-gel technology 
with polyimide in between the pixels. In a novel 
approach, the ferroelectric film was poled laterally 
(that is, in the plane of the deposited film) so that 
much larger interelectrode distances became pos-
sible. Instead of using metal electrodes on opposite 
sides of the thin PZT film, metal electrodes with a 
30-µm spacing on the top side of the film resulted in 
a 30-fold increase in voltage sensitivity. With a stress 
applied in the same direction as the poling, there 
was a further gain of a factor of 2 due to a higher 
ferroelectric coupling constant in that direction. In 
total, a 30 dB improved sensitivity, compared with 
conventional polarizing across the thickness of the 
PZT film, was measured.69 A commercially avail-
able acoustic sensor from Honeywell Corporation is 
shown in Figure 8.27.70 The microphone chip illus-
trated incorporates ZnO deposited on a silicon sub-
strate. A unique annular electrode design permits the 
parasitic signal in the zinc oxide film to be canceled 
because of temperature variations while doubling 
the output because of pressure (see Figure 8.27b).
Cast or spun-on and poled polymeric films of 
PVDF can also be employed to integrate piezoelec-
trics inexpensively into silicon micromachines. 
Gluing of commercial PVDF film with a urethane 
adhesive also works. Kolesar and Dyson,71 for exam-
ple, realized a two-dimensional electrically multi-
plexed tactile sensor this way. A 40-µm-thick PVDF 
film was glued onto an 8 × 8 array of taxel electrodes 
(400 × 400 µm each) electrically coupled to a set 
of sixty-four MOSFET amplifiers located around the 
periphery of this array. The response of the tactile 
sensor was found to be linear for loads between 
0.008 and 1.35 N. Crude imaging of the applied 
loads also was demonstrated.
Piezoelectricity Summary
Some pros for using piezoelectricity as an actuator 
mechanism are high-energy density/bandwidth and 
lower operating voltages than electrostatics. Some 
cons are fabrication complexity and reproducibility 
of the actuator characteristics, and at the microscale, 
piezoelectrics provide very limited strain/displacement.
In Table 8.10 (see also Figure 8.14) we summarize 
some of the salient points associated with piezoelec-
tric actuators.
Dielectric Induction
In the case of dielectric induction effects on particles 
in liquids and on fluids themselves, one speaks about 
Top electrode
Zinc oxide acoustic sensor
(a)
(b)
MOS
ampliﬁer
Zinc oxide
piezoelectric
film
Bottom electrodes:
Outer electrode
Inner electrode SiO2
Silicon
diaphram
Top
electrode
Inner
electrode
Outer
electrode
Outer
bottom
electrode
Inner
bottom
electrode
Output (signals cancel)
Output (signals add)
Piezoelectric response
Pyroelectric response
Connection to
integrated electronics
Polarization
FIGURE 8.27 Zinc oxide acoustic sensor. (a) Two parallel plate electrodes in Honeywell’s acoustic sensor act as capacitors. 
(b) Voltages due to temperature variations (pyroelectric effect) on zinc oxide film cancel, while those due to pressure 
add, doubling the output. (After Allen, R. 1984. Sensors in silicon. High Technology, September: 43–81.70)

[Page 422]
422   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
dielectrophoresis and EHD, respectively. The word 
dielectrophoresis implies the movement of particles 
through induction, while in electrohydrodynamics the 
emphasis is on the movement of the fluid itself. In 
dielectrophoresis, the induced charges can be attrac-
tive or repulsive with respect to the inducing field, 
depending on the dielectric constants of the particle 
and the medium in which the particle is embedded. 
This principle can be used for sorting, moving, and 
separating small objects such as biological cells.72–74 
The phenomenon is detailed in Volume I, Chapter 
6, on fluidics.
In EHD pumping, fluid forces are generated by 
the interaction of electric fields and charges in the 
fluid. In such pumps electrodes are regularly spaced 
along a microchannel and each electrode is phase 
shifted with respect to the next. In contrast to forces 
generated by mechanical pumping using an impel-
ler or bellows, EHD pumping requires no moving 
parts.75–77 The interaction of electrical fields with 
induced electrical charge in the fluid yields a force 
that then transfers momentum to the fluid.78 The 
EHD effect has also been put to use in mixing of flu-
ids of different conductivities. Choi mixed DI water 
and saline solution in a 10-pL volume this way.79 
Surface charges induced at the interface of the two 
liquid streams react with the applied electric fields to 
generate shear forces leading to rapid mixing of the 
streams passing the electrodes. Reasonable electric 
fields can only be built up with acceptable voltage 
levels within microstructures; therefore, this princi-
ple becomes more and more effective with decreas-
ing dimensions. A requirement for the continued 
existence of free charge is the presence of a spatial 
gradient in the conductivity or permittivity. Free 
charge injected into a region without gradient will 
relax in a time characterized by the relaxation time 
of the charge. One way to accomplish a conductiv-
ity gradient in the bulk of a slightly conductive fluid 
is by imposing a temperature gradient. A limitation 
of EHD is its reduced effectiveness with conductive 
fluids, such as in biological environments.
In an induction motor, localized charges are 
induced in the rotor by the electrostatic field gener-
ated by the stator electrodes. Since a finite relaxation 
time is needed for this excess charge to be diffused, 
a driving torque is generated. An induction motor is 
driven by a traveling wave of voltage and uses charge 
relaxation rather than physically salient poles in a 
variable-capacitance motor as shown in Figure 8.6b.80 
Consequently, the rotor can be a smooth uniform 
plate and may even be a fluid.81 In the case of the 
rotor blades, fabrication involves some rather tricky 
planarization steps. The conductivity of the induc-
tion motor materials, on the other hand, strongly 
affects performance, so fabrication difficulties asso-
ciated with variable-capacitance motors with rotor 
blades are traded for those associated with conduc-
tivity control in induction motors.82
Electrostriction
Electrostriction is a property of all dielectric mate-
rials caused by the presence of randomly aligned 
electrical domains within the material. With an 
electric field applied, the opposite sides of the 
domains become differently charged and attract 
each other, reducing material thickness in the direc-
tion of the applied field (and increasing thickness 
in the orthogonal directions in accordance with the 
Poisson’s ratio. The resulting strain (ratio of defor-
mation to the original dimension) is proportional 
to the square of the polarization. Reversal of the 
electric field does not reverse the direction of the 
deformation. In other words, electrostrictive mate-
rials—basically all dielectrics—develop mechanical 
deformations when subjected to an external electri-
cal field; that is, they show an increase in length 
parallel to the field. Even apparently symmetric 
crystals of nonconducting materials exhibit this 
effect, but it is usually smaller than the piezoelec-
tric effect.83 The phenomenon is attributed to the 
rotation of small electrical domains in the material 
upon exposure to a field. In the absence of the field, 
TABLE 8.10 Salient Features of Piezoelectric Actuators
 1. Stroke: small, 10–2 µm
 2. Speed: >100 kHz (see Figure 8.14)
 3. Force density: low (see Figure 8.14)
 4. Complex to fabricate
 5. Voltage: ~10–100 V
 6. Footprint: 1–10 µm
 7. Maximum energy density, Um (in J/m3): 52 × 106 Jm–3

[Page 423]
Actuators   423
the domains are oriented randomly. The alignment 
of the electrical domains parallel to the electrical 
field results in the development of a deformation 
field in the electrostrictive material. Usually, the 
effect is small, but a few materials, such as certain 
titanates and zirconates, show a large effect, in 
which case they are ferroelectric and exhibit prop-
erties analogous to ferromagnetic materials. In 
both groups of materials, spontaneous polarization 
occurs within small regions or domains. The electric 
dipoles in ferroelectric materials or the elementary 
magnets in ferromagnetic materials are in parallel 
alignment within each domain. Like piezoelectrics, 
electrostrictors are often based on the perovskite 
crystal structure. Two examples of electrostrictive 
materials are barium titanate and lead magnesium 
niobate (PMN).32,33 In the case of PMN, electrostric-
tion gives rise to a mechanical deformation com-
parable to that induced by the piezoelectric effect 
in PZT. Fripp and Hagood compared the relative 
merits of piezoceramics and electrostrictors for 
vibration suppression.83 Uchino made astronomy 
mirrors, the shape of which is continuously adjust-
able by bonding silvered glass to a series of elec-
trostrictive layers that enable one to make minute 
adjustments to the mirror’s shape in response to an 
applied field.84
A ceramic piezoelectrostrictor is used in the 
motor shown in Figure 8.28. This ultrasonic motor 
uses ultrasonic vibration (20 kHz or above) as the 
driving source and comprises a stator (a piezoelec-
trostrictor ceramic glued to a metal as the elastic 
body) and a rotor (the dynamic body). The piezo-
electrostrictor ceramic is glued onto one side of the 
metal stator. The rotor is pressed against the opposite 
stator metal surface. Comb tooth-shaped grooves 
are created on the metal stator surface facing the 
rotor. The rotor is pressed tightly against this comb-
toothed side of the stator metal surface. The ceramic 
element generates ultrasonic vibration when a spe-
cific high-frequency voltage is applied and the piezo-
electric ceramic itself is expanding and contracting. 
The ultrasonic wave, i.e., swelling and falling of the 
stator surface, travels along the surface of the stator 
in a single direction. The ultrasonic vibration that 
travels in this manner is called the progressive wave. 
The comb tooth-shaped grooves on the stator sur-
face are devised to make the amplitude of the elliptic 
motion large and to reduce abrasion. As the progres-
sive wave travels and undulates through the contact, 
an elliptic motion is generated. The locus of the 
elliptic motion points in the opposite direction of 
the progressive wave traveling on the stator surface.
Pyroelectricity
The spontaneous polarization in ferrorelectrics is 
temperature sensitive. This is called the pyroelectric 
effect, which was discovered in tourmaline [(Na,Ca)
(Li,Mg,Al)(Al,Fe,Mn)6 (BO3)3 (Si6O18)(OH4)], the 
so-called Ceylon magnet (class 3m) by Teophrast 
in 314 BC and first recorded in the scientific litera-
ture in 1824 by Brewster.32,85 The word is derived 
from the Greek for “heat electricity” and is the 
development of electric polarization in classes of 
noncentrosymmetric crystals subjected to a tem-
perature change. Electrical polarity in a biological 
material is produced by a change in temperature. 
Pyroelectricity is probably a basic physical property 
of all living organisms. First discovered in 1966 in 
Rotor
Elastic body
Piezoelectric
ceramic
Stator
Bearings
Case
Shaft
(axis)
Pressure
Pressure
Movement of rotor
Rotor (slider)
Csinωt
A
B
Ccosωt
Piezoelectric
ceramic
Stator metal
Elliptic motion
Elliptic motion
Direction
of
progressive wave
FIGURE 8.28 A ceramic piezoelectrostrictor in an ultrasonic motor. (From http://www.shinsei-motor.com/English/index.html.)

[Page 424]
424   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
tendon and bone, it has since been shown to exist 
in most animal and plant tissues and in individual 
cells. Pyroelectricity appears to play a fundamental 
part in the growth processes (morphogenesis) and 
in physiological functions (such as sensory percep-
tion) of organisms. From Volume I, Chapter 2, we 
know that there are twenty-one classes lacking a 
center of symmetry: 1, 2, m, 2mm, 222, 3, 3mm, 
32, 4, –4, 4mm, –42m, 422, 6, –6, 6mm, 62m, 622, 
23, 43m, and 432. Among materials electrically 
polarized because of crystal structure, pyroelectric 
materials are such that they become electrically 
polarized with changes in temperature, and the 
amount of electric charge produced varies accord-
ing to temperature change. The phenomenon is 
present in crystallized dielectrics with one or more 
polar axes of symmetry. In polar crystals, the cen-
troids of positive and negative charges in a unit cell 
do not coincide. As a result, nonzero polarization, 
P, of the crystal occurs. Pyroelectricity is thus only 
possible in crystals lacking a center of symmetry 
and also have a unique polar axis: 1, 2, m, 2mm, 
3, 3mm, 4, 4mm, 6, and 6mm. The polarization, P, 
of the crystal changes with temperature, and this 
is the result of a structure change with tempera-
ture. While all pyroelectric materials are piezoelec-
tric, the opposite is not true; for example, quartz 
is piezoelectric but not pyroelectric. Both zinc 
oxide, with its wurtzite crystal structure, and PZT, 
with a ferroelectric perovskite structure, feature an 
intrinsic dipole moment and show pyroelectricity 
even in thin film form. In Volume I, Figure 2.10, we 
already illustrated the pyroelectric effect in BaTiO3. 
The strongest pyroelectric effect for a thin film is 
measured with the sol-gel processed tetragonal 
PbTiO3.48,86 The pyroelectric constant, p, of these 
materials is defined as the differential change in 
polarization with temperature in the case of uni-
form heating, constant stress (σ), and low electric 
field (E) in the crystal (see also row 1 in Volume I, 
Table 2.1):
 
p 
P
T
E   0
=
∂
∂
σ
=
 
 
,
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
(8.66)
p is expressed in C/cm2 K. Thin films of ZnO, PZT, 
and PbTiO3 all show pyroelectric coefficients simi-
lar to the bulk material: 0.95–1.05 × 10–9 C/cm2 K 
for ZnO, 50–70 × 10–9 for PZT, and 95–125 × 10–9 
for PbTiO3.48,86
In the pyroelectric IR (for 10 µm) sensor configu-
ration shown in Figure 8.29a, two sensing elements 
are connected in electrical opposition and one is 
shielded from the radiation source, to cancel out the 
effect of any drift in ambient temperature. A germa-
nium window is used because it is opaque to visible 
light but transparent at wavelengths near 10 µm. In 
Figure 8.29b, a sensor IR array that was developed 
in the 1980s is shown. Detector elements made of 
lead strontium titanate (PST) or barium strontium 
titanate (BST) were commonly used. These materials 
have Curie temperatures close to room temperature. 
The devices operate at temperatures above the Curie 
level (in the so-called paraelectric phase), and an 
applied electric field induces the pyroelectric effect. 
Laser-assisted chemical etching produces an array 
with a large number of detector pixels. The elements 
on that array are soldered (or “bump bonded”) to a 
silicon multiplexer. Contemporary versions have as 
many as 384 × 288 pixels, and a noise-equivalent 
temperature difference (NETD) is a measure of the 
detector-noise-limited sensitivity of single-band IR 
systems) as low as 75 mK. Micromachined thin-
film elements with even lower NETDs are under 
development.
Single crystals of triglycine sulfate (TSG), LiTaO3, 
and (Sr,Ba)Nb2O6 are widely used for heat-sensing 
applications. Using LiTaO3, Hsieh et al.87 produced 
sensitive, wide-range anemometers. In all ther-
mal anemometers, the goal is to measure heat loss. 
Usually, this is accomplished by measuring the resis-
tance of a temperature-sensitive resistor; but with 
a pyroelectric sensor, heat loss generates a current 
directly. Gas flows of 0.1 mL/min to over 20 L/min 
were detected. It should be remembered that only 
changing temperatures can be detected this way. For 
a crystal maintained at a constant temperature, the 
charges will decay rapidly.
Using a thin (<5 µm), freestanding membrane of 
poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene) [P(VDF/
TrFE)] copolymer in a Si frame, Zavracky et al. made 
a pyroelectric IR detector array.88 The freestanding 
film is provided with top and bottom semitranspar-
ent Cr/Au electrodes, and incident IR light produces 
a voltage between these electrodes. The advantage of 

[Page 425]
Actuators   425
this polymeric pyroelectric is that it is well suited 
for microfabrication, since it can be applied to a 
substrate by spin on from a solvent-based precur-
sor. Complementary metal-oxide-silicon (CMOS) 
devices fabricated in the Si frame can be used 
for amplification and signal processing. To pre-
vent thermal conduction from the sensing film 
to the substrate, which limits sensitivity, the thin 
polymer film may be supported by a thin silicon 
nitride film.
Pyroelectric materials are used in remote control 
devices, night vision, and thermal sensors.
Thermoelectricity*
Introduction
Thermoelectricity covers three separate phenom-
ena: the Seebeck effect, the Peltier effect, and the 
* Thermoelectric actuators could equally well be discussed under ther-
mal actuators.
Thomson effect. The Seebeck phenomenon, discov-
ered by the Estonian-German physicist Seebeck in 
1821, is perhaps the best known, since it is used in 
thermocouples for the measurement of temperature 
differences. The effect is that a voltage is created in 
the presence of a temperature difference between 
two different metals or semiconductors. The mea-
sured voltage is proportional to the temperature dif-
ference, and the proportionality constant is known 
as the Seebeck coefficient, S.
Independently, the French physicist Peltier dis-
covered the reverse effect, i.e., a current flow across 
a junction results into heating or cooling. In the 
absence of a magnetic field, the Seebeck and Peltier 
effects are the two most important thermoelectric 
effects. 
The Thomson effect is the heating or cooling of 
a current-carrying conductor with a temperature 
gradient. Any current-carrying conductor (except 
for a superconductor) with a temperature difference 
between two points either absorbs or emits heat, 
(a)
(b)
Metal
shield
Electronics
container
Optical filter
4.8 × 5.8 mm
FET
Pyroelectric
detectors
Gate resistor
Circuit board
Hybrid focal-plane array
Solder
bump
bonding
Ferroelectric
wafer
Silicon
multiplexer
Rotating
chopper
IR lens
Image
difference
processor
FIGURE 8.29 Single- and multiple-element pyroelectric detectors. (a) In this single-element configuration intended 
to monitor radiation with a wavelength near 10 µm, two lead titanate pyroelectric elements are used. One detector 
 element is exposed to incoming radiation, another shielded under a metal strip. Both crystals are electrically connected 
with opposite polarities, to cancel out the effect of any drift in ambient temperature. (b) A ferroelectric-hybrid focal-
plane device comprises a lens, usually made of germanium to block visible light, and an array of individual ferroelectric 
elements, each of which is bonded by tiny balls of solder to elements from a silicon multiplexer. The incident infrared 
radiation must be periodically blocked, here by a chopper, to ensure that a temperature variation is measured. (From 
http://www.physicstoday.org/vol-58/iss-8/p31.html.)

[Page 426]
426   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
depending on the material. The Thomson effect was 
predicted and experimentally observed by William 
Thomson (Lord Kelvin) in 1851. The Seebeck effect 
constitutes a combination of the Peltier and Thomson 
effects. The Thomson effect is unique among the 
three main thermoelectric phenomena because it 
features the only thermoelectric coefficient directly 
measurable on an individual material. The Peltier 
and Seebeck coefficients can be determined only for 
pairs of materials. The Joule heat generated when 
a voltage difference is applied across a resistor is a 
loss mechanism due to nonidealities; it is related 
to thermoelectricity, but it is not generally called a 
thermoelectric effect. The Peltier-Seebeck and Thomson 
effects are reversible, whereas Joule heating, because 
of the second law of thermodynamics, cannot be 
reversible.
Mechanism behind Thermoelectricity
An applied temperature difference between two dif-
ferent metals or semiconductors causes charge carri-
ers, electrons or holes, to diffuse from the hot side 
to the cold side, similar to the way a classical gas 
expands when heated. The diffusing charges are 
scattered by impurities, imperfections, and lattice 
vibrations (phonons), and since scattering is energy 
dependent, the hot and cold carriers diffuse at dif-
ferent rates. This creates a higher density of carriers 
at one end of the material, and the separation of 
charges creates an electric field. This electric field, 
however, opposes the uneven scattering of carriers, 
and an equilibrium is reached with the net number 
of carriers diffusing in one direction canceled by 
the net number of carriers moving in the opposite 
direction. This means the thermopower of a mate-
rial depends strongly on impurities, imperfections, 
and structural changes (e.g., different dimensionali-
ties, two-dimensional, and one-dimensional), and 
the thermopower of a material is a collection of sev-
eral effects.
The build-up voltage causes a continuous current 
to flow in the conductors if they form a complete 
loop. This way, in a thermocouple (TC), a voltage 
is measured at the leads as the sum of the voltages 
across both legs of the device (see Figure 8.30). 
The thermocouple voltage is of the order of several 
microvolts per degree difference.
The Seebeck coefficient, S (in units of V/K), also 
known as the thermopower or thermoelectric power, 
measures the voltage or electric field induced in 
response to a temperature difference. If the tempera-
ture difference, ΔT, between the two ends of a mate-
rial is small, then the thermopower of a material is 
defined as follows:
 
S
V
T
= 
 
(8.67)
and a thermoelectric voltage ΔV is seen at the termi-
nals. The thermopower S is an important material 
parameter and determines the efficiency of a ther-
moelectric material. A larger induced thermoelectric 
voltage for a given temperature gradient leads to a 
larger thermoelectric efficiency.
For the thermocouple in Figure 8.30, the measured 
electromotive force (EMF) is calculated as follows:
 
V
[S
T)
S
T)]dT
A
B
T
T
1
2
=
−
∫
(
(
 
(8.68)
Reference
junction, T0
Measuring
junction, TM
ΔV
Chromel
Chromel
ΔT
95% Ni, 2% Mn, 2% Al, 1% Si
84.5% Ni, 14.2% Cr, 1.4% Si
Alumel
Termocouple
V
T+ΔT
A
B
A
T
FIGURE 8.30 Thermocouple operation. Dissimilar metal junctions (at A/B and B/A) with the reference junction 
at T0 (say, an ice bath) and the measuring junction at TM, lead to a voltage reading V. (From a talk by Chien-Neng 
Liao, NTHU.)

[Page 427]
Actuators   427
where SA and SB are the Seebeck coefficients of the 
metals A and B, and ΔT = T1 – T2 is the tempera-
ture differential between the two junctions. The 
Seebeck coefficients are nonlinear and depend on 
the conductors’ absolute temperature, material, and 
molecular structure. A thermocouple can be used 
to measure a temperature difference directly, or to 
measure an absolute temperature, by setting one 
end to a known temperature. Several thermocouples 
in series are called a thermopile. The thermocouple 
can also be used to extract energy in applications 
where heat and temperature differences are available 
“for free” (see energy harvesting in Chapter 9). Thin-
film thermocouples have been used, for example, to 
power a watch on the basis of the temperature differ-
ence between its cool front face and the warm skin 
contact. A disadvantage of this approach is the very 
low efficiency of the conversion.
Typically, a metal displays a small thermopower 
because it comes with half-filled bands. In contrast, 
semiconductors can be doped with an excess amount 
of electrons or holes and thus can have larger posi-
tive or negative values of the thermopower depend-
ing on the charge of the excess carriers.
The Peltier effect is illustrated in Figure 8.31. 
When charge carriers flow from one material into 
another in which their average transport energy is 
higher, they absorb thermal energy from the lat-
tice, and this cools the junction between the two 
materials. One can think of this as the electron gas 
expanding in the energy space as they enter the sec-
ond material. The thermoelectric process is revers-
ible, so if the direction of the current is reversed, 
energy is released to the lattice, and there is heating 
at the junction.
The definition of the Peltier coefficient, ΠAB, is 
given as the ratio of heat absorption (JQ) over cur-
rent flow (JE) (see Figure 8.31).
 
ΠAB
Q
E
J
J
=
 
(8.69)
As mentioned above, there is no direct experi-
mental method to determine an absolute Seebeck 
coefficient or absolute Peltier coefficient for an indi-
vidual material. However, in 1854, Thomson found 
two relationships, now called the Thomson or Kelvin 
relationships, relating the three thermoelectric coeffi-
cients. Therefore, only one can be considered unique. 
The absolute temperature, T; the Peltier coefficient, 
Π; and the Seebeck coefficient, S, are related by the 
first Thomson relation:
 
ΠAB = ST 
(8.70)
In turn, S and T are related to the Thomson coeffi-
cient, µ, by the second Thomson relation as follows:
 
μ   
= T dS
dT
 
(8.71)
The efficiency of a conventional thermoelectric 
cooler is controlled by a parameter Z, given by:
 
Z 
S
2
= 
σ
κ
 
(8.72)
where σ and κ are the electrical and total thermal 
conductivities (with both lattice and electrons con-
tributions) of the material, respectively, and S is the 
Seebeck coefficient (in µV/K). More commonly a 
dimensionless figure of merit ZT is defined by multiply-
ing Z with the average temperature T. Larger values 
of ZT indicate a greater thermodynamic efficiency 
and ZT is a convenient figure for comparing the 
A
B
A
Heat
absorption
Heat
generation
Electric current
direction
JE
JQ
JQ
Termoelectric (Peltier) cooler:
Q
p
n
I
I
Metal
Cold
Hot
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.31 In a Peltier device, current flow across a junction of dissimilar metals causes a heat flux, thus cooling one 
side and heating the other. (a) Illustration of the Peltier effect. (b) Picture of a Peltier cooler. (From a talk by Chien-Neng 
Liao, NTHU.)

[Page 428]
428   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
efficiency of devices using different materials. One 
can show that the efficiency for cooling, represented 
by Φ, and that of heating, symbolized by η, both 
increase with an increase of:
 
(    
 
   
1
1
2
1
2
+
=
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
ZT)
S
T
1
2
σ
κ
 
(8.73)
Consequently, requirements for a good thermoelec-
tric (TE) material are a high figure of merit (ZT), 
i.e., a high Seebeck coefficient (S), a high electri-
cal conductivity (σ), and a low thermal conductiv-
ity (κ). For good thermoelectric materials one has 
a ZT of ~1, and this remained the upper limit for 
many years. Thermoelectric compounds include 
bismuth  telluride (Bi2Te3), used for refrigeration, 
bismuth antimony (BiSb), lead telluride (PbTe), and 
silicon germanium (Si1–xGex), used for power gen-
eration. These materials today are used for smaller 
cooling/heating applications; they are not highly 
efficient but are environmentally friendly and very 
reliable. On a larger scale, thermoelectric refrigera-
tion would be very interesting as it involves no toxic 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and no moving parts 
and is quick and reliable. The biggest problem is 
that ZT has to be improved from ~0.9 to 3 or higher 
to become more commercially attractive [ZT needs 
to improve to >1.3 at 300 K for a major impact in 
electronics cooling and to around 2.5 for a revolu-
tionary impact in air conditioning and power from 
waste heat (energy scavenging)]. The pioneering 
work of Hicks and Dresselhaus in 1993 renewed 
interest in thermoelectrics.89 Dresselhaus et al. 
showed that lower- dimensional structures such as 
nanowires based on bismuth, BiSb, Bi2Te3, and SiGe 
nanotechnology could lead to a higher ZT. This 
group demonstrated that electrons in low-dimen-
sional semiconductors such as quantum wells and 
wires exhibit an improved thermoelectric power 
factor. This is due to the fact that electron motion 
perpendicular to the potential barrier is quantized 
creating sharp features in the electronic density of 
states (DOS). The higher density of states at the 
Fermi level increases σ, and the increased phonon 
boundary scattering lowers κ (see also Volume  I, 
Chapter 3 and Chapter 3, this volume). Both  factors 
contribute to make ZT higher. In Figure 8.32, we 
show the thermoelectric figure-of-merit ZT of a Bi 
quantum well and quantum wire as a function of 
size (see also Chapter 3, this volume).
Because of the massive amount of processing 
know-how and the relatively large Seebeck coeffi-
cient, polysilicon is an attractive material for thermo-
couples. The Seebeck coefficient for 0.38-µm-thick 
n-polysilicon films with a sheet resistance of 30 Ω/□ 
is –100 µV/K; for n-polysilicon with a sheet resistance 
of 2600 Ω/□, it is –450 µV/K. For p-polysilicon with 
a 400 Ω/□ sheet resistance, it is 270 µV/K. Silicon 
might also start playing a more and more important 
role in heating and cooling applications. In 2008, a 
team from Caltech and a team from University of 
California, Berkeley, separately reported that they 
were able to increase silicon’s ability to convert heat 
into electric current by as much as 100 times.90,91 
Bulk silicon is only an average material for thermo-
electric conversion, because its thermal conductivity 
is too high; heat travels across it so well that it is dif-
ficult to create the necessary temperature gradient. 
Bulk silicon at room temperature has a ZT of only 
0.01, but the Berkeley team increased that to 0.4, 
and the Caltech team increased it to 0.6. This puts 
silicon nanowires almost on par with bismuth tellu-
ride (see above). Making thermoelectric devices out 
of silicon, which is much more abundant, cheaper, 
and easier to handle than bismuth telluride, could 
help create a large market for these devices.
An excellent 2006 review on nanoscale thermal 
transport and microrefrigerators on a chip is by 
Dr. Ali Shakouri.92
8.0
T = 300 K
n-type
Trigonal direction
6.0
4.0
1D
ZT
2D
2.0
0.0
0
100
200
dw, Å
300
FIGURE 8.32 Thermoelectric figure of merit ZT of bis-
muth quantum well and quantum wire as a function of 
dimension.89

[Page 429]
Actuators   429
Electrets
A permanently charged dielectric, an electret, 
forms an elegant base to improve upon electro-
static actuation by setting up a permanent electric 
field, thereby reducing or eliminating the need 
for a large applied bias. There are many different 
methods to form electrets from high-impedance 
dielectrics, such as the corona, the liquid contact, 
and the electron beam methods.93,94 An electret-
based micromachine may incorporate a capaci-
tor charged because of the presence of the electret 
between the capacitor plates while one of the plates 
is sensitive to an external force (e.g., pressure). 
Micromachined electret microphones have been 
built this way and exhibit an open-circuit sensi-
tivity of about 2.5 mV/µbar at 1 kHz.95 By charg-
ing up SiO2 with a 300-V corona, electrets in these 
subminiature microphones exhibit a charge decay 
time constant amounting to more than 100 years 
of expected operation. Similarly, an electret-based 
pressure sensor with a permanently charged poly-
mer foil (commercially available Teflon FEP) as 
the electret has been manufactured. The foil was 
charged by electron beam exposure. A maximum 
sensitivity of 10mA/A/100 mmHg (i.e., the mea-
sured relative change of drain current), about ten 
times higher than the sensitivity of piezoresistive 
pressure sensors with comparable dimensions (1 × 
2 × 0.3 mm), was determined.
Wolffenbuttel et al.96 point out that an insu-
lating, electret-implanted rotor circumvents  two 
major limitations of electrostatic motors, namely, 
the relatively large voltages and the friction 
between the rotor and the stator during rotation. 
Replacing the polysilicon rotor in a motor as shown 
in Figure  8.6b allows propulsion at smaller drive 
voltages as well as electrostatic levitation and lat-
eral alignment of the rotor, making it virtually 
contactless. Temperature and humidity sensitivity 
constitute two of the biggest drawbacks of employ-
ing electrets in actuators.
Earlier, we pointed out that bone has piezoelec-
tric properties; Mascarenhas shows that bone can 
also be made into an electret,97,98 and Fukada et al.99 
report that plastic electrets applied to bone produce 
alterations in bone growth. 
Electrorheological Fluids
Introduction: Field-Responsive Fluids
Field-responsive fluids refer to colloidal dispersions 
whose rheological properties are modified under 
the influence of an external field, typically elec-
tric or magnetic. Upon application of such fields, 
induced dipoles in the dispersion cause the parti-
cles to form columns that align with the applied 
field. Field-responsive fluids are commonly classi-
fied as electrorheological (ER), magnetorheologi-
cal (MR), and ferrofluids (FF). FF are a variant of 
MR fluids, having as main requirement particle size 
below 20 nm.
The idea of field-responsive fluids dates back to the 
eighteenth century. As early as 1779, Gowan Knight 
attempted to obtain a magnetic fluid by suspend-
ing iron fillings in water but the fillings would settle 
too quickly. In 1896, Duff100 observed a reversible 
0.5% change of viscosity in castor oil and glycerin 
when applying an electric field of 27 KV/cm. In 1947 
Winslow discovered a similar but larger effect when 
dispersing fine dielectric powders in a nonconduct-
ing fluid101 that he called electroviscous.102 Later, this 
term was changed to electrorheological. A year later, 
Rabinow103 published his discovery of a similar 
effect, but applying a magnetic field instead, giving 
birth to magnetorheological fluids. Since then, a con-
siderable amount of research has been conducted on 
the topic. Many patents were filed in the 1950s, but 
the lack of commercial devices and probably the fact 
that most suspensions suffered from particle sedi-
mentation dampened the initial enthusiasm. In the 
1980s, research revived with ER fluids as the main 
focus since they were thought to be closer to com-
mercial applications. This initial hunch proved to be 
wrong and MR fluids became the center of attention 
in the 1990s and eventually led to the application 
of MR fluids in commercial dampers, loudspeak-
ers, and dynamic seals. Although the interest on ER 
fluids is still large, they have not yet been applied 
in commercial devices. The reasons for the switch 
from ER to MR devices are that the MR effect is an 
order of magnitude stronger than that of ER fluids 
and that the required magnetic field levels are easier 
to achieve.

[Page 430]
430   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Given the fact that it is easy to obtain large electric 
and magnetic fields in the microdomain, research 
on adapting ER and MR fluids to MEMS should fol-
low soon.
Here we only discuss electrorheological fluids. 
MR fluids and FF are covered below, under magnetic 
actuators.
Electrorheological Fluids
ER fluids are a class of colloidal dispersions, usually 
dielectric particles in a nonconducting fluid, that 
exhibit large reversible changes in their viscosity or 
flow rate; that is, in their rheological behavior when 
subjected to external electrical fields (typically of 
1–4 KV/mm). These changes in rheological behavior 
are typically manifested by a pseudo-phase change 
from the liquid to a viscous, semisolid, gel-like state 
and result in a dramatic increase in flow resistance 
(the viscosity might increase by several orders of 
magnitude). The total power required is rather 
low, and the response of ER fluids to an electrical 
stimulus is typically in the millisecond range. The 
electrical field induces dipoles in the particulate 
phase, that is, the fine dielectric powder suspended 
in nonconducting fluid, and forges an interaction 
between the individual particles. The induced dipole 
then aligns with the field to minimize dipole-dipole 
interaction energy. Eventually, columnar structures 
like those presented in Figure 8.33 are formed.104,105
Willis Winslow, who discovered and patented101 
the 
electrorheological 
phenomenon 
in 
1947, 
worked with silica gel in mineral oil. More recent 
formulations are based on suspensions of particles of 
polymers or ceramic materials in silicone oil. Typical 
products proposed with these actuators include 
clutches and transmission systems, hydraulic valves, 
and vibration isolation systems such as engine 
mounts and shock absorbers. The bulk conductance 
of the carrier fluid can present a difficulty to 
power usage; true nonconducting fluids work best. 
Problems with separation of fluid and particles due 
to evaporation, sedimentation, centrifugal forces, 
and electrophoresis can lead to device failures. 
Wear due to abrasion from particles can also cause 
device failure. Electrorheological fluids are very 
temperature sensitive, and both boiling and freezing 
are major issues. Furthermore, ER fluids are sensitive 
to impurities since polarization mechanisms might 
be changed by them.
In 2003 a “giant electrorheological effect” was 
reported by Wen et al.,106 who demonstrated an 
ER effect of the order of magnitude of an MR one. 
Electrorheological devices have not yet reached the 
commercial market, while MR fluids are already 
used in some applications (see “Magnetorheological 
Fluids” below).
Magnetic Actuators
Introduction
In the macroworld, electromagnetic (EM) forces 
dominate the development of actuators such as 
conventional motors. On the other hand, large 
electrostatic motors such as the 1889 capacitive 
motor made by Zipernowsky107 are rarities rather 
than commodities. Because of the three-dimensional 
nature of magnets and solenoids, EM systems are 
difficult to micromachine using planar integrated 
No voltage
applied
Voltage
applied
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
- +
+-
- +
+-
- +
+-
- +
+-
+ +
-
+--
+
-
+ +
-
+--
+
-
+ +
-
+--
+
-
+ +
-
+--
+
-
+
-
+ - -
+
-
+ - -
+
-
+ - -
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
- - +
+
+
+
+ +
V
V
++
--
++
--
++
--
++
--
+ + +
-- -
+ + +
-- -
+ + +
-- -
+ ++
-- -
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+ +
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+ ++
-- -
+ ++
-- -
+ + +
-- -
+ + +
-- -
Electrode
Electrode
ER
particle
FIGURE 8.33 The electrorheological phenomenon. (After 
Gandhi, M.V., and B.S. Thompson. 1992. Smart materials 
and structures. London: Chapman & Hall.32)

[Page 431]
Actuators   431
circuit (IC) processes. Electrostatic motors are 
simpler and more compatible with IC fabrication, 
and electrostatics often scale more favorably  into 
the microdomain. These factors explain the cur-
rent preponderance of electrostatic actuators in 
micromachining. We shall learn from a detailed 
comparison of electrostatic versus magnetic actua-
tion that both present advantages and disadvantages 
and that both have severe problems when high-
power output is demanded from the miniaturized 
systems in which they are embedded.
Principle behind Magnetic Actuation
A good starting point to understand magnetic actua-
tors is Ampère’s circuital law, used to calculate the 
magnetic field strength H (in A/m) around a current-
carrying wire (Volume I, Figure 5.25). That law, we 
saw in Volume I, Chapter 5, states that the line inte-
gral of an electric current density J running through 
a straight wire generates a magnetic field strength H 
(in A/m) around that wire. The integral of H along 
the circular path C is equal to the current I, which 
in turn can be obtained as the integral of the current 
density J across the cross-section of the wire S:
 
H
l
J
s
⋅
=
⋅
∫
∫
d
d
c
s

 
(Volume I, Equation 5.28)
When applying this to a solenoid inductor as shown 
in Figure 8.34 one obtains the following:
 
H
l
⋅
=
∫
d
NI
c
 
(8.74)
where N is the number of windings in the solenoid. 
The electric inductance L (in H) of the solenoid 
equals NΦ/I (see Volume I, Table 5.1), where Φ is the 
magnetic flux. With Φ = BS = µHS (with µ the mag-
netic permeability and B the magnetic induction 
field) and, using Equation 8.74, we obtain:
 
Φ = μ NI
1 S 
(8.75)
where l is the length of the solenoid, so that for the 
inductance L of the solenoid we get the following:
 
L  
N S
= μ
2
1
 
(8.76)
We can now calculate the stored magnetic energy 
(Um) and energy density (U′m) of the solenoid. The 
electromotive force, or VEMF, generated by the coil is 
given by (see also first term on the left in Equation 
8.36):
 
V
L dI
dt
N d
dt
EMF    
   
= −
= −
Φ  
(8.77)
So that for the stored energy:
 
U
V
dq 
L dI
dt dq 
LI
m
EMF
2
=
−
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
∫
∫
(
)
0
1
1
2
 
(8.78)
or:
 
U
N
S
B
N
B S
m =
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
 
(
/ )    
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
μ
μ
μ
 
(8.79)
and for the energy density we divide by the volume 
(V = Sl) to obtain the magnetic energy density, U′m, 
as follows:
 
U′m = B2/2µ 
(8.80)
which, in the case of an air gap, was introduced 
earlier as Equation 8.62, where B is the magnitude 
of the magnetic flux density in the gap and µ0 the 
magnetic permeability of free space. Earlier, we also 
mentioned that for magnetic actuators in air, the gap 
energy density by pushing B into saturation (about 
1.5 T) leads to 950,000 Jm–3. The energy density 
stored in the rotor/stator gap for magnetic, electro-
static, piezoelectric, and SMA actuation (see below) 
was compared in Table 8.8.
By analogy with the electrostatic energy density 
from Equation 8.2:
 
U
E
2
ʹ= 1
2 ε
=
⋅
2
1 D E  
(8.2)
+
then a voltage
opposing that change
is created by the
magnetic ﬁeld
of the coil.
If the current
is increasing
I
L
Inductance
+
−
−
FIGURE 8.34 Solenoid inductor.

[Page 432]
432   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the magnetic energy density can be written out as 
follows:
 
ʹ =
=
U
B
m
2
2
1
2
μ
.
H B  
(8.81)
And by analogy to the electrostatic surface force F, 
given earlier as follows:
 
F   
U
= −
 
(8.3)
we calculate a translational magnetic force, Fm, as (see 
Figure 8.35, where translation is in the y direction):
 
F
U
m
m
= −
 
(8.82)
with:
 
U
LI
N lSI
m
2
2
2
=
=
 
 
 
1
2
1
2
 
(8.79)
we obtain for a small movement, dy:
 
dU
 N SI
dy) 
 
dy]
m
2
2
0
=
−
 
 [ (
1
2
1
+
 
(8.83)
Or, with µ = µ0(1 + χ), we calculate the following for 
the magnetic restoring force along the y-axis:
 
F
dU
dy
N SI
m
m
2
2
0
=
= −
μ
1
2
χ 
(8.84)
To garner some magnetic actuator scaling insights, 
we rewrite Equation 5.28 of Volume I as follows:
 
B
l
J
s
c
s
d
I 
d
∫
∫
⋅
=
=
⋅
 
 
μ
μ
0
0
 
(8.85)
This equation describes the creation of a magnetic 
field by a current, with S defining the area of the 
surface bounded by C, and J the current density. We 
use this expression for an example calculation of 
scaling of the solenoid shown in Figure 8.36.108 As 
the system becomes smaller, area ds decreases more 
rapidly than dl, and B decreases unless the current 
density J is increased. We refer to the appendix in 
Trimmer109 for a more detailed analysis. His results 
indicate that different assumptions about current 
density and heat transfer lead to different scaling 
laws. When the current density is kept constant 
and the size of the system is decreased, the force 
between two EM wires or coils scales as (l4). In other 
words, a size reduction of 10 means a magnetic force 
reduction of 10,000. Electrostatic force scales as l2, 
and from Chapter 7, on scaling, we remember that 
the lower the coefficient in l the better the scaling 
behavior into the microdomain. So from this vantage 
point, electrostatic actuators scale better than EM 
ones. The scaling results of the interaction between 
a coil and a permanent magnet are somewhat 
better: (l3). To improve the situation further, we can 
increase the current density. The resulting heat, as 
we will see below, is more effectively removed from 
microstructures, thus avoiding overheating and 
improving the scaling. Constant heat flow per unit 
area of the windings results in l3 (l2.5 with a permanent 
magnet). A constant temperature difference between 
windings and environment yields l2 (and also l2 for 
the permanent magnet case). For the last magnetic 
B
dy
l
Fm
µ0
µ
FIGURE 8.35 Magnetic force in a translational motion.
Wire
Path C
FIGURE 8.36 The line integral of B·dl over a closed 
curve C is equal to µ0, the magnetic permeability of 
free space times the current through this loop C. As the 
system becomes smaller, the area decreases more rapidly 
than the length of the dashed line. [After Trimmer, T. 
1990. In Proceedings, Integrated Micro-Motion Systems: 
Micromachining, Control, and Applications (3rd Toyota 
Conference), 1–15. Aichi, Japan.108]

[Page 433]
Actuators   433
case, where the force scales as (l2), the power that 
must be dissipated per unit volume scales as (l–1), 
or, when the scale is decreased by a factor of 10, 10 
times as much power must be dissipated. The use 
of superconductors could eliminate this problem 
(see below).
Examples of Magnetic Actuators
Introduction
The magnetic actuation examples we consider here 
are magnetic levitation for making valves, magnetic 
micromotors, and a bead array counter (BARC).
Levitation Valve 
Friction and wear in miniaturized systems primar-
ily relate to the surface contact between solids, in 
particular in bearing surfaces supporting the load 
of the micromachinery. They scale as l2 and become 
increasingly important in the microdomain (see also 
Chapter 7). The friction in early electrostatic micro-
motors was actually found to be comparable to the 
friction of brake materials on cast iron.110 Levitation 
eliminates wear and friction, two factors affecting 
reliability and control. Levitation is obtained from 
magnetic,111 electrostatic,112,113 and fluidic forces.114 
Here, we consider magnetic levitation for making 
a valve. 
Levitation with magnetic devices, or maglev, can 
be achieved by various methods, such as with per-
manent magnets, electromagnets (including super-
conducting magnets), and diamagnetic bodies. 
Working with permanent magnets leads to better 
scaling behavior than working with electromagnets 
(see above). Wagner et al.115 levitated a small, rare-
earth permanent magnet out of the plane of a sili-
con substrate equipped with a planar coil as shown 
in Figure 8.37b. This moving structure may be used 
to close off a hole in a valve seat, making for a mag-
netically actuated valve. The permanent magnet 
was glued onto a silicon micromachined thin plate 
suspended by a thin silicon spring made from sus-
pending beams parallel to the substrate edge. The 
monolithically integrated seventeen-turn planar coil 
was used to generate a magnetic field force, which 
forces the magnet on its spring suspended platform 
to move vertically (z-direction).116 Using planar IC 
technologies to manufacture the coil ensures an opti-
mum heat flow within the device (see below under 
Thermal Actuators). If µz, the magnetization of the 
permanent magnet, is independent of the magnetic 
E.m. force [mN]
Distance z [mm]
1.0
2.0
(a)
3.0
4.0
coil
Magnet
+
z
0.8
A
A
0.6
0.4
0.2
Coil
Permanent
magnet
Suspending
beams
dBz
Fz
Mz
dz
Silicon
(b)
FIGURE 8.37 Magnetic actuator. (a) Electromagnetic force 
on a magnet. The dot indicates the magnet position in 
the fabricated device. (b) Schematic of a vertical magnetic 
microactuator with integrated planar coil and hybrid-
mounted permanent magnet. [After Benecke, W. 1991. 
Silicon-microactuators: Activation mechanisms and scaling 
problems. In 1991 International Conference on Solid-
State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’91), 46–50. 
San Francisco, CA.116]

[Page 434]
434   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
induction field, B, the vertical force acting on the 
permanent magnet is given by the following:
 
F
dB
dz dV
m z
z
z
,
 
= ∫
μ
 
(8.86)
where Bz represents the vertical component of the 
magnetic field produced by the planar coil. The 
magnetic force is proportional to the volume of 
the magnet. Thin magnetic layers will, in general, 
be  insufficient to generate high forces. Problems 
with  commercially available NdFeB permanent 
magnets include the fact that these magnets, like 
other rare-earth-based magnets, incorporate on their 
side (nonpole) surfaces a magnetically reversed layer 
of about 20 µm thick. This surface demagnetiza-
tion limits the miniaturization of these permanent 
magnets to a few hundred micrometers; the small-
est commercially available size is about 0.3 mm. 
The deflection of the highlighted actuator is given 
by Hooke’s law as follows:
 
z 
F
k
m,z
= 
 
(8.87)
with k symbolizing the spring constant. The mag-
nitude of the magnetic field depends on the current 
density achieved in the windings generating the field, 
and this current in turn is limited by heating of the 
solenoid metal (gold, in this case). Sheet resistance 
of thin-film conductors, electromigration, and ther-
mal and geometric constraints all conspire to reduce 
the achievable magnetic energy density. Wagner et 
al.115,117 assume constant current and very efficient 
power dissipation and derive a magnetic force with 
quadratic scaling and a deflection exhibiting linear 
scaling. To obtain constant current, this group has 
the number of coil turns scaling linearly with the 
cross-section of the coil wire. Quadratic force scal-
ing, also found for electrostatics, lends itself well to 
the microrange. In practice, the magnetic force in the 
example increases rapidly at first and then decreases 
slowly with z, exhibiting a maximum value of 0.68 
mN at a distance of 1.25 mm from the coil plane 
(see Figure 8.37a).116 Increasing the volume of the 
permanent magnet thus works only up to a point, 
as the magnetic field decreases slowly with z. For a 
driving current range between –300 and +300 mA, 
an elevation of the permanent magnet of 143 µm 
is achieved, resulting in a mean slope of 24 µm per 
100 mA. This example indicates that at least for lin-
ear actuators, magnetic actuation can be designed to 
scale as well as electrostatics and that these actua-
tors are not too hard to implement when allowing 
for some final manual assembly. 
Along the same lines, a meso (intermediate) scale, 
electromagnetically actuated, normally closed valve 
was realized using low-temperature cofired ceramic 
(LTCC) tape technology by Gongora-Rubio et al.118 
In this hybrid device, LTCC green tape technology is 
used for the electromagnet [several layers of planar 
silver spirals on alumina (Dupont 951 series)] and 
for the fluid manifold (alumina) fabricated at the 
same time. Anisotropically etched Si is employed for 
the planar rectangular spring (similar to the Benecke 
spring in Figure 8.37b) and a high-energy SmCo for 
the mini-permanent magnet. Using a 900-Gauss 
SmCo (1-mm diameter) magnet, a 200-µm deflec-
tion of the rectangular planar Si spring was obtained. 
The square spiral spring is covered with a polysilox-
ane film; the rectangular spring butts up against a 
polysiloxane valve seat on the ceramic coil stack and 
is lifted of the valve seat when powered up.
Magnetic Micromotors
Electromagnetic (EM) microactuators with glued 
magnets of millimeter dimensions have been used 
for different types of vertical, torsional, and multi-
axial actuation. Here we consider EM micromotors 
and compare them with electrostatic micromotors.
Making micromotors has fascinated the MEMS 
community from day one. To witness, on November 
28, 1960, William McLellan collected $1000 from 
Richard Feynman for having made the first oper-
ating electric motor only 1/64 inch in size.119 The 
handmade motor was a more or less standard, two-
phase, permanent-magnet motor.
Actuators in general, we remarked earlier, often 
do not scale advantageously in the microdomain. 
The torque of both electrostatic and electromagnetic 
motors depends on the shearing stress on the rotor 
integrated over its whole area, and force production 
is proportional to changes in the stored energy in 
the gap between rotor and stator (see Equation 8.82). 
The amount of force that may be generated per unit 

[Page 435]
Actuators   435
substrate area is thus proportional to the height of 
the motor. Large-aspect ratio rotor structures are 
therefore desired for both types of motors (or actuators 
in general for that matter). Torque is a volume effect, 
and small, flat-surfaced micromachined micromotors 
have a only a small force available for actuation. For 
most practical applications, motors with torques 
larger than 10–6 to 10–7 Nm are required,* but, as 
we saw above, the torque generated with a typical 
surface-micromachined electrostatic motor is only in 
the nano-newton-meter or pico-newton-meter range 
(see Figure 8.6b for a typical surface micromachined 
motor). In practice, the performance with respect 
to torque and speed of a traditional miniature 
magnetic motor with a 1-mm diameter to 2-mm-long 
permanent magnetic rotor is incomparably better 
than the surface micromachined motors described 
here and in Volume II, Chapter 7.120
With LIGA (see Volume II, Chapter 10) or a 
combination of LIGA (or pseudo-LIGA) and pre-
cision engineering, large aspect ratio magnetic 
motors can be built that do produce torques that 
are in the 10–6 to 10–7 Nm range. As an example, 
in Figure 8.38 we show one of the best-performing 
micromotors, fabricated using the sacrificial LIGA 
process in combination with traditional precision 
machining. Essentially, a permanent magnetic rotor 
follows a rotating magnetic field in the stator coils. 
Both rotor and stator in this micromotor are made 
from pure nickel. Such a motor with a diameter of 
285 µm operates at speeds slightly above 30,000 
rpm, with a current excitation level of 600 mA. No 
evidence of deterioration was evident even after 
50 million rotations.121 The motor manufacture 
illustrated here shows how LIGA micromachining 
and precision engineering constitute complementary 
techniques for producing individual parts that 
are then assembled afterward. Only components 
with the smallest features are produced by LIGA; 
other parts are produced by traditional precision 
mechanical methods. The cost of producing 
monolithic magnetic LIGA micromotors urges one to 
investigate less expensive LIGA-like technologies or 
* As a reference point, to drive a cylindrical load of several hundred 
microns in diameter and several mm long, the required torque is of 
the order of 10–5 Nm.
hybrid approaches (LIGA combined with traditional 
machining) as more accessible and adequate 
alternatives.
A University of Wisconsin team122 demonstrated a 
series of magnetic LIGA motors, typically consisting 
of a plated nickel rotor that is free to rotate about 
a fixed shaft. Some of the motors made by this 
group can also be run electrostatically. Given their 
dramatically increased torque, these motors are 
again much better than their similar sized surface 
micromachined cousins. Using a pseudo-LIGA 
approach, Ahn et al. made a meander-type induction 
coil involving polyimide and electroplated high-
permeability Ni (81%)-Fe (19%).123 An EM motor 
based on this approach rotated at speeds up to 500 
rpm with applied currents of 300–500 mA and a 
driving voltage of less than 1 V. The torque predicted 
for a stator current of 500 mA was 1.2 µN.
High-aspect-ratio techniques, we pointed out, 
also benefit torques in electrostatic micromotors. 
Wallrabe et al.,124 for example, present design 
rules and tests of electrostatic LIGA micromotors. 
Minimum driving voltages needed were measured 
to be about 60 V and optimized designs are expected 
to deliver torques in the micro-newton-meter range. 
Suppose now that we use the same high-aspect-
ratio machining techniques for both magnetic and 
electric micromotors, which one is then expected 
to be the best? For this we turn our attention again 
to the maximum energy density achievable in the 
stator-rotor gap. In conventional motors using iron, 
magnetic induction is limited to 1.5 T because of 
saturation, producing an energy density of about 
9 × 105 Jm–3. This is already more than twice the 
achievable electrostatic energy in a 1-µm gap (see 
Table 8.8). Moreover, it is important to remember 
that, in the case of electrostatic motors, there is 
little room for improvement, since the electrostatic 
FIGURE 8.38 Large-aspect-ratio magnetic motor. 
(Courtesy of IMM, Germany.)

[Page 436]
436   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
energy density assumed above is close to what is 
achievable in vacuum. In contrast, there is plenty of 
room for improvement in magnetic energy density. 
Thin ferromagnetic films have yielded 2-T fields, 
and substantially higher fields are generated, at 
much larger expense, using superconductors (see 
below).125 For example, using small-bore 10–15-T 
superconducting magnets, the achieved energy 
density of 4–9 × 107 J m–3 is roughly two orders 
of magnitude larger than the highest possible 
electric field density. For now, though, the 10–15-T 
superconducting magnets fall outside the realm of 
micromachining.
The efficiency—the ratio of power used in per-
forming a desired task to the total amount of power 
consumed for a current-driven magnetic motor—
will be worse than for a voltage-driven electrostatic 
device. However, Busch-Vishniac argues, since fric-
tion in small gaps, rather than electrical losses, are 
the major losses in microactuators, mechanical 
losses render nearly all types equally inefficient.125 
Moreover, since the gap in magnetics may be larger, 
friction is actually easier to avoid in magnetic actua-
tors. One could add that a wider separation gap 
would also make the actuator less sensitive to dust 
and humidity.
In addition to the problem of minuscule amounts 
of power being produced by minuscule motors of 
both types, that of heat dissipation in a micromo-
tor below a certain size needs to be solved. Busch-
Vishniac calculated that a generic problem of heat 
dissipation exists if microfabricated microactuators 
continue to shrink in size without a concomitant 
reduction in the amount of power used in the system. 
For instance, a motor dissipating 100 mW should not 
have a rotor smaller than 20 µm, as the temperature 
might rise above 250°C, resulting in thermal break-
down of the metals in the microstructure. Classical 
models for heat convection were used to reach this 
conclusion. A more accurate model would result in a 
reduction of the heat lost by convection as the effec-
tive viscosity in the gap is greater than that predicted 
by the classical model (see section on heat transfer 
in Volume I, Chapter 6). In other words, the results 
generated with the classical model should be viewed 
as a conservative approximation; real microdevices 
might run hotter yet.
The more immediate challenge for both types of 
motors, however, is in making them in batch fash-
ion. MEMS activities in micromachined motors 
today have generated plenty of new insights into 
phenomena such as stiction, friction, and wear of 
various materials but have not yet produced viable, 
batch-produced micromotors that can compete with 
a proven product such as the Panasonic piezoelec-
tric device pictured in Figure 8.23a.
The above analysis seems to put magnetic actuation 
at an advantage over electrostatic actuation and even 
suggests that micromachined actuators are not always 
possible or useful. We compare magnetic and elec-
trostatic actuators in general in a separate section, 
“Comparing Magnetic with Electrostatic Actuation.” 
The Bead Array Counter
In the bead array counter (BARC), we describe the use 
of a magnetic field gradient to levitate and remove 
paramagnetic microbeads that are not specifically 
bound to the surface of an array of giant magnetore-
sistive (GMR) sensors.126 Recent developments in 
thin-film magnetic technology has resulted in films 
that exhibit a large change in resistance in response 
to a magnetic field. This phenomenon is known as 
GMR to distinguish it from conventional anisotro-
pic magnetoresistance (AMR). AMR resistors exhibit 
a change of resistance of <3%, but GMR materials 
achieve a change of as much as 10–20%. GMR films 
have two or more magnetic layers separated by a 
nonmagnetic layer. Because of spin-dependent scat-
tering of the conduction electrons, the resistance is 
maximum when the magnetic moments of the lay-
ers are antiparallel and minimum when they are 
parallel. 
The BARC uses molecular recognition, such as 
DNA hybridization, magnetic microbeads, and 
magnetoresistive sensors (such as giant magne-
toresistive sensors or GMR sensors), and the appli-
cation of a magnetic field to detect and identify 
binding of a molecule with a molecular receptor. 
In one particular embodiment, DNA probes are 
patterned directly above an array of GMR sensors, 
as shown in Figure 8.39. Sample containing com-
plementary DNA hybridizes with the probes on 
the surface. Magnetic or paramagnetic beads are 
labeled with a binding material (e.g., streptavidin), 

[Page 437]
Actuators   437
and they bind to biotinylated sample DNA hybrid-
ized on the BARC chip. Nonspecifically adherent 
microbeads are removed by means of a controlled 
magnetic field—applying the magnet removes 
>95% of these microbeads. A change in the out-
put of the magnetic field sensors indicates the pres-
ence of magnetic particles bound to sensors and 
thereby indicates the presence and concentration 
of target molecules in the sample. The detection of 
the presence of beads requires a uniform magnetic 
field, but removing the beads requires a nonuni-
form large field gradient. The latter is accomplished 
by moving a portion of the electromagnetic core 
closer to the chip with a plunger.
Comparing Magnetic with 
Electrostatic Actuation
The debate about the relative merits of electro-
static versus magnetic actuation, especially for 
driving micromotors, has preoccupied many MEMS 
researchers over the last two decades.119,127 Fujita 
and coworkers, for example, have argued that elec-
trostatic actuation is preferred,128–130 pointing to the 
following attributes of surface micromachined elec-
trostatic actuators:
 
1. Thin insulating layers such as SiO2 or Si3N4 
exhibit breakdown strengths as high as 2 MV/
cm. The power density in this field is 7 × 105 
J/m3; this value is equal to the power density of 
a 1.3-T magnetic field. The contracting pressure 
induced by this field is 1.3 MPa. A voltage of 
about 100 V is sufficient to generate the strong 
fields mentioned.
 
2. The electrostatic force is a surface force exhib-
iting a favorable scaling law. The actuation is 
simple, as it involves only a pair of electrodes 
separated by an insulator.
 
3. The electrostatic actuator is driven by voltage, 
and voltage switching is far easier and faster 
than current switching (as in EM actuators). 
Energy loss through Joule heating is also lower.
 
4. Weight and power consumption are low.
However, earlier, the comparison between electro-
static and magnetic micromotors demonstrated that 
many factors besides scaling need to be considered 
when deciding upon a certain type of actuation prin-
ciple. Whereas in some cases, the magnetic power 
might scale disadvantageously into the microscale, 
the absolute magnetic forces achievable are much 
larger.
While there is some validity, especially in the 
case of micromotors, to the arguments favoring 
magnetic actuators, the criticism of micromachined 
electrostatic actuators is too harsh where linear 
micromachined electrostatic devices such as resona-
tors are concerned. In the latter application, power 
output is of little concern, and these devices have 
found a major application, for example, in the ana-
log devices accelerometer described in Volume II, 
Example 7.1. Similarly, for most optical applications 
such as digital mirror technology from TI (Volume 
II, Example 7.2), the amount of power required to 
deflect a laser beam with a micromachined mirror 
is minimal.
GMR
Sensor
GMR
Sensor
Au
Si3N4
S
PEG
Probe DNA
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
Biotinylated
sample DNA
Streptavidin
Mag.
bead
FIGURE 8.39 Schematic diagram of the bead array 
counter (BARC) chip surface chemistry and hybridization 
assay. Thiolated DNA probes are patterned onto a gold 
layer directly above the giant magnetoresistive (GMR) 
sensors on the BARC chip. Biotinylated sample DNA is 
then added, and it hybridizes with the DNA probes on 
the surface when the complementary sequence is pres-
ent. Unbound sample DNA is washed away. Streptavidin-
coated magnetic beads are injected over the chip surface, 
binding to biotinylated sample DNA hybridized on the 
BARC chip. Beads that are not specifically bound are 
removed by applying a magnetic field. Bound beads are 
detected by the GMR sensors. (Based on Edelstein, R.L., 
C.R. Tamanaha, P.E. Sheenan, M.M. Miller, D.R. Baselt, 
L.J. Whitman, and R.J. Colton. 2000. The BARC biosensor 
applied to the detection of biological warfare agents. 
Biosens Bioelectron 14:805.126)

[Page 438]
438   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
For many years, micromagnetics have found 
major use in Hall chips and thin-film heads for 
magnetic discs (see Figure 1.1d). Besides magnetic 
micromotors, magnetic valves, and BRAC chips, 
described above, micromagnetic efforts continue on 
making denser thin-film magnetic heads;131 high-
performance magnetographic printing heads;132 
electronic switching components;133 different types 
of vertical, torsional, and multiaxial actuators;117 
and contactless magnetic transmission of force to 
ferrofluids (FF) (see “Ferrofluids” below).115 The 
pros of magnetic actuation include high force and 
stroke for  the size of the actuator, the ability to 
attract and repel, multiaxis capability, and the linear 
current response. The most outstanding advantage 
of magnetic actuators is the long range of the force. 
With dimensions above 1 mm and for larger forces, 
actuators based on permanent magnets become 
a good choice (see Table 8.11). The cons might be 
listed as large actuator footprint (approximately a 
centimeter), requirement of external field sources, 
complex microscale manufacturing/assembly pro-
cesses, high-power consumption, and interactions of 
the magnetic field with nearby system components. 
Incorporating microfabrication of a permanent 
magnet into common MEMS fabrication processes 
remains an active field of research (see also 
Figure 8.14).
To conclude this comparison of electromagnetic 
versus electrostatic actuators, we summarize the key 
points in Table 8.12. Our conclusion regarding the 
status of microactuators is that electrostatics is useful 
in dry environments and over limited distances and 
that electromagnetics is still difficult to collapse into 
integrated structures.
Magnetostriction
Introduction
The magnetostrictive effect is the contraction or 
expansion of a material under the influence of a 
magnetic field and the inverse effect of changes in 
magnetization due to a stress in the material. It is 
the magnetic equivalent of electrostriction (see 
above). This bidirectional effect between the mag-
netic and mechanical states of a magnetostrictive or 
piezomagnetic material presents one with another 
transduction capability that can be used for build-
ing actuators and sensors. It was the Scotsman James 
Joule (1818–1889) who, in 1842, found that when 
a nickel rod is magnetized it contracts very slightly 
(the effect is also called the Joule effect). A very early 
use of electrostrictive materials (1861) was for the 
TABLE 8.11 Salient Points of Electromagnetic 
Actuators
 1. Maximum stroke: 10–1 µm
 2. Maximum speed: 10 kHz (see Figure 8.14)
 3. Intermediate force density: 10–2
 4. Complex to fabricate
 6. Large footprint: 1–10 mm
 7. Special drive conditions: 1.5 T
 8. Maximum electrostatic energy density, U′m (in J/m3): 
9.5 × 105 Jm–3
TABLE 8.12 Comparison of Electrostatic versus Magnetic Actuators
Electrostatic
Magnetic
Field energy density
4 × 105 Jm–3(max)
4 × 107 Jm–3 (10 T)
Scaling
(l2)
(l3) (constant current)
Gap contamination sensitivity
Very sensitive to humidity and attracts dust
Fairly insensitive
Integrated circuit compatibility 
Good
Not very good
Range
Short range
Long range
Power efficiency
Very good in the absence of mechanical 
friction
More power consuming even in the 
absence of mechanical friction
Implementation of levitation 
schemes
Possible
Easier implemented because larger gaps 
are possible
Miniaturization
Excellent
Difficult
Complexity
Low
High
Control
Voltage switching control is faster, easier 
to make, and more efficient
Current switching control is less efficient, 
more complex, and less efficient

[Page 439]
Actuators   439
generation of sound and ultrasound, and one of the 
first telephone earpieces was magnetostrictive. The 
magnetostrictive effect is actually familiar to all of 
us in the humming of transformers (expanding and 
contracting of the coils).
How Does Magnetostriction Work?
The magnetostrictive coefficient, ε, is the fractional 
change in length (Δl/l) as the magnetization of the 
material increases from zero to its saturation value 
(Δl/l = ε) (see Figure 8.40). Its value is typically in 
the parts-per-million range (e.g., 40 × 10–6). It can 
be positive or negative in a direction parallel to the 
magnetic field and is independent of the direction 
of that field, indicating a square-law type of relation-
ship, such as:
 
ε   
   
=
=
Δ1
1
0
2
cB  
(8.88)
where ε = static strain
B0 = flux density
c (m4Wb–2) = a material constant
For a small flux density (B << B0), taking the deriv-
ative of Equation 8.88, one derives the basic magne-
tostrictive strain equation:
 
ε = βB 
(8.89)
where β = 2cB0 defines a magnetostrictive strain con-
stant with dimensions of m2Wb–1. As the magnetic 
field, B, increases, the length change saturates and 
increasing the field strength further brings about no 
additional change. As in the case of piezoelectricity, 
the inverse effect exists as well; a changing flux den-
sity results when modulating the stress on a piezom-
agnet. This reverse effect is called the Villari effect.
The magnetostriction phenomenon is attributed 
to the rotations of small magnetic domains in the 
material, randomly orientated in the absence of a 
magnetic field. The orienting of these small domains 
by the imposition of a magnetic field results in the 
development of a strain field (Figure 8.41).
As the intensity of the field increases, more and 
more domains line up with the field until saturation 
is reached. Magnetostrictive actuation, like piezo-
electric actuation, is important when large forces 
must be obtained over small distances. Applications 
for magnetostrictive devices include high-force lin-
ear motors, positioners for adaptive optics, active 
vibration or noise control systems, medical and 
industrial ultrasonics, pumps, and sonar. Both find 
applications as sonar sensors, vibration dampers, 
and tunable-compliance materials.
The Wiedemann effect describes what happens 
when an axial magnetic field is applied to a mag-
netostrictive wire, with a current passing through 
it, i.e., a twisting occurs at the location of the axial 
magnetic field (Figure 8.42). The twisting is caused 
by interaction of the axial magnetic field, from an 
H = 0
H
∆L
∆L
= Fractional change
L
FIGURE 8.40 Magnetostrictive materials: the Joule effect.
H
σ
σ
σ
σ
FIGURE 8.41 Magnetostriction. With a compressive load 
applied to a magnetostrictive material, the domain struc-
ture is oriented perpendicular to the applied force. As a 
magnetic field is introduced, the domain structure rotates, 
producing the maximum possible strain in the material.
Current
Current
Position magnet
(permanent)
Waveguide twist
Ferromagnetic material
FIGURE 8.42 The Wiedemann effect: the twisting due to 
an axial magnetic field applied to a ferromagnetic mate-
rial carrying a current.

[Page 440]
440   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
external permanent magnet, with the magnetic field 
along the wire, due to the current in the wire. The 
inverse effect, that of creation of an axial magnetic 
field by a magnetostrictive material when subjected 
to a torque, is known as the Matteucci effect. Together, 
these effects are used in torque magnetostrictive 
sensors. 
Magnetostrictive Materials
The amount of magnetostriction in base elements 
and simple alloys is small, on the order of 10–6 m/m. 
The magnetostrictive effect is exhibited by the tran-
sitional metals including iron, cobalt, and nickel 
and their alloys. The magnetostrictive coefficients of 
some magnetostrictive materials are shown in Table 
8.13. The highest room temperature magnetostric-
tion of a pure element is that of Co, which saturates 
at 60 microstrains.
“Giant magnetostriction” materials are materials 
in which the magnetostrictive coefficient exceeds 
1000 µm/m (that is about two hundred times larger 
than that of iron). These materials are today’s choice 
for magnetostrictive sensors and actuators. They 
were developed in the 1960s for underwater radar; 
a typical material is Terfenol-D.104 Terfenol-D is a 
commercially available magnetostrictive material 
incorporating the rare-earth elements terbium and 
dysprosium (TbxDy1–xFey, with x between 0.27 and 
0.3 and y between 1.9 and 1.98) (Etrema Company). 
This material offers strains up to 0.002—at liquid 
nitrogen temperatures (–196°C), terbium, dyspro-
sium, and compounds of the two can exhibits strains 
of 0.01. The Terfenol-D effect is often referred to as 
the giant magnetostrictive effect. It works in the oppo-
site sense of iron magnetostriction; the material 
expands rather than contracts. An alloy of iron 
with samarium also displays a giant magnetostric-
tive effect but, like iron, in the shrinking sense (see 
below and Honda et al.134).
Sputter-deposited magnetostrictive films present 
an interesting opportunity for actuation in micro-
machines where contactless, high-frequency opera-
tion is desired. Terbium-iron alloys are typical 
magnetostrictive materials that can be deposited 
by sputtering. Quandt et al., using an RF-sputtered 
TbDyFe film (10 µm thick) on a silicon cantilever 
2 cm long and 50 µm thick, could deflect the silicon 
cantilever by more than 200 µm in an external field 
of only 30 mT.135 The cantilever was operated at a 
frequency of 500 Hz, and no degradation could 
be observed after more than 107 operations. The 
same group is exploring the use of these films for 
valves and pumps. Honda et al. discovered that 
amorphous Tb-Fe films exhibit positive mag-
netostriction, while amorphous Sm-Fe thin films 
exhibit negative magnetostriction (see above), 
and this group built  magnetostrictive bimorph 
cantilevers and traveling machines as illustrated in 
Figure 8.43a and 8.48b.134 The actuation behavior 
of the magnetostrictive bimorph cantilever is as 
follows: a 1-cm-long polyimide beam (thicknesses 
of 7.5, 50, and 125 µm were experimented with) 
is sandwiched between an upper Tb-Fe film and 
a bottom Sm-Fe film, each 1  µm thick. When a 
magnetic field is applied along the cantilever length 
direction, the Tb-Fe film expands and the Sm-Fe film 
contracts, bending the polyimide beam downward. 
With a magnetic field along the width direction, the 
Tb-Fe film contracts and the Sm-Fe film expands, 
deflecting the beam upward. One version of this 
group’s traveling machine, shown in Figure 8.43b, 
consists of a 7.5-µm-thick polyimide film equipped 
with magnetostrictive bimorph actuator layers 
and with two legs inclined so that it travels in one 
direction. With an alternating  magnetic field of 
100 Oe at 50 Hz applied along the machine length 
direction, it vibrates and travels at an average speed 
of 0.5 mm/s in the arrow direction.
A major application of magnetostriction is in 
noncontact torque sensing. An integrated sili-
con micromachined sensor head for torque and 
force measurements was first proposed in 1994 by 
TABLE 8.13 Magnetostrictive Materials with 
Their Magnetostrictive Coefficients
Material
Saturation 
Magnetostriction (µm/m)
Nickel
−28
49Co, 49Fe, 2V
−65
Iron
+5
50Ni, 50Fe
+28
87Fe,13Al
+30
95Ni, 5Fe
−35
Cobalt
−50
CoFe2O4
−250

[Page 441]
Actuators   441
Rombach and Langheinrich.136 It is based on a mag-
netic yoke with an exciting and receiving coil that 
detects the change of permeability of a Co75Si15B10 
ribbon fixed to the shaft surface of an automotive 
vehicle. The Co75Si15B10 is an amorphous metal alloy 
rather than the crystalline alloys discussed so far. 
The most common of these materials is Metglas 
2605SC, an amorphous alloy of iron, with boron, 
silicon, and carbon [for more on these so-called bulk 
metallic glasses (BMGs), see Chapter 5]. These mate-
rials exhibit a smaller magnetostrictive distortion 
at saturation than do the crystalline iron-terbium 
alloys, and generate smaller forces, but they provide 
a larger response for small applied fields and vice 
versa—small mechanical distortions create a larger 
change in magnetic properties. These amorphous 
magnetostrictors are used in sensitive strain gauges 
and in accelerometers as well.105,137
Comparing Magnetostricion 
with Piezoelectrics
The power requirements for giant magnetostriction 
are greater than for piezoelectric materials, but the 
actuation offers a larger displacement, and the ratio 
of mass per unit stress is greater than with a PZT 
actuator.138 Magnetostrictive materials have other 
advantages; they are metal alloys rather than brittle 
ceramics, and they do not exhibit dielectric break-
down under high fields as do piezoelectric and fer-
roelectric materials.105 There are obviously relative 
advantages and disadvantages to the two technolo-
gies; some of these are listed in Table 8.14.
Magnetohydrodynamic Pumping
Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) pumping is widely 
used in nuclear power plant cooling systems and has 
been applied for pumping and sensing of conductive 
gases and liquid metals.139 It has not been exploited 
much in the microdomain.
MHD pumping, like EHD pumping, involves 
no moving parts, has a continuous flow, and is 
compatible with solutions containing biologi-
cal specimens—both phenomena are attractive 
as scales go down. A MEMS MHD pump is sche-
matically illustrated in Figure 8.44. The effect 
is based on the Lorentz force, FL (see Volume I, 
B
10 mm
B // length direction
B
B // width direction
(a)
Polyimide ﬁlm
(7.5 µm)
(b)
13 mm
Tb–Fe (1 µm)
Sm–Fe (1 µm)
Tb–Fe
polyimide
Sm–Fe
δ
δ
Tb–Fe
polyimide
Sm–Fe
Tb–Fe (1 µm)
Sm–Fe (1 µm)
polyimide (7.5, 50, 125 µm)
FIGURE 8.43 Magnetostrictive actuators. (a) Actuation behavior of a magnetostrictive bimorph cantilever. (b) Schematic 
view of traveling machine. [After Honda, T., K.I. Arai, and M. Yamaguchi. 1994. Fabrication of actuators using magneto-
strictive thin films. In IEEE International Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’94), 51–56. Oiso, Japan.134]

[Page 442]
442   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Equation  3.64),  which is the force generated by 
a current- carrying conductor in a magnetic field. 
This magnetic force, in the case of a fluid, can be 
written out as follows:
 
FL = σ EB 
(8.90)
where σ = conductivity of the fluid (Ω–1m–1)
B = permanent magnetic field (Gauss)
E =  electric field applied to the pump (V/m), 
which is E = V/L
Heng et al., using LIGA, microfabricated an MHD-
type micropump. When operating in the DC mode, 
they observed significant bubble generation due to 
electrolysis of the fluid being pumped. The same 
group later worked on an AC-driven nozzle/diffuser 
type MHD to eliminate or reduce bubble forma-
tion.140 In an AC MHD micropump, a sinusoidal AC 
electrical current and a perpendicular sinusoidal AC 
magnetic field pass through the electrolyte solution 
and transverse to a microchannel. The time-averaged 
TABLE 8.14 Comparison of Magnetostrictive and Piezoelectric Materials
Parameter
Magnetostrictive
Piezoelectric
Frequency range (ultrasonic range is 
from 20 to 200 kHz)
<20 kHz
More limited because of size
20–200 kHz
Most versatile
Audible noise
More noise
Less noisy; higher-frequency piezoelectric 
equipment is easier brought under 
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) limits by 
appropriate design and acoustic shielding
Power requirements
Larger 
Lower
Displacement
Larger 
Lower
Transducer reliability
Both are mature, highly reliable, engineered devices
Generator reliability
2-year warranty
1-year warranty
Effect of aging; the electrical activity 
of piezoelectric materials slowly 
degrades as a half-life function from 
the time they are “poled” material 
during manufacture
No depolarization problem
In the case of piezoelectric materials, the 
reduction in activity after 100 days brings 
the activity level to within 1% of the 
ultimate level it will achieve over the next 
17 years of aging
Energy efficiency
<50%: magnetic systems are 
usually less than 50% efficient 
because of the energy lost in 
heating of the coils and the 
effects of magnetic hysteresis
>70%: piezoelectric transducers are 
extremely efficient because of the direct 
conversion of electrical to mechanical 
energy in a single step
Material strengths 
Magnetostrictors are metal alloys 
rather than brittle ceramics, and 
they do not exhibit dielectric 
breakdown under high fields as 
do piezoelectric and ferroelectric 
materials
Brittle ceramics that do exhibit dielectric 
breakdown
+V
+V
Electric ﬁeld
+
+
+
+
+
+
–V
–V
N
B
J
Magnet
Electrode
Voltage
Lorentz force
S
FIGURE 8.44 Schematic of a microelectromechanical system magnetohydrodynamic pump.

[Page 443]
Actuators   443
Lorentz force in this arrangement is given by the fol-
lowing equation:
 
F
IBw
sin tsin
t + 
d t
L
0
2
=
∫
 
 (
)
ω
ω
φ
ω
π
 
(8.91)
where I is the current amplitude and w the width of 
the microchannel. The ability to control the phase 
allows for controlling both the flow speed and the 
flow direction. Such an AC MHD micropump was 
demonstrated by Lemoff et al.141 The same group 
also microfabricated an AC MHD fluidic switch in 
silicon with a switching speed faster than 0.033 s.142 
The switch is made by integrating two AC MHD 
pumps into different arms of a fluidic Y-channel. 
With a 1 M NaCl solution, a flow velocity of a 0.5 to 
0.6 mm/s was registered in a 300-µm-deep, 1-mm-
wide channel.
Magnetorheological Fluids, Ferrofluids, 
and Ferrowaxes
Magnetorheological Fluids
Magnetorheological (MR) fluids are colloidal dis-
persions of mesoscale size (1–10 µm) ferromagnetic 
particles suspended in polar or nonpolar carrier flu-
ids. The particles are typically high-purity iron pow-
ders, but ceramic and alloys are used as well. These 
particles are multidomain and exhibit low levels 
of magnetic coercivity. As expected, the clumping 
of the suspended particles is caused by magnetic 
attraction.
When unperturbed by a magnetic field, MR fluids 
appear rather liquid. Upon applying a magnetic field, 
the viscosity of the fluid increases with the magnetic 
field magnitude in a nonlinear fashion. Upon reach-
ing very high fields, the MR fluid becomes solid-like 
(Figure 8.45). As in the case of ER fluids, MR fluids 
reverse to their original state upon removal of the 
external field. Overall response time of an MR sys-
tem is of the order of milliseconds.143
MR fluids were discovered and patented in 1948 
by Jacob Rabinow,103 who was then with the National 
Bureau of Standards (NBS) [now the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)]. After 
this invention, MR fluids basically disappeared from 
both the academic and industrial scene until the late 
1980s. It is believed that the reason for this decline 
of interest in MR fluids in the early 1950s was that 
sedimentation and agglomeration of the magnetic 
particles were deemed unsolvable. This explains 
why knowledge of MR fluids is not as mature as 
that of ER fluids (see above), where the research 
remained more or less active after their initial dis-
covery. Surprisingly, commercial success came first 
to MR fluids.
The main applications of MR fluids have been 
in the development of active vibration control and 
in the transfer of torque or force systems. In Figure 
8.46, an MR fluid damper used in active building 
FIGURE 8.45 Magnetorheological fluids: (a) No magnetic field. (b) Intermediate magnetic field. (c) High magnetic field.
3-stage piston
Magnetic ﬂux
MR ﬂuid
Termal expansion
accumlator
FIGURE 8.46 Magnetorheological fluid damper. Stroke: 
±8 cm. Maximum input power: <50 watts. Maximum force 
(nominal): 200,000 N.

[Page 444]
444   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
control (earthquakes) is shown. Another excellent 
application of MR fluids is the MagneRide by Delphi 
Corporation. A well-marketed magnetorheological 
suspension system, it was first used by GM in the 
Chevrolet Corvette C5, Cadillac Seville, and STS and 
is now also used in the Ferrari 599, the Audi TT, and 
the Audi R8. For more information, see http://delphi.
com/manufacturers/auto/other/ride/magneride.
A major goal for the future in MR fluids is the more 
complete characterization of their performance 
depending on temperature, time, and shearing stress 
cycles. A hurdle in the path toward commercializa-
tion is the lack of suppliers of high-purity iron pow-
der that makes the cost of MR fluid relatively high, 
even in large volumes.143
Ferrofluids
There are some notable efforts in nanoparticle-based 
MR fluids. Ferrofluids (FF) are a variant of MR fluids 
and are differentiated only by the size of the sus-
pended particles used. In FF, one deals with particles 
smaller than 20 nm in diameter, whereas MR fluids 
are designed with particles in the micrometer size 
range (1–10 µm). The magnetic behavior of nano-
structured materials has been investigated since the 
early days of nanotechnology. Some very significant 
results were first obtained by Herzer and Warlimont 
in 1992,143 and an excellent review of the field by 
Herzer appeared in 1997.144 When a ferromagnetic 
material is magnetized in one direction, it will not 
relax back to zero magnetization when the imposed 
magnetizing field is removed. It must be driven back 
to zero by a field in the opposite direction. If an alter-
nating magnetic field is applied to such material, its 
magnetization will thus trace out a loop called a 
hysteresis loop. It is well known that the microstruc-
ture, especially grain size, determines the hysteresis 
loop of a ferromagnetic material.144 It is found that 
the coercivity, Hc, the intensity of the magnetic field 
needed to reduce the magnetization of a ferromag-
netic material to zero after it has reached saturation, 
increases with decreasing grain size down to val-
ues of about 40 nm for a pure metal such as iron or 
about 700 nm for hard magnets based on rare earth 
metals.144 The reason for the Hc increasing propor-
tional to 1/d is that as particles decrease in size, the 
magnetic domain size coincides more and more with 
the grain size. In this size range, multidomain (M-D) 
materials change to single-domain (S-D) materials. 
In the single-domain region, a change of magnetiza-
tion can be produced only by rotation of the mag-
netization of a single grain or crystallite as a whole, 
which requires strong magnetic fields, depending on 
the shape and anisotropy of the particles. As the size 
of the magnetic particles is further scaled down, a 
transformation from ferromagnetic to superpara-
magnetic behavior occurs and the curve of Hc versus 
grain size d exhibits a peak at ds (see Figure 8.47).144 
At particle size ds, the material behaves as a purely 
single-domain material, and at dp, the transition to a 
superparamagnetic is complete.
Typical particle sizes for the ferrro- to superpara-
magnetic (SP) phase transformation are between 
10 and 20 nm for oxides and 1–3 nm for metals. 
This range corresponds to the band of lines drawn 
through the peak in the Hc-d curve. In the nanoparti-
cle regime, between ds and dp, the coercivity exhibits 
a d6 dependence.144 In the superparamagnetic state of 
the material, the room temperature thermal energy, 
kT, where k is the Boltzmann constant, overcomes 
the magnetostatic energy of the particle (= domain), 
resulting in minimal hysteresis. In this case, even 
when the temperature is below the Curie or Neel 
temperature (and hence the thermal energy is not 
sufficient to overcome the coupling forces between 
neighboring atoms), the thermal energy is sufficient 
to change the direction of magnetization of the 
M–D = Multi-domain
  S–D = Single-domain
    SP  = Super paramagnetic
S–D
SP
Hc
o
dp
ds
M–D
FIGURE 8.47 Coercivity (Hc) versus particle size. (Based on 
Herzer, G. 1997. In Handbook of magnetic materials, ed. 
K.H.J. Bushow, 417. Elsevier Science B.V.144)

[Page 445]
Actuators   445
entire  crystallite. The resulting fluctuations in the 
direction of magnetization cause the magnetic field 
to average to zero at dp. Thus, the material behaves 
in a manner similar to paramagnetism, except that 
instead of each individual atom being indepen-
dently influenced by an external magnetic field, the 
magnetic moment of the entire crystallite tends to 
align with the magnetic field. Superparamagnetic 
particles are attracted to a magnetic field but retain 
no residual magnetism after the field is removed (no 
hysteresis). These superparamagnetic nanoparticles 
feature a high-saturation magnetization, high rela-
tive permeability, low coercivity, high resistivity, and 
low hysteresis loss, and all of this benefits a large 
number of applications,* including in FF.
Superparamagnetic particles can be dispersed in 
a liquid, e.g., oil, without perceptible agglomeration 
if treated properly (see below and colloidal stability 
in Volume I, Chapter 7). Because of the nanometer 
sized particles in FF, sedimentation is prevented by 
Brownian motion, and agglomeration is avoided 
through the use of surfactants or ionic shells that coat 
the particles. If no coating is used, attractive van der 
Waals forces would cause the agglomeration of the 
particles. A typical FF constitutes a stable colloidal 
suspension of single-domain magnetic nanoparticles 
dispersed in a liquid carrier in a volume fraction of 
typically 2–10% (Figure 8.48). As explained above, 
MR fluids exhibit different viscosities depending on 
the strength of the magnetic field applied; FF, on 
the other hand, maintain their viscosity regardless 
of the magnitude of the magnetic field. Where MR 
fluids solidify in strong magnetic fields, FF always 
remain liquid.
In their natural state, with no field applied, FF are 
subjected to three forces: 1) repulsive forces due to 
the implemented coating, 2) attractive van der Waals 
forces, and 3) magnetic dipole-dipole interactions, 
which can be either repulsive or attractive. A 
true  FF maintains equilibrium between the forces 
mentioned even in the presence of strong magnetic 
fields. A stable FF will not conglomerate for several 
years, until eventually the surfactants or the coatings 
* On the other hand, it is also because of superparamagnetism that 
computer hard drive technologies are expected to stop growing once 
they reach a density of 150 gigabits per square inch.
on the particles break down and gradually cause 
the irreversible conglomeration of the particles into 
bigger clusters. At this point, the behavior of the FF 
tends to simulate that of an MR fluid.
Dispersed nanoparticles in FF are typically mag-
netite (Fe3O4) or maghemite (γ-Fe2O3), although 
cobalt, iron, and manganese zinc ferrite ZnxMn1-x 
have been used as well. The fluid carrier might be 
polar (water, in which case the FF are highly biocom-
patible) or nonpolar (hydrocarbons, fluorocarbons). 
Obtaining magnetic nanoparticles itself constitutes 
an important research field, and different methods 
have been attempted, with precipitation being the 
most common one (see Volume I, Chapter 7 and 
Chapter 3, this volume). Current applications of FF 
include positioning systems for multiaxle movement 
(see Figure 8.49), compliant positioning systems, 
dynamic sealing (e.g., on computer hard disks), 
bearings, adaptive gripping devices and dampers, 
and heat dissipation. Suspended superparamagnetic 
particles are also used to tag biomaterials of interest, 
the targeted species can be removed from a matrix 
using a magnetic field, but they do not agglomerate 
(i.e., they stay suspended).
Although perhaps not immediately or obviously 
useful, FF present a striking behavior when sub-
jected to a normal magnetic field of strength above 
a critical value. Such fields induce a normal-field 
instability, causing the FF to instantly protrude from 
the surface in spikes aligned to the field lines, as 
FIGURE 8.48 Ferrofluid fixed with a magnetic field. The 
bottle is filled with ferrofluid and shows the magnetic 
force of the ferrofluid acting on the permanent magnet 
(Institute for Machine Tools and Factory Management, 
IWF, Germany).

[Page 446]
446   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
shown in Figure 8.50. The spikes are characteristic 
of equilibrium of gravitational force, magnetic force, 
and surface tension.
Many excellent videos have been created demon-
strating this interesting behavior. A special mention 
goes to those obtained by Sachiko Kodama (http://
www.kodama.hc.uec.ac.jp/protrudeflow/index.
html), where art and technology are cleverly mixed 
to obtain beautiful FF patterns and behaviors.
Another interesting application along the same 
artistic lines is the creation of fractal droplets on 
a surface by confining a drop of FF between two 
glass slides in a Hele-Shaw cell* with a 0.9–1.4 mm 
gap (see Rinaldi and Zahn145 and http://www.aps.
org/units/dfd). When an FF drop is placed in such 
a cell and is subjected to simultaneous in-plane 
rotating and DC axial uniform magnetic fields and 
the magnitude of the fields increases, different, 
striking patterns are obtained (see Figure 8.51). The 
fluorocarbon-based FF used for the results shown 
here has a saturation magnetization of ≅400 Gauss 
and a low field magnetic susceptibility of χ ≈ 3. The 
FF is surrounded by a 50/50 mixture of isopropyl 
alcohol and deionized water that prevents the FF 
from wetting the glass plates. The rotational field 
strength is up to 100 Gauss rms at frequencies 20–40 
Hz while the dc axial field is varied from 0 to ~250 
Gauss.146
Next we detail an important microfluidic applica-
tion of FF (i.e., valving and pumping) and highlight 
the prospect of ferrowaxes in fluidic platforms.
Hartshorne et al. demonstrated a FF-based valve.147 
In their work, a 600-cP FF was used to implement 
plugs to block fluidic channels. In air, this FF valve 
could hold pressures of up to 12 kPa (1.74 psi). When 
tested in water, water leakage at the FF/channel wall 
interface was observed. By making the channel walls 
hydrophobic, this water leak could be reduced. In 
the latter case, the valve could withstand pressures 
up to 10 kPa (1.45 psi). Besides their low pressure 
rating, FF plugs require the application of a magnetic 
* A Hele-Shaw cell consists of two flat plates that are parallel to each 
other and are separated by a small distance, with at least one of the 
two plates being transparent.
FIGURE 8.50. A normal-field instability caused by a 
magnet placed underneath the ferrofluid. (From Sachiko 
Kodama, http://www.kodama.hc.uec.ac.jp/protrudeflow/
index.html.)
FIGURE 8.51 Fractals on a surface obtained by magnetic 
interaction of a field with a ferrofluid drop enclosed in a 
Hele-Shaw cell.146 (From Prof. Markus Zahn, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.)
Load capacity: F < 10 N (in normal direction)
Accuracy of Positioning: ~ 1 µm
Max. velocity: 0.1 m/sec (uncontrolled); 0.02 m/sec (precise control)
Max. Range: s = 10 mm (limited by the volume of ﬂuid)
Coil current: I < 5 A (for optimized coils and ﬁeld formers)
Technical Data:
FIGURE 8.49 View of a two-axis ferrofluid positioning sys-
tem with two paired coils for each direction (Institute for 
Machine Tools and Factory Management, IWF, Germany).

[Page 447]
Actuators   447
field at all times in order to maintain the plug at the 
desired position.
An elegant approach for pumping with FF was 
introduced by Hatch and coworkers.148 This team 
manipulated two FF plugs in a circular channel 
using a magnet that moves in a circular motion and 
maintains the plugs in place using stationary mag-
nets. Using this scheme, one is able to pump defined 
volumes of liquid, given by the separation between 
the ferroplugs and the radius of the circular channel 
containing both pumping liquid and plugs.
Our team at University of California, Irvine, is 
attempting to use modified FF valves to create an 
inexpensive, normally closed, reusable valve that 
does not consume any power to stay closed. This 
type of valve is essential for all types of microfluidic 
platforms. For example, diagnostic reagents often 
must be stored on a chip or platform for months 
before they actually are used (the shelf-life of a 
diagnostics lab-on-a-chip device must be at least 
six months). Unless one has good, inexpensive 
liquid and vapor barriers/valves, liquids or vapors 
from the different reagent compartments will 
contaminate the system and even mix with each 
other, rendering the platform useless in a matter 
of hours. In principle, a regular pure wax valve fits 
the description: inexpensive, normally closed, and 
a good barrier for both liquids and vapors. Pal and 
colleagues149 implemented pure wax valves, using 
paraffin wax and other waxes with higher melting 
points. Moving the resistance-heated molten wax 
by applying air pressure toggled the valve. Similarly, 
Liu and coworkers150 used paraffin wax in their sin-
gle-use valve. In this case, resistive heaters or Peltier 
elements melted the wax, while air pressure was 
again used for moving the molten wax. The authors 
claimed zero leakage when checking sealing against 
air. They measured a maximum holding pressure 
of 40 psi, while Pal et al. achieved 250 psi. Both 
groups succeeded in using a wax valve for sealing a 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) chamber (remem-
ber that the maximum temperature needed for PCR 
thermocycling is ~92°C; see Figure 2.53). Liu et al. 
reported the use of paraffin valves (melting point 
~50°C) 10 mm away from the PCR chamber, while 
Pal et al., using waxes with higher melting points 
(~85°C), could operate as close as ~5 mm from the 
PCR chamber. Use of microcrystalline waxes, with 
melting points up to 95°C, would be better yet for 
use in PCR applications.
An important drawback of the aforementioned 
wax valves is the need for an air pump to control the 
movement of the molten wax. This is where modi-
fied FF valves come in. A normally closed, reusable 
FF valve that provides effective sealing of a channel, 
for both vapors and liquids, and can be moved mag-
netically would thus be a very desirable feature. In 
the case of a regular FF valve, though, that objec-
tive is not met: to stay closed, a magnetic field needs 
to be applied, which is impractical during storage. 
Ferrowaxes, a modified type of FF valve, might be 
able to solve this problem.
In a ferrowax, magnetic nanoparticles are dis-
persed in a molten wax, and phase changes between 
solid and liquid are temperature controlled. A 
magnetic wax offers the opportunity of magnetic 
manipulation at will while the wax is molten and 
solidification at desired location (e.g., a valve seat) 
upon removal of the heat source. Additionally the 
wax, in its liquid phase, conforms to its holding 
container, and through the use of different kinds 
of waxes, the melting point can be tailored to dif-
ferent applications. Paraffin waxes appear to be the 
best choice for melting points of around 70–80°C, 
whereas microcrystalline waxes can take tempera-
tures of around 95°C. Thanks to its nonpolar nature, 
the wax is immiscible in most biological samples. 
Advantages and disadvantages of the use of ferrowax 
are summarized in Table 8.15.
Kwang W. Oh and colleagues151 demonstrated a fer-
rowax valve in a Y-shaped microfluidic junction. The 
valve is opened and closed by heating (using resis-
tance heating) and magnetically displaced at will. The 
valve presented no leakage up to pressures of 50 psi.
Park and coworkers152 implemented a single-use 
ferrowax valve in a compact disc (CD)-like cen-
trifugal microfluidic device. This research group at 
Samsung took advantage of the absorption of laser 
energy by the embedded magnetic nanoparticles. 
The laser source operates at relatively low intensity 
to induce heat in the ferrowax causing a quick phase 
change to liquid. The pressure generated by the phase 
change causes the plug to move in a direction estab-
lished a priori by the device’s geometry, thus either 

[Page 448]
448   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
blocking or unblocking a channel or chamber. In 
this case, the magnetic nanoparticles are used solely 
to enhance heat absorption of the ferrowax and to 
induce a quicker phase change than that of paraf-
fin wax alone. Our team at University of California, 
Irvine, tested the quality of the sealing of a ferrov-
alve for vapors and liquids qualitatively by immers-
ing ferrowax sealed channels, containing calcium 
chloride, in a liquid environment. Even after more 
than twenty months, the calcium chloride did not 
show any sign of water uptake. A solidified ferrowax 
plug of around 2 mm in length with a cross-section 
of 1.75 mm2 was also tested in a circular channel on 
the CD platform; the plug was located at a distance 
of 80 mm from the center of the rotating disc and 
did not show leakage up to 6000 rpm.
Regarding a real pumping application with fer-
rowax on the CD, the author’s research group is 
currently exploring the use of these pumps to bring 
liquid samples back toward the center of the CD.153 
Indeed, a serious drawback in current CD microflu-
idics, besides the need of the type of valve described 
above, is the inability, after spinning fluids from the 
center to the rim, to move them back toward the 
center of the CD. This prevents the implementation 
of more complex diagnostic systems on a single 
standard-size CD, since the whole process of sample 
preparation and detection cannot be fitted easily 
onto a single CD platform. An FF plug could pump 
the sample back to the center of the CD for addi-
tional process steps (see also Volume I, Chapter 6, 
on fluidics, for more details on this CD platform). 
The concept that we are implementing is the use 
of  a ferrowax or FF plug as a pulling or pushing 
plug for the magnetic field to move the liquid inside 
a microchannel. To minimize water leakage at the 
interface of the pull/push plug and the CD plastic 
the walls of the channel are made hydrophobic. The 
concept is sketched in Figure 8.52. Theoretically, 
engineering a very soft ferrowax could eliminate 
the need for a heat source in a ferrowax system. In 
this case, the torque generated by the magnetic par-
ticles under a magnetic field could perhaps be made 
greater than the cohesion forces within the material, 
making the material move when a magnetic field is 
applied. The soft material might be a soft paraffin, 
gel-like polymer, or gelatinized nonpolar carrier that 
exhibits a “solid-like” behavior.
TABLE 8.15 Pros and Cons of Using Ferrowaxes
Pros
Cons
Relatively inexpensive
Heat source is required 
adding to the cost and 
complexity of the system
Energy efficient
Finite time of ferrowax phase 
change limits the time 
available for manipulation
Absorption of specific 
electromagnetic energy
Not yet commercially 
available (as of 2008)
Precision control
Industry scalability, since they 
require deposition of hot, 
viscous slurry
Nonpolar carrier used
Melting point can be 
tailored
Melting point restricts the 
temperatures the at which 
the device might be used 
and/or stored
Do not interact with 
sample
Conform to container 
geometry and provide 
an excellent seal after 
solidifying
Rotation
center
Interface to
next stage
assay
Sample/wash/buﬀer
chambers
Assay area
Results/waste
chambers
Movement
Magnetically-actuated ferrowax
movement in a channel. Push/pulling
pumping
Paraﬃn
wax
Interface to
same stage
assay
Magnet
Magnet
Magnetic
particles
FIGURE 8.52 Schematic showing an example of a ferro-
wax pump. Ferrowax plugs, magnetically actuated by an 
external magnetic field, pull/push a sample toward the 
center of a compact disc (CD)-like centrifugal microfluidics 
platform. This way a sample might be reprocessed in one 
single CD platform, enabling a full diagnostic test (i.e., 
separation, filtration, amplification, and quantification) 
to be contained in a single platform. (From Zoval, J., and 
M.J. Madou. 2004. Centrifuge-based fluidic platforms. 
Proc IEEE 92(1):140–53.153)

[Page 449]
Actuators   449
Superconductivity
Introduction
Given that actuators and power sources, in general, 
exhibit poor scaling in the microdomain, supercon-
ductors could play a dominant role in the more effi-
cient powering and actuating of micromechanisms. 
The superconducting state is a new phase state in 
which, below a certain critical temperature (Tc), zero 
resistance and perfect diamagnetism is reached. It 
is well known that superconductors can levitate 
magnets because of their diamagnetism (Meissner 
effect). In this section we elaborate on superconduc-
tivity as it makes for the ideal Meissner levitators.
The levitating permanent magnets described 
above are ferromagnets with a positive and very 
large magnetic susceptibility, χm (χm usually is only 
constant  in a small range of magnetization). 
Levitation can also be based on diamagnetic 
materials for which χm is small and negative. In 
diamagnetism, as a magnet approaches a diamagne-
tic material, magnetic dipole moments are induced 
in the diamagnetic material that oppose the applied 
field. These dipole moments lead to magnetic 
forces  that tend to push away the magnet. Some 
ordinary diamagnetic materials, such as carbon and 
bismuth, with a χm of about –1 × 10–6 (compared with 
–0.20 × 10–6 for Au or –0.11 × 10–6 for Cu), can levitate 
magnets at room temperature. Although only a small 
force per unit mass, this kind of levitation does not 
require power, operates at room temperature, and 
can be used with a variety of materials. Kim et al., 
for example, levitated a permanent-magnet mover 
by applying the Meissner effect.110 The ideal would 
of course be to have superconductivity at room 
temperature, but even a material superconducting 
at liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K) is amazing 
[liquid nitrogen ($1.04/L) is much cheaper than 
liquid helium ($3.75/L) and far easier to handle].
The Discoveries
Superconductivity represents a macroscopic quan-
tum effect: one of the few cases where quantum 
effects become observable on a macroscopic scale. 
The electrons in a superconductor behave as a single 
particle. The Dutch physicist, Heike Kammerlingh-
Onnes (1853–1926) (Figure 8.53), discovered the 
phenomenon in mercury in 1911, and in 1913, he 
received a Nobel Prize for his work.* The supercon-
ducting state may be defined as a new phase state in 
which, below a certain critical temperature (Tc), zero 
resistance and perfect diamagnetism is reached.
Most high-purity metals, when cooled to tem-
peratures nearing 0 K, exhibit a gradually decreas-
ing electrical resistivity, approaching some small yet 
finite value characteristic of the particular metal. 
For a few superconducting materials, such as mer-
cury and indium, resistivity abruptly plunges from 
a finite value to one that is virtually zero at very 
low temperatures and remains there upon further 
cooling. Loss of resistance to electrical current flow 
occurs below a critical temperature, Tc. Below that 
temperature superconductors offer an energy trans-
fer medium with virtually no power loss. In the case 
of pure elements such as mercury (see Figure 8.54) 
and indium, the Tc is between a few and 10 K. The 
change from the normal state to the superconduct-
ing state occurs over a temperature range of about a 
thousandth of a degree. One might wonder then if 
the resistance, R, really is zero and how one measures 
a zero resistance. To measure R = 0, a loop of a super-
conductor is made, a current is injected in it, and 
the magnetic field due to this current is measured as 
a function of time. Carrying out these experiments 
* Kammerlingh-Onnes was also the first to liquefy helium at 4.2 K, 
using a “fancy” refrigerator, in 1908.
Heike Kamerlingh Onnes
(1853-1926)
FIGURE 8.53 The Dutch physicist Heike Kammerlingh-
Onnes (1853–1926).

[Page 450]
450   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
turns out to be very boring, after monitoring the cur-
rent via the magnetic field it generates for a number 
of years and observing no change, scientists typically 
shut the experiment down. We cannot say from this 
experiment that the resistance is really zero, but we 
can at least say it is far smaller than any capability or 
patience of ours to measure (the theory says it really 
is zero). In other words, once set in motion, electrical 
current will flow forever in a closed loop of a super-
conductor (R = 0), and all magnetic fields will be 
expelled from the same chunk of material (perfect 
diamagnetism). The Holy Grail for superconductivity 
researchers is, of course, a room-temperature super-
conductor, which would exhibit perpetual motion. 
But even a material superconducting at liquid nitro-
gen temperature (77 K) is amazing. [Liquid nitro-
gen ($1.04/L) is much cheaper than liquid helium 
($3.75/L) and far easier to handle.]
The curious magnetic property of superconductors 
in which the material expels all traces of magnetism 
from its interior is called the Meissner effect; it was 
discovered in Berlin, in 1933, by Walther Meissner 
and Robert Ochsenfeld. Superconductivity baffled 
classical physicists. Below Tc there can be no resis-
tance, so there can be no voltage inside the super-
conductor, and from Faraday’s law it follows that the 
magnetic field inside cannot change. However, we 
actually observe that the field lines from the external 
field are “expelled” from the superconductor. How 
is that possible? The explanation is that a supercur-
rent (screening current) is induced on the surface in 
a direction such that it cancels the external field (see 
Figure 8.55). The magnetic field generated is strong 
enough to overcome gravity, so that a magnet can 
be made to levitate over the superconductor (see 
below, Figure 8.60). A superconductor such as this, 
which exhibits a complete Meissner effect, is called a 
type I superconductor, a soft superconductor, or a low-
critical-temperature superconductor (LTS). Such 
a superconductor is limited in its current-carrying 
capability because it can tolerate only very small 
magnetic fields. As we shall see below, type II semi-
conductors can carry much larger currents but are 
not perfectly diamagnetic.
Among pure elements, niobium shows the high-
est temperature for superconductivity, and there 
are about a dozen niobium compounds (examples 
include niobium carbide, niobium titanium, nio-
bium gallium, and niobium germanium) that all 
show super conductivity up to about 30 K (liquid 
hydrogen range). Nb3Ge was discovered in 1973 and 
was long the record-holder for highest Tc (see Figure 
8.56). Some of the niobium compounds have been 
drawn into wires to produce very compact magnetic 
fields for use in, for example, magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI). In Table 8.16 we present a review of 
typical metal superconductors.
Until 1986, the Tc was 23 K for the best low-tem-
perature superconductors, requiring liquid helium 
for maintaining the superconductivity state. In 
1986, Bednorz and Muller (Figure 8.57), working 
at the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory, discovered 
higher-temperature (35 K) superconductivity in a 
lanthanium-barium-copper oxide. Their compound 
was a ceramic material and, ironically, a very poor 
conductor at room temperature.
0.15
Mercury
superconducting
transition
A zero
resistance
state!!
R < 10–5 Ω
Tc = 4.2 K
R (Ω)
0.10
0.05
0
0
4.1
4.2
4.3
Temperature (K)
4.4
FIGURE 8.54 Mercury becomes a superconductor below 
4.2 K.
T > Tc
T < Tc
B
B
FIGURE 8.55 The Meissner effect for type I superconduc-
tors at T > Tc and T < Tc.

[Page 451]
Actuators   451
Bednorz and Muller’s ceramic was the first non-
metal that begins to superconduct above the boiling 
point of liquid hydrogen. Their invention triggered 
a race to find superconducting materials with tran-
sition temperatures above 77 K, the boiling point 
of liquid nitrogen. Overnight, anybody who knew 
about superconductors or ceramics started cook-
ing up new compounds in his or her furnace, and 
a record number of high-temperature superconduc-
tors was announced over the next couple of years 
(see Figure 8.56). Paul Chu, of the University of 
Houston, made a stunning breakthrough when he 
announced the discovery of a material that became 
superconducting at 93 K, well above liquid nitrogen 
temperature. Early in 1987, Chu circulated a pre-
print of a paper describing superconductivity at 93 K 
in a ceramic containing Yb, Ba, Cu, and O. When the 
paper appeared in print, every Yb (ytterbium) had 
been replaced by Y (yttrium)! It was just a typo, Chu* 
explained. By January 1988, another copper-oxide 
material was shown to exhibit superconductivity at 
a high temperature, 110 K. The world record Tc for a 
superconductor is 138 K, for a compound contain-
ing mercury, thallium, barium, calcium, copper, and 
oxygen. Some superconductor ceramic materials are 
listed in Table 8.17. The new breed of ceramic super-
conductors is referred to as hard superconductors, type 
II superconductors, or high-critical-temperature supercon-
ductors (HTS). The two types of superconductors are 
compared in Figure 8.58.
In the case of a small applied magnetic field, type 
II superconductors act like type I superconductors. In 
the presence of large magnetic fields, a type II “sacri-
fices” part of itself so that the rest can remain super-
conducting. These superconductors contain vortices 
that are filaments of the material in the normal 
* This would not be the last intrigue haunting superconductor 
research. In May 2002, outside researchers presented evidence to 
Bell Labs management of possible manipulation of data involving 
five separate papers published by its scientists in Science, Nature, and 
Applied Physics Letters over a two-year period by Jan Hendrik Schön as 
lead author and his colleagues at Murray Hill and elsewhere as coau-
thors. Schön is the only researcher who coauthored all five papers in 
question.
Tc/K
140
HgBaCaCuO
TISrBaCuO
BiCaSrCu2O9
YBa2Cu3O7
LaBaCuO4
Nb3Ge
Nb3Sn
NbN
Nb
Hg Pb
120
Boiling temperature
of liquid nitrogen
Boiling temperature
of liquid helium
100
80
60
40
20
0
1900
1920
1940
1960
Year of discovery
1980
2000
FIGURE 8.56 The critical temperature, Tc, of various 
superconductors plotted against their discovery dates.
TABLE 8.16 Type I Superconductors, Soft 
Superconductors, and Low-Critical-
Temperature Superconductors
Compound
Tc (K)
Al
1.17
α-Hg
4.15
In
3.41
Nb
9.25
Ru
0.49
Sn
3.72
Ti
0.40
Zn
0.85
Al2Y
0.35
AuPb2
3.15
InPb
6.65
Ir2Th
6.50
Nb2SnV
9.80
CuS
1.62
Nb3Sn
18.00
TiO
0.58
SnO
3.81
(SN)x
0.26
FIGURE 8.57 George Bednorz and Alex Muller, 1987 
Noble Prize winners.

[Page 452]
452   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
state as shown in Figure 8.59. The magnetic field 
lines pass through those vortices. High-temperature 
superconductors thus exhibit only a partial Meissner 
effect. Compared with type I superconductors, type 
II superconductors can carry enormous currents (in 
some cases, superconducting wires can carry cur-
rents that are thousands of times larger than those 
that can be handled by ordinary wires of similar 
dimensions), but these brittle ceramics are very dif-
ficult to fabricate into wires.
In Figure 8.60, we show a magnetic cube, placed 
on a disc made of a superconductor material. As the 
disc is cooled down with liquid nitrogen, supercon-
ductivity sets in below its critical temperature and 
the magnetic repulsion levitates the cube.
The Model of John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, 
and Robert Schrieffer (BCS Model)
The mechanism of superconductivity remained a 
mystery from 1911 until 1957. The abrupt change 
from normal state to superconductive state indicated 
clearly that superconductivity is not merely an 
extension of ordinary conductivity. Three important 
observations having to do with superconductors that 
gave hints about its origins were the following:
 
1. The Meissner effect exists.
 
2. The “best” metals do not seem to be supercon-
ductors. Among superconducting metals, bet-
ter metals make poorer superconductors, and 
vice versa.
 
3. A lighter isotope of mercury becomes super-
conducting at a higher temperature (i.e., more 
readily) than a heavier isotope.
From quantum theory, we know that  electrical 
conductivity arises because of acceleration of elec-
trons near the Fermi surface and that electrons 
move in conductor-like waves rather than as parti-
cles. Because they act as waves, electrons may travel 
TABLE 8.17 Examples of Type II Superconductors with 
Their Critical Temperatures (Tc)
Compound
Tc (K)
YBa2Cu3O7
93
YBa2Cu4O8
80
Y2Ba4Cu7O15
93
Bi2CaSr2Cu2O8
92
Bi2Ca2Sr2Cu3O10
110
Tl2CaBa2Cu2O8
119
Tl2Ca2Ba2Cu3O10
128
TlCaBa2Cu2O7
103
TlCa2Ba2Cu3O8
110
Tl0.5Pb0.5Ca2Sr2Cu3O9
120
0
50
Temperature, K
Liquid helium
operation
Liquid nitrogen
operation
LTS
Tc
HTS
Electrical resistance→
100
150
Tc
FIGURE 8.58 Low- and high-critical-temperature (Tc) 
superconductors compared.
Vortices
Normal
cores
Normal
cores
Current
FIGURE 8.59 Type II superconductors expel magnetic 
fields just as type I superconductors do but contain vorti-
ces of the metal in the normal state. This is called a partial 
Meissner effect.
FIGURE 8.60 A magnetic cube is placed on a disc made 
of a superconductor material. As the disc is cooled down 
with liquid nitrogen, superconductivity sets in below its 
critical temperature, and the magnetic repulsion levitates 
the cube.

[Page 453]
Actuators   453
through a metal without colliding with the metal 
ions, and consequently, in principle at least, one 
could get zero resistance. If electrons do not collide 
with metal ions, what do they collide with? After 
all, metals do have finite resistivities? As we discov-
ered in Volume I, Chapter 3, even in a pure mate-
rial, thermal oscillations of the atoms, or phonons, 
will scatter moving electrons, causing finite resistiv-
ity; electrons do not bump into ions at the regular 
crystal sites but scatter from ions that happen to be 
vibrating and in the “wrong” place when the elec-
tron wave passes by. Impurity atoms and defects 
such as vacancies, dislocations, and twin and grain 
boundaries will scatter the electrons even more, fur-
ther increasing the resistivity. When the temperature 
is lowered, the phonon contribution to resistivity is 
expected to fall away, but the contribution caused by 
impurities should remain finite. In the case of super-
conductivity, all these resistance-causing factors are 
somehow overcome.
John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and Robert Schrieffer 
(Figure 8.61), all at the University of Illinois, first 
explained superconductivity in 1957 and won the 
1971 Nobel Prize for their BCS model (this was 
Bardeen’s second Nobel Prize). The model works 
for low-temperature superconductivity only; there 
is no explanation yet for the ceramic HTS. The 
key observation that led to the BCS model was 
the isotope effect, which puts one on the trail of 
phonons;  since  isotopes are involved, atoms, and 
perhaps their movement, must somehow play a 
role  in  the phenomenon. To start the argument, 
remember that in a normal metal conductivity 
(σ) is proportional to scattering time (τ). In super- 
 conduct ors, there are no final states for the scattered 
electrons to go to, so scattering is simply quantum 
mechanically not allowed. What this means is that 
the difference between a normal metal and a super-
conductor is that in the case of the superconductor 
there is a bandgap, as shown in Figure 8.62.
Because of this bandgap in momentum space, 
scattering is forbidden, i.e., there are no final states 
for scattered electrons to go to. The energy gap is 
caused by attractive interaction between electrons. 
Somehow pairing of electrons reduces their energy. 
This is rather curious; how can electrons attract each 
other and form pairs with a lower energy content? 
The answer is that there is a phonon glue that causes 
their interaction to be attractive.
This needs some further detailing. Phonons, as 
we know, are periodic vibrations of atoms in solids; 
think of plucking an atom with nanotweezers. The 
forces between the different atoms pull the plucked 
 
 
FIGURE 8.61 The theory of superconductivity by Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (left to right) earned them a joint 
Nobel Prize in 1972.
Normal metal
Superconductor (T < Tc)
Energy (E)
Momentum (k)
Occupied states
k
Energy gap
E
FIGURE 8.62 An energy bandgap in momentum space in 
a superconductor.

[Page 454]
454   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
atom back into position, setting up a wave of atomic 
vibrations that travels through the material. Pairing 
is mediated by these crystal vibrations (phonons), 
and it is a distortion of the lattice, as shown in Figure 
8.63, that allows the formation of the Cooper pairs, 
as shown in Figure 8.64, to take place. 
A close-up of the crystal deformations leading to 
the formation of Cooper pairs is shown in Figure 
8.65. As electrons travel between the ion cores of 
the metal they exert an attractive force on the posi-
tive nuclei, and these move very slightly away from 
their idealized positions. As a result of this distur-
bance, the distribution of positive charges is no lon-
ger uniform and features regions of small excess of 
positive charges. This extra charge is sufficient to 
attract a second electron, and so two electrons are 
linked, albeit indirectly. If the attraction exceeds 
the electron-electron repulsion, a “bound pair” is 
formed. The bound pair is called a Cooper pair. This 
mechanism explains why good conductors such as 
Cu and Ag are poor superconductors; these materi-
als are good conductors at room temperature exactly 
because their conduction electrons do not strongly 
interact with the ion cores, and as a consequence 
we would not expect such materials to form good 
superconductors since the mechanism for forming 
pairs is very weak. This pair formation also explains 
the abrupt change from normal to superconducting 
state. Such a sudden transition is known as a phase 
change. Just as ice melts suddenly at 0°C, the thermal 
motion of the molecules at a critical temperature 
abruptly destroys the Cooper pairs.
The model also explains why a lighter isotope 
of mercury becomes superconducting at a higher 
temperature (i.e., more readily) than a heavier iso-
tope; the smaller the mass of the positive ion core, 
the greater the distortion an electron can induce (to 
be more exact, TcM1/2 = constant). But how do those 
Cooper pairs explain superconductivity? Electrons 
in a superconductor move in correlated pairs in such 
a way that the properties of each pair are the same 
Phonon
e–
e–
FIGURE 8.63 Pairing is mediated by crystal vibrations (phonons), and a distortion of the lattice as shown causes Cooper 
pair formation.
Electron
Phonon
Phonon mediated pairing
Cooper pair
FIGURE 8.64 Cooper pair formation.
Positively-charged lattice ions
Electron
Electron
Cooper pair moving through lattice
FIGURE 8.65 A lattice deformation forming a Cooper pair.

[Page 455]
Actuators   455
as those of all the others. These paired electrons are 
not necessarily close; on average they might be sepa-
rated by hundreds or even thousands of atom spac-
ings. The maximum distance up to which the states 
of paired electrons are correlated to produce super-
conductivity is called the coherence length. Coherence 
length of Cooper pairs is about 10–4 cm.
The electrons in Cooper pairs have opposite spins 
and equal and opposite linear momenta, or the pairs 
have zero spin and zero momentum, which makes 
them bosons instead of fermions (see Figure 8.66 
and Volume I, Chapter 3).
In the absence of a current there is no net move-
ment of electrons, and all the electron pairs have 
an average velocity of zero. Zero-spin particles such 
as Cooper pairs are bosons (like photons and pho-
nons), and they “like” each other so much that they 
all crowd together in the same state (energy and 
momentum). Cooper pairs condense into one mac-
roscopic quantum state with ~1023 particles that are 
all coherent. If a current flows, all the pairs have the 
same velocity and move in the same direction, as 
one collective body. In the superconducting state, 
the Cooper pairs are constantly scattering each 
other, but the total momentum remains constant. 
Remember—the paired electrons have opposite 
momentum. If one gains momentum, the other loses 
momentum. Because all Cooper pairs act together, a 
single lattice ion cannot scatter a single Cooper pair 
or they do not lose energy by interacting with the 
lattice. With all the electrons acting as a team, the 
only resistance possible is for all electron pairs to 
simultaneously scatter into a different state, an event 
that is so implausible that all attempts to measure 
any resistance in a superconductor have failed. This is 
the same as saying that there are no energy levels for 
the scattered pairs to go to, or that there is an energy 
gap. Because all the electrons act together to form a 
single quantum state, electrons flow around a wire 
as electrons in an atom do. Zeeman splitting takes 
place when a material is placed in a high magnetic 
field. When Zeeman splitting occurs in supercon-
ductors, the field is great enough to force a Cooper 
pair to occupy the same energy level and thus spin 
in the same direction. This breaks the Cooper pairs 
and superconductivity.
In summary, the BCS model is based on a 
phonon-mediated attractive interaction between 
electrons, leading to the formation of Cooper pairs; 
these pairs act like bosons, which fall into a coherent 
superconducting state. BCS theory beautifully 
explained all aspects of superconductors, but it 
seemed to predict that 30 K (give or take a couple of 
degrees) is the highest possible temperature at which 
a material could be superconducting, as above that 
temperature lattice vibrations destroy the Cooper 
pairing: the BCS model explains the LTS but not the 
HTS. BCS theory is clearly a good starting point, 
and just as clearly it is not the final answer. If we 
understood HTS, it might be possible to propose a 
room-temperature superconductor.
Thermal Actuators68
Introduction
In thermomechanical actuators (TMAs), thermal 
energy is transformed into mechanical movement. 
A µ-TMA generates controlled motions via thermal 
strains. The simplicity of the system is the major rea-
son that many MEMS devices are actuated by ther-
mal means.
In Figure 8.67, we illustrate an example of a TMA, 
i.e., a parallel beam µ-TMA. By applying a current, 
the narrow beam shown in this structure is heated 
FIGURE 8.66 How to make bosons out of electrons.
Hot arm
Cold arm
Substrate
FIGURE 8.67 Parallel beam thermomechanical actuator.

[Page 456]
456   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
up more and expands also more because of its higher 
resistance and higher current density than the wider 
beam, causing a movement as indicated. Removing 
the current restores the structure to its original 
position. 
Scaling of Thermal Actuators
Scaling laws in heating and cooling, such as the total 
amount of heat required to start a thermal actuator, 
its heating and cooling rate, the thermal stresses or 
distortions expected, and possible damage to deli-
cate MEMS and NEMS components, were detailed 
in Volume I, Chapter 6. In the same chapter we also 
analyzed the breakdown of the heat transfer contin-
uum theory in the microdomain, and in Volume I, 
Chapter  3, we discussed quantized thermal trans-
port in nanoscale devices.
Here we reiterate the most salient points of those 
scaling insights as they apply to thermal actuators: 
 
1. Small devices, having a smaller mass, heat and 
cool faster than larger structures (see Volume I, 
Equation 6.68).
 
2. The Biot number (Bi) relates the heat transfer 
resistance inside and at the surface of a body 
(Volume I, Equation 6.70). This dimension-
less number gives an indication of the poten-
tial for thermal stresses. For Bi << 1, internal 
temperature gradients become small and the 
microstructure can be treated as having a uni-
form temperature. In the microscale, the Bi is 
small, so that conduction accounts for 99% 
of the energy transport. Consequently, with 
small devices there is less worry about thermal 
stresses induced by thermal gradients, and sys-
tems with larger internal heat generation capac-
ity by volume can be built.
 
3. The increased phonon-boundary scattering in 
nanostructures lowers the thermal conductiv-
ity κ (see Volume I, Chapter 3 and Chapter 3, 
this volume). This contributes, for example, to 
making better heat insulators and more effi-
cient thermoelectrics. 
From the above, the micro- and nanodomain 
seems especially appealing for thermal actuator 
applications.
Types of Thermomechanical Actuators 
Introduction
In this section we compare pneumatic, bimetallic, 
and shape memory alloy thermal actuators by con-
sidering their use in microvalves. These three types 
of thermal actuator mechanisms employed in micro-
valves are illustrated in Figure 8.68. In the section 
that follows we detail the choice of actuator types in 
commercially available valves. 
Thermopneumatic Actuators
The thermopneumatic valve (see Figure 8.68a) traps 
a liquid in a sealed cavity containing a thin film 
heating resistor along one side of the cavity, with a 
flexible diaphragm wall forming the opposite side.154 
Upon heating, the fluid in the chamber expands and 
evaporates, raising the pressure in the sealed cavity 
and causing the flexible wall to bulge outward. In a 
normally open valve, this bulging diaphragm closes 
a nearby orifice. In a closed valve, as illustrated in 
Figure 8.68a, actuation levers a silicon body away 
from an orifice. Compared with other microvalve 
technologies, thermopneumatic actuation exerts 
 tremendous force through a long stroke. In a nor-
mally open valve, over 20 N through a stroke of 
50 µm was demonstrated.154 This long stroke allows 
a thermopneumatically actuated valve to control 
higher flow rates and a wider range of pressures. This 
type of valve was made at Redwood Microsystems, 
Inc., a company that is now defunct.
Bimetallic Actuators
The second thermal actuator, illustrated in Figure 
8.68b, is a bimetal. A bimetal involves the combina-
tion of two materials with distinct thermal expan-
sion coefficients. A bimetal strip will bend when 
heated or cooled from the initial reference tempera-
ture because of incompatible thermal expansions of 
the materials that are bonded together. The bimetal 
returns to its initial reference shape once the applied 
heat is removed.
In the case of a bimetal structure based valve, as 
illustrated in Figure 8.68b, the nickel and silicon 
relax and the valve is closed when cold; upon heat-
ing, the nickel expands more than the silicon, lifting 

[Page 457]
Actuators   457
the silicon body from the valve seat. In terms of size, 
bimetal actuators are smaller than thermopneu-
matic ones and consume less power, but they lack 
the longer stroke of the latter.155
Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) Actuators
A third thermal actuator is based on shape mem-
ory alloys (see Figure 8.68c). Shape memory alloys 
undergo reversible thermal-mechanical transfor-
mations of their atomic structure at certain tem-
peratures. Specifically, SMAs such as NiTi undergo 
crystalline phase transformations from a weak and 
easily deformable state at low temperatures to a hard 
and difficult-to-deform state at higher temperatures. 
The material is first held in the desired shape and 
heated to well above the transition temperature (Ttr). 
At these temperatures, the crystal structure is in the 
austenite or parent phase. Cooling transforms the 
material into martensite, the low-temperature phase, 
which plastically deforms (solder-like) by as much as 
10% at relatively low stresses (yield strength is only 
100 Mpa). When the SMA is heated again above its 
transition temperature, Ttr, it transforms back to the 
high-temperature phase (austenite) and reverses to 
its originally high-temperature shape, exerting a sub-
stantial force (>100 MN/m2). The austenite phase has 
a much higher yield point and can sustain stresses 
up to 560 MPa without permanent deformation.156 
The large forces make SMAs ideal for actuation pur-
poses; piezoelectric and electrostatic actuators exert 
only a fraction of the SMA force, but they act much 
faster. The temperature interval over which the 
shape change takes place typically is 10–20°C. The 
lowest energy path to the austenite exactly retraces 
the atomic movements responsible for the defor-
mation, causing the shape memory. The discov-
ery of the effect in 1951 involved a gold-cadmium 
alloy, but this was soon extended to a broad range 
of other alloys, including titanium-nickel, copper-
 aluminum-nickel, iron-nickel, and iron-platinum 
alloys. For practical applications, Ni-Ti, Cu-Zn-Al, 
and Cu-Al-Ni all have been tried. Depending on the 
type of alloy and the alloy composition, critical tem-
peratures range between –150°C and +150°C.
Besides their use in µ-valves, shape memory 
alloys have been used in numerous applications (see 
Figure 8.69) including medical (e.g., microsurgical 
Nickel
Closed (cold)
Closed (cold)
Flow
Closed (cold)
Open (hot)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Flow
Open (hot)
BeCu spring
TiNi alloy band
Flow
Open (hot)
Glass
Glass
Trapped ﬂuid
Silicon
Silicon
Silicon
Silicon
Silicon
FIGURE 8.68 Schematics of thermally actuated valves. 
(a) Schematic of a normally closed thermopneumatic 
valve. (After Zdeblick, M.J., R. Anderson, J. Jankowski, B. 
Kline-Schoder, L. Christel, R. Miles, and W. Weber. 1994. 
In Technical Digest: 1994 Solid State Sensor and Actuator 
Workshop, 251. Hilton Head Island, SC.154) (b) Schematic of 
a normally closed nickel/silicon bimetal valve. (c) Schematic 
of a normally closed shape memory alloy valve. [After 
Barth, P.W. 1995. In 8th International Conference on 
Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’95), 276. 
Stockholm, Sweden.]

[Page 458]
458   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
instruments, stents, artificial muscle), aerospace 
(e.g., connectors, lock rings), automotive (e.g., Ni-Ti 
thermostat), industrial (e.g., pipe connectors), con-
sumer (e.g., eyeglass frames), and safety (e.g., fire 
safety valves).
The most extensive work with shape memory 
alloys involves bulk materials and bulk titanium-
nickel alloys in the form of wires and rods, which are 
commercially available under the name NitinolTM. 
Nitinol, a composition transforming near room 
temperature, is traditionally prepared with 50% Ti 
and 50% Ni. Increasing the Ni content decreases the 
transition temperature by about 25°C per 0.2 at % 
Ni. The material is a good electrical conductor, with 
a resistivity of 80 µΩ·cm, but a relatively poor ther-
mal conductor, with a thermal conductivity about 
one-tenth that of silicon. 
The more IC-compatible sputtered films were made 
in the late 1980s by Walker et al.157 at Bell Labs and by 
Busch and Johnson156 at TiNi Alloy Company (http://
www.sma-mems.com). Thin-film, nickel-titanium 
shape memory alloys up to 50 µm in thickness have 
been sputter deposited. These films exhibit memory 
behavior comparable to bulk material, and the phase 
transition to and from martensite lies entirely above 
ambient temperature (see Figure 8.70).158 When 
deposited at room temperature, NiTi films are amor-
phous. Heating to 500°C causes the film to crystal-
lize and acquire its shape memory property.158
Some materials and processes are incompat-
ible with such high temperatures, requiring either 
rapid thermal annealing (RTA) or a special choice 
of materials and careful selection of the order in 
which processes are carried out. Another limitation 
of thin-film NiTi is the upper limit of 70–80°C for 
transition temperature Ttr, which is too low for appli-
cations such as valves for fuel injection systems and 
many military applications. Experimentation with 
higher-temperature tertiary alloys such as TiNiHf is 
under way to alleviate this problem. The bandwidth 
of the NiTi films is slightly improved, to about 5 Hz, 
compared with the NiTi wire (about 1 Hz) because 
of the more effective cooling in the microdomain. 
Another advantage of TiNi thin-film actuators is 
that they are biocompatible and transistor-transistor 
logic (TTL) voltage compatible.
We compared the energy density and drive 
conditions for NiTi with magnetic, electrostatic, 
and piezoactuators in Table 8.8. NiTi outperforms 
magnetic and electrostatic actuation in terms of 
energy density and may cause large motions in the 
range from 10 µm to 1 mm, operational requirements 
not well matched by electrostatic or piezoelectric 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.69 Examples of shape memory alloy (SMA) applications. SMA valve opens and releases hot water at the proper 
temperature (a). NiTi surgical tools: precise bending of the tool to the proper shape in microsurgery (b).
500
Sample #55C — 16 µm thick
400
300
200
100
0
0
1
2
3
Strain (%)
80ºC
20ºC
Stress (MPa)
4
5
FIGURE 8.70 Stress-strain curve for a TiNi shape mem-
ory alloy thin film. The sloping, broken line indicates 
a load line spring force resisting the actuator, show-
ing a 2% repeatable strain recovery. (After Johnson, 
A.D. 1991. Vacuum-deposited TiNi shape memory film: 
Characterization and applications in microdevices. 
J Micromech Microeng 1:34.158)

[Page 459]
Actuators   459
technologies. As the required voltage for actuation 
is low (a couple of volts), it becomes compatible 
with IC technology. The phase change in SMAs is 
temperature driven, and as heat must be removed 
before the next cycle starts, this makes the system 
inefficient—the cycle rate may be slowed down by 
the achievable rate of heat transfer. The ultimate 
efficiency cannot exceed that of the Carnot cycle 
operating between the same temperature limits.159 
Practical SMA actuators have an efficiency typically 
less than 10%; for example, 50 J of heat input might 
be required to obtain 1 J of mechanical energy 
output.158 However, in very small devices, heat 
transfer is rapid, which makes this type of actuator 
more attractive. Another potential disadvantage is 
the need, in most applications, of mechanical biasing 
devices to provide a return force such as the BeCu 
spring, enabling cyclical behavior in the normally 
closed valve sketched in Figure 8.68c. The beryllium-
copper spring puts bands of SMA in tension over the 
orifice at low temperature. The SMA bands constitute 
electrical resistors and are heated by current passage. 
At high temperature, the SMA element works against 
the BeCu spring to reach its high-temperature preset 
form and moves away from the valve seat, opening 
the valve. At low temperatures, the spring easily 
pushes the silicon body back onto the valve seat, 
closing the valve. The spring adds somewhat to the 
size of the SMA actuator and also further slows 
down the response time (0.5–2 Hz). If the high-
temperature shape does not change upon cooling the 
specimen and transforming it to the martensic phase, 
the phenomenon is referred to as a one-way shape 
memory effect, and springs or other mechanical 
biasing mechanisms are required. Solutions to 
avoid mechanical biasing might be within reach: 
SMAs can, under certain circumstances, remember 
their low-temperature shape as well, enabling cyclic 
device operation without the need of a bias.160 In 
the latter case, one refers to a “reversible” shape 
memory effect. The low bandwidth of SMA usually 
is assumed to be determined by the relatively long 
cooling thermal time constant. Hunter et al. report 
an interesting unexplained effect in which very large 
brief current pulses (>109 A/m2), imposed during 
externally shortening and lengthening cycles, 
alter the subsequent NiTi switching properties.161 
The altered NiTi shortens and lengthens very 
rapidly (within 40 ms) and generates a maximum 
extrapolated stress of 230 MN/m2 and a peak power/
mass approaching 50 kW/kg.161
Shape memory plastics also are being devel-
oped. Norsorex, for example, is the trade name for 
a polynorbornene polymer with excellent shape 
recovery properties at shape memory temperatures 
of over 35°C. Another polymer is Zeon Shable, a 
polyester-based polymer blend.162 There are many 
potential applications for shape memory alloys and 
patents abound in this area (upwards of 15,000).
Summarizing, the advantages of SMA actuation 
include high force/weight and force/volume ratios, 
large deformation, simplicity of implementation via 
a heating current fed through the SMA material, sim-
ple cooling by the ambient environment (especially 
effective for small structures with a small Biot num-
ber), and inexpensive raw materials. Disadvantages 
include the one-way operation necessitating a bias 
force, heating/cooling cycles that reduce the band-
width, the number of cycles reducing the maximal 
deformation (after >105 cycles, the maximal defor-
mation is less than 4%), the fact that cycling changes 
the properties of the alloy, hysteresis (10 … 30°C), 
and nonlinearity.
Comparison of Actuator Principles 
in Commercial Valves 
Miniature, highly accurate valves are of importance 
in many industrial operation processes. In Table 8.18, 
listing four commercially available thermal valve 
technologies, we compare the merits of the various 
underlying thermal actuator mechanism reviewed 
in this section.155 Parameters of interest for valve 
performance include power consumption, actuation 
speed, force, stroke, cost, and package size. 
Hewlett-Packard (HP) has come up with a 
thermally actuated valve intended for a very small, 
possibly handheld, gas chromatography (GC) 
system.163,164 A schematic of HP’s normally closed 
nickel/silicon bimetal valve was shown earlier in 
Figure 8.68c (a more detailed view is presented in 
Figure 8.71b). Resistive heating of the nickel/silicon 
bimetal causes the membrane deformation and 
opening of the valve. The competing IC Sensor’s 

[Page 460]
460   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 8.18 Comparison of Micromachined Thermal Valves
Parameters
Shape Memory 
Alloy (Microflow 
Analytical, Inc.)
Al (IC Sensors, Inc.)
Ni/Si (HP)
Thermopneumatic 
(Redwood 
Microsystems)
Pressure (PSIG)
80
25
150
100
Flow (sccm, air or N2) at 
T = 25 ºC
6000
100
1000
2000
Power (W)
0.29
0.5
1.03
2.0
Response time (ms)
100
100
200
400
Source: After Barth, P.W. 1995. In 8th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers 
’95), 276. Stockholm, Sweden.155
Metallization
Heated diaphragm
Inlet pressure
Boss
Valve body
Valve
seat
Outlet
Cross-section of micromachined, bimetallically-actuated diaphragm valve.
(a)
Oriﬁce (e.g., 180 µm square)
Silicon  poppet, 1.5 mm square
Silicon die, 5×8 mm
TiNi  thin-ﬁlm "microribbons"
(3 µm thick)
Valve seat (e.g., 20 µm wide)
Bimetal actuator e.g., 30 µm Ni over 30 µm Si
Torsion bar suspension and thermal isolater
Nickel heating resistor
Silicon oriﬁce plate
(b)
(c)
Flow
0.8 mm
8.8 mm
Boss
FIGURE 8.71 Commercially available, micromachined, thermally actuated valves. (a) IC Sensor’s bimetallic Al/Si valve. 
(b) Hewlett-Packard’s bimetallic Ni/Si valve. (c) The TiNi actuator consists of a rectangle of silicon, 5 mm wide and 8 mm 
long, that has been partially removed to leave a poppet supported by 8 TiNi thin-film “microribbons.” The lower drawing 
shows these microribbons stretched. When electrical current runs through these microribbons, the shape memory prop-
erty causes them to contract. The upper view shows the microribbons in their contracted state. The poppet displacement 
is more than 100 µm, and it can exert a force of as much as 0.5 N (http://www.tinialloy.com/devices.html).

[Page 461]
Actuators   461
valve (Figure 8.71a) is also a normally closed 
bimetallic valve but uses an annular aluminum 
region on a Si diaphragm with integral diffused 
resistors instead. By varying the electrical power 
dissipated in the resistors, and thus the temperature 
of the Si diaphragm, the displacement of a central 
boss can be controlled.165 The HP valve exhibits an 
increase of an order of magnitude in both pressure 
and flow control capability compared with the IC 
Sensor’s valve. This improvement is made possible 
by using a torsion bar suspension (see Figure 8.71b) 
and a nickel-and-silicon bimetal combination, 
which allows larger valve dimensions and higher 
stress levels for consequent longer stroke and higher 
force. For very small structures, this thermal type 
of actuation becomes an attractive option because 
of geometric scaling (see comments above and in 
Volume I, Chapter 6 on the Biot number). The amount 
of thermal mass decreases as the volume of heated 
material decreases, and the thermal loss decreases as 
the thickness of the support structure for the bimetal 
decreases, while the force per unit area remains 
high. The normally closed thermopneumatic valve 
(the Fluistor™) from Redwood Microsystems (now 
defunct) is shown in Figure 8.68a; in this valve, a 
liquid-filled cavity, upon heating, forces a silicon 
diaphragm to lift off the valve seat (a normally open 
valve is also available from the same company). 
Although providing a tremendous force (>20 N) 
through a long stroke (between 50 and 150 µm), 
this valve is thermally inefficient because of the large 
volume of heated fluid and is difficult to assemble 
because of the working fluid in the device. Moreover, 
it is quite slow (~ 400 ms). A fourth alternative is the 
normally closed SMA valve from Microflow, sold by 
TiNi Corporation, which is shown in Figure 8.71c.166 
Sputtered thin-film NiTi is the SMA element and is 
deformed in tension through an integral BeCu bias 
spring, pushing it against a valve seat. Passing a 
small current through the actuator element heats it 
up, and it regains its original shape, lifting it against 
the spring from the valve seat and allowing gas to 
flow. From the point of view of performance, the HP 
valve stands out; in terms of manufacturability and 
IC process compatibility, the IC valve has the edge. 
Redwood Microsystems has gone the furthest in 
incorporating its valves into higher-level subsystems, 
including pressure and feedback control, to create a 
completely electronically programmable pressure 
regulator. This company has also paid more attention 
to applying its valves in biomedical instruments 
carrying fluids.154,155
Summary: Thermal Actuators
In Table 8.19, we list the salient points associated 
with thermal actuators. See also Figure 8.14.
Other Actuators and Some Final Actuator 
Comparisons: Final Comparison
Introduction
In closing this chapter on actuators, we review two 
more interesting actuator principles, i.e., those based 
on chemical/electrochemical forces and those based 
on the quantum mechanical Casimir force, and pres-
ent some final actuator comparison figures.
Chemical/Electrochemical Actuators
A variety of electrochemical and chemical actua-
tors have been demonstrated. In Volume II, Example 
4.3, we reviewed an electrochemical disruptable 
valve invented by the author (see Volume II, Figure 
4.98). Hamberg et al.167 used electrolysis of water 
to create pressure on a micromachined membrane. 
Osmotic pumps use a semipermeable membrane 
over a pump body to realize a mechanical stroke; 
the mechanism is clarified in Figure 8.72.168 A solu-
tion in a closed vessel is covered on one side with 
a semipermeable membrane. A hypertonic solution 
outside the pump draws solvent from the hypotonic 
solution inside the pump body, reducing the volume 
inside and bending the membrane inward. Such an 
TABLE 8.19 Salient Points of Thermal Actuators
 1. Maximum stroke: 100 µm
 2. Maximum speed: 10 s to 1 kHz (low bandwidth; see 
Figure 8.19)
 3. Maximum force: 1–10 mN (high force; see Figure 8.19)
 4. Easy to fabricate
 6. Footprint: 10 µm to mm
 7. Special drive conditions: 1–5 V
 8. High power and temperatures 
 9. Multiaxis operation

[Page 462]
462   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
osmotic pump was proposed for delivering insulin 
to a patient, depending on the patient’s changing 
glucose concentration. In this application, the mem-
brane displacement caused by a high glucose con-
centration in the patient pushes insulin out of the 
pump into the patient’s body.168
Also, hydrogels and redox polymers and blends of 
the two have been used as chemical or electrochemi-
cal actuators. Examples include the actuator hydrogel 
valve in Volume II, Figure 8.15. One of the most use-
ful features of a polymer actuator is that swelling and 
shrinking of the material can be triggered by a wide 
variety of external stimuli. This may involve pH, 
ionic strength, magnetic field, electrical field, etc. A 
number of these environmentally sensitive or “intel-
ligent” materials are listed in Table 8.20.169 Most of 
these polymers exhibit reversible structural modifi-
cations upon repeated changes in the external envi-
ronment. These polymer systems are of great interest 
as drug delivery vehicles. A Web site describing prog-
ress in the general area of electroactive polymers is 
the WorldWide Electroactive Polymers Newsletter, or 
Artificial Muscles Newsletter (http://ndeaa.jpl.nasa.
gov/nasa-nde/lommas/eap/EAP-web.htm).
In Volume I, Chapter 6, we described a gold/poly-
pyrrole actuator µ-flap (see Volume I, Figure 6.64) 
as a means of active mixing in the microdomain. 
A thin Au film (1 µm), covered with a thin layer of 
polypyrrole, forms an electrochemical actuator. If 
submerged in an ionic solution, upon application of 
a bias small solvated cations in the solution move in 
and out of the redox polymer matrix, swelling and 
shrinking, respectively, its apparent volume. The 
volume changes in the polymer generate stresses on 
the Au layer surface, bending it upward or down-
ward in a “flapping” motion. Movement frequencies 
in the 1–20 Hz range can be achieved with this type 
of actuator.
Casimir Forces: A Quantum Actuator
We normally think of a vacuum as space with nothing 
in it, and we would then also tend to conclude that its 
energy is zero. But this is inconsistent with the time-
energy uncertainty principle that predicts that the 
energy of a vacuum fluctuates (Volume I, Equation 
3.107). It is therefore possible that empty space locally 
Osmotic nonequilibrium
Osmotic eqilibrium
Hypertonic solution
Isotonic solution
Displacement
Bending semipermeable membrane
Closed cylinder vessel for pump
Volume ﬂow
Jv
Hypotonic
solution
FIGURE 8.72 Mechanism of the osmotic pump. The 
decrease in volume bends the semipermeable membrane. 
JV corresponds to the volume flow out of the pump 
chamber. [After Nagakura, T., K. Ishihara, T. Furukawa, 
K. Masuda, and T. Tsuda. 1995. In 8th International 
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ’95), 287. Stockholm, Sweden.168]
TABLE 8.20 Environmentally Sensitive Polymers for Drug Delivery
Stimulus
Hydrogel
Mechanism
pH
Acidic or basic hydrogel
Change in pH—swelling—release of drug
Ionic strength
Ionic hydrogel
Change in ionic strength—change in concentration of ions inside 
gel—change in swelling—release of drug
Chemical species
Hydrogel containing electron-
accepting groups
Electron-donating compounds—formation of charge/transfer 
complex—change in swelling—release of drug
Enzyme 
substrate
Hydrogel containing 
immobilized enzymes
Substrate present—enzymatic conversion—product changes 
swelling of gel—release of drug
Magnetic
Magnetic particles dispersed in 
aliginate microspheres
Applied magnetic field—change in pores in gel—change in 
swelling—release of drug
Thermal
Thermoresponsive hydrogel 
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
Change in temperature—change in polymer-polymer and water-
polymer interactions—change in swelling—release of drug
Electrical
Polyelectrolyte hydrogel
Applied electric field—membrane charging—electrophoresis of 
charged drug—change in swelling—release of drug
Ultrasound 
irradiation
Ethylene-vinyl alcohol hydrogel
Ultrasound irradiation—temperature increase—release of drug
Source: After Brannon-Peppas, L. 1997. Polymers in controlled drug delivery. Med Plastics Biomater 4:34.169

[Page 463]
Actuators   463
does not have zero energy but may have sufficient 
energy ΔE for a very short time, Δt, to create particles 
and their antiparticles. This is called the zero point 
energy. Empty space is a seething mass of quantum 
fluctuations creating virtual particles that recombine 
and annihilate, just below the threshold of reality 
(Volume I, Figure 7.29). These fluctuations have been 
measured as the Casimir effect. The Casimir effect is 
a small attractive force that acts between two close 
parallel uncharged conducting plates in a vacuum as 
illustrated in Volume I, Figures 3.69 and 7.30. Casimir 
realized that only virtual particles of certain wave-
lengths can appear between the plates, while those of 
any wavelength can appear on the outside. Particles 
other than the photon also contribute a small effect, 
but only the photon force is measurable. All bosons, 
such as photons, produce an attractive Casimir force, 
while fermions make a repulsive contribution.
The attractive Casimir force, Fc, between two 
plates of area A separated by a distance r can be cal-
culated as follows:
 
F
c
r  A
c = −
   
 
π
2
4
240
ℏ
 
(8.92)
where c is the speed of light. Steve K. Lamoreaux170 
measured this tiny force in 1996 with a torsion pen-
dulum (Figure 8.73). One can quickly establish from 
Equation 8.92 that two mirrors of 1 cm2 separated 
by a distance of 1 µm have an attractive Casimir 
force of 130 nN. Although this force appears small, 
at distances below a micrometer, the Casimir force 
becomes the dominant force between two neutral 
objects. At separations of 10 nm, the Casimir effect 
produces the equivalent of 1 atmosphere pressure! 
Obviously this is a force to reckon with in MEMS 
and NEMS devices.
As summarized in Table 8.21, Lamoreux’s mea-
surement of the Casimir force was followed by many 
subsequent attempts using MEMS and NEMS actua-
tors to measure this force.
The zero point energy is also connected to 
Einstein’s famous cosmological constant:
 
Λ = 8
3
π ρ
g
c
2
 
(8.93)
where g = gravitational constant
c = speed of light
ρ = energy density of vacuum
Einstein included this term in the equations for gen-
eral relativity because he was dissatisfied that his 
equations would not allow for a stationary universe, 
which was the model of the universe at the time. 
Soon after Einstein developed his theory, obser-
vations by Edwin Hubble (1929) proofed that the 
universe was expanding. Einstein then abandoned 
the cosmological constant and called it the “big-
gest blunder” of his life. The cosmological constant 
remains of interest though, as observations made in 
the late 1990s of distance-redshift relations suggest 
that the universe is accelerating. These observations 
can be explained by assuming a very small positive 
cosmological constant in Einstein’s equations. The 
current standard model of cosmology, the Lambda-
Cold Dark Matter model (CDM), thus includes the 
cosmological constant, which is measured to be on 
the order of 10–35 s–2, or 10–47 GeV4, or 10–29 g/cm3, or 
about 10–120 in Planck units. 
Final Comparison of Actuator Mechanisms
Finally, in Figures 8.74 and 8.75 we show two very 
complete figures summarizing the state of the art 
in actuators by Bell.171 The first is a figure compar-
ing all types of actuators in terms of maximum dis-
placement versus maximum frequency; the second 
compares their maximum displacement versus max-
imum force exerted.
Vacuum
can
Tungsten
ﬁber
Compensator
plates
Vibration
damping
disk and
magnet
Solenoid plunger
to position plates
Casimir
plates
Piezoelectric
stack
Torsion
pendulum
FIGURE 8.73 This experiment by Steve K. Lamoreaux170 
relies on a torsion pendulum. A current applied to the 
piezoelectric stack tries to move the Casimir plate on the 
pendulum. The compensator plates hold the pendulum 
still. The voltage needed to prevent any twisting serves as 
a measure of the Casimir effect.

[Page 464]
464   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 8.21 Attempts Using MEMS and NEMS Actuators to Measure Casimir Force
Investigators
Year
Geometry
Method
Distance 
Scale (nm)
Materials
Pressure 
(mbar)
Temp. 
(K)
Accuracy 
(%)
S.K. Lamoreaux
1997
Torsion pendulum
600–6000
Au (500 nm)
10−4
300
5
U. Mohideen and A. Roy
1998
AFM
100–900
Al (300 nm) + AuPd (20 nm)
5 × 10−2
300
2
A. Roy and U. Mohideen
1999
AFM
100–900
Al (250 nm) + AuPd (8 nm)
5 × 10−2
300
2
G.L. Klimthitskaya, A. Roy, 
U. Mohideen, and V.M. 
Mostepanenko
1999
AFM
100–900
Al (300 nm) + AuPd (20 nm)
5 × 10−2
300
1
T. Ederth
2000
Piezo-tube 
manipulator
20–100
50 µm Au wires coated in 
thiol SAM
1000
300
1
H.B. Chan, V.A. Aksyuk, 
R.N. Kleiman, D.J. Bishop, 
and F. Capasso
2001
MEMS torsion bar 
capacitance
90–1000
Au (200 nm) + Cr 
underlayer
1000
300
1
G. Bressi, G. Carugno, R. 
Onofrio, and G. Ruoso
2002
Interferometry
500–3000
Cr (50 nm) on Si
10−5
300
15
R.S. Decca, D. Lopez, E. 
Fischbach, and D. E. 
Krause
2003
MEMS torsion bar 
capacitance
200–2000
Cu/Au
10−4
300
1
NANOCASE
2005
AFM, MEMS
10–1000
Si, Au
10−11
20–1000
<1
Source:  Antezza Mauro, University of Trento, INFN and CNR-INFM BEC Center on Bose-Einstein Condensation, Trento, Italy.

[Page 465]
Actuators   465
Example 8.1: Mass Sensing Actuators
In Volume I, Example 4.1, we analyzed the design 
criteria for a static mass sensitive piezoresistive 
cantilever. In that example, we were interested 
only in the static bending of the cantilever upon 
mass loading. Here we consider the mass sen-
sitivity of different types of resonators, includ-
ing cantilever beams. A mass sensitive resonator 
transforms an additional mass loading into 
Magnetostrictive
Piezoelectric
Parallel-plate
Piezoelectric bimorph
1e+008
Macro
1e+006
1e–007
1e–006
1e–005
1e–004
1e–003
0.01
0.1
Maximum displacement (m)
1
10000
Repuslive force
Curved electrode
Solid expansion
Comb drive
Magnetostrictive
Termal bimorph
Electromagnetic
Topology optimized
State change
S-shaped actuator
Distributed actuator
Inchworm
Scratch drive
SMA
Impact actuator
Termal relay
Fluid expansion
State change
SMA
Termal bimorph
Hydraulic
External ﬁeld
Piezoelectric expansion
Electromagnetic
Electroactive polymer
Pneumatic
Electrostatic relay
Magnetic relay
100
1
0.01
Maximum frequency (HZ)
FIGURE 8.74 Comparison of all types of actuators in terms of maximum displacement versus maximum frequency.171
1e+006
1e–004
Maximum force (N)
1e–008
10000
Piezoelectric
SMA
SMA
State change Fluid expansion State change
Electromagnetic
Electromagnetic
Solid expansion
External ﬁeld
Scratch drive
Inchworm
Termal bimorph
Termal relay
Piezoelectric bimorph
Piezoelectric expansion
Magnetic relay
Magnetostrictive
Topology optimized
Impact actuator
Distributed actuator
Maximum displacement (m)
Repulsive force
1e–007
1e–006
1e–005
1e–004
1e–003
0.01
0.1
1
Electrostatic relay
Curve electrode
Comb drive
Magnetostrictive
Electroactive polymer
Hydraulic
Termal bimorph
Pneumatic
Macro
100
0.01
1
Parallel-plate
FIGURE 8.75 Comparison of all types of actuators in terms of maximum displacement versus maximum force exerted.171

[Page 466]
466   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
a resonance frequency shift. Resonance fre-
quency shifts of cantilevers can be measured 
with high precision using optical reflection 
with a diode laser and a linear position sensi-
tive detector (PSD). The cantilever measuring 
principle may also be based on the detection 
of changes in phase, deflection, amplitude, and 
Q.172 The excitation of MEMS resonators, say a 
comb drive or a cantilever, is most often real-
ized by electrostatic actuation. The drawbacks 
of this approach include the relatively high sup-
ply voltage and the nonlinearity, linked to the 
varying distance between the electrodes. An 
alternative actuation scheme uses the combi-
nation of a high-quality piezoelectric thin film 
with a mechanical resonator. This has several 
advantages: it avoids the nanometer-size gaps 
typically required for electrostatic transduction 
and has a better power handling capability, 
better impedance handling with electronics, 
and better potential to reach 10 GHz and above 
(especially important for very sensitive mass-
sensing applications).
Consider as the resonator a uniform beam 
with a rectangular cross-section, which is fixed 
at one end and deflected at the other (Figure 
8.76). Such a beam experiences lengthwise stress 
that is compressive below the centerline and 
tensile above it. The effective spring constant, K, 
of this beam is given by the following:
 
K = EWt3/4L3 
(8.94)
with E the Young’s modulus and W, t, L the width, 
thickness, and length of the beam, respectively. 
Representative MEMS values for W, t, and L are 
20, 0.6, and 100 µm, with a resulting value for K 
of 0.1 N/m.
For this simple cantilever beam the maximum 
deflection, δ, induced by a weight, We, at its free 
end is given by the following:
 
δ = W L
3EI
e
3
 
(8.95)
in which E and I are, respectively, the Young’s 
modulus of the beam material and the moment 
of inertia of the beam, which is given as W t3/12. 
The weight We = Mg, that is, the mass (M) mul-
tiplied by the gravitational acceleration (g). The 
stiffness constant, K, from Equation 8.94, corre-
sponds to the load/deflection, or We/δ = 3EI/L3, 
resulting in a natural frequency, f0, of:
 f
EI
ML
EWt
ML
t
L
E
0 =
=
=
1
2
3
1
2
4
4
3
3
3
2
π
π
π
ρ
 
(8.96)
where ρ is the density of the material.* For 
a Si-based stress-free MEMS cantilever with 
dimensions of 100 × 3 × 0.1 (L × W × t, in µm), 
the calculated resonant frequency is 12 kHz 
(Young’s modulus E = 160 GPa); for a NEMS 
beam of 0.1  ×  0.01 × 0.01 (L  × W  × t, in µm), 
the frequency is 1.2 GHz. Using a stiffer mate-
rial (higher Young’s modulus E) such as SiC 
(E = 400 GPa), the corresponding numbers are 
even higher, that is, 19 kHz and 1.9 GHz, respec-
tively— reflecting the higher (E/ρ)1/2 in Equation 
8.96. In the NEMS range, mechanical devices 
are almost as fast as today’s electronic devices. 
Making things yet smaller, the ultimate reso-
nant frequency is reached in the THz range, that 
is, for molecular vibrations.174 An intermediate 
frequency of 1.25 MHz was observed for an  
8.3-µm-long, 95-nm-thick SiO2 beam.175
In Figure 8.77 we show an example of a set 
of micromachined single-crystal silicon cantile-
vers. These beams can be used for real-time, in 
situ measurements of physical parameters such 
as viscosity,176 pressure, density, flow rate and 
temperature. The latter, for instance, is achieved 
simply by coating a cantilever with metal on one 
side to form a bimetal.177 Mercury vapor,177 mois-
ture, volatile mercaptans, DNA hybrization,178 
discrimination of single-nucleotide mismatches 
in DNA,179 protein conformational changes,180 
and antibody-antigen binding all have been 
* For a rigorous derivation, including the case of a thin cantilever that 
has been metalized with a layer that contributes to the functioning 
of the device, see Den Hartog.173
Stress
Stress
t
W
L
F
δ
FIGURE 8.76 Stresses in a uniform cantilever beam when 
deflected.

[Page 467]
Actuators   467
monitored using cantilevers.181 For chemical and 
biochemical sensing, the microcantilever sur-
face must be derivatized with chemically selec-
tive coatings, perhaps through self-assembled 
alkanethiols or organosilane films, direct cova-
lent attachment of molecular receptors, dip 
coating (e.g., polymeric resins), or adsorption/
evaporation (e.g., sol-gel matrices).
Under the assumption of negligible variation 
in spring constant and uniformly distributed mass 
loading of the beam, Equation 8.96 describes the 
resonance frequency dependence on mass of 
the cantilever. Adding a discrete mass, Md, to the 
cantilever defines a total effective mass, MT, of 
the cantilever-adsorbate system as MT = M + Md. 
Equation 8.96 describes the mass dependence 
of a mass sensing cantilever, in which case the 
effective mass is that of the cantilever plus an 
adsorbate. The effective mass of the beam, M, is 
related to the mass of the beam, Mb, through M 
= nMb, where n is a geometric parameter, which 
for a rectangular bar is 0.24.183 This results in an 
expression for the resonant frequency given by 
the following:
 f
1
2
EWt
4M L
1
2
EWt
4L (M
0.24WtL )
0
3
T
3
3
3
d
=
π
=
π
+
ρ
 
 
 
(8.97)
where ρ is the density of the cantilever. To com-
pare the mass sensitivity, Sm (given by Equation 
8.64), of a cantilever sensor to that of other gra-
vimetric devices, see Table 8.9.
In a case where mass loading is distributed 
evenly over the cantilever surface, Sm, as noted 
in Table 8.9, is given by the following (in Table 
8.9, d was used for thickness instead of t).
 
S
1
t
m = ρ
 
(8.98)
The positive sign indicates that, as mass is 
added, the resonant frequency increases, corre-
sponding to the increase of the cross-sectional 
thickness of the beam. For an end-loaded canti-
lever (mass only allowed to accumulate in a small 
area at the free end of the beam) this results in:
 
S
t
t
m
d
=
−
+
ξ
ρ ξ
2
0 24
(
.
)
 
(8.99)
where ξ and td are the fractional area coverage 
and thickness of the deposited mass, respectively. 
The negative sign denotes that the frequency is 
decreasing with increasing mass piling up.
From the above we conclude that for mass 
sensing with a microcantilever, a uniform mass 
loading is preferred. From Equations 8.98 and 
8.99, it is further advantageous to make the can-
tilever as low density (ρ) and as thin as possible 
(t). Dramatic further improvements in analytical 
figures of merit can be achieved by scaling the 
cantilever size down to the nanoscale.
In Figure 8.78 we compare the size of a typical 
quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) transducer, 
with a minimal volume of 80 mm3, with an array 
of ten micromachined cantilevers (e.g., based 
on silicon nitride) that requires as little as 0.001 
mm³ of volume. 
From Table 8.9 cantilevers are much more 
sensitive than quartz microbalances and are 
100 µm
FIGURE 8.77 Scanning electron micrograph of a sec-
tion of a microfabricated silicon cantilever array (eight 
cantilevers, each 1 µm thick, 500 µm long, and 100 
µm wide, with a pitch of 250 µm, spring constant 0.02 
Nm–1. (Reprinted with permission from Fritz, J., M.K. 
Baller, H.P. Lang, H. Rothuizen, P. Vettinger, E. Meyer, 
H.-J. Güntherodt, C. Gerber, and J.K. Gimzewski. 2000. 
Translating biomolecular recognition into nanomechanics. 
Science 288:316. Copyright 2000, American Association 
for the Advancement of Science. Courtesy of Dr. J. Fritz, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab.182)
8 mm
5 mm
Cantilever:
60 µm
L = 80 µm
. . .440 µm
20 µm
60 µm
FIGURE 8.78 Size comparison of a quartz crystal microbal-
ance and a micromachined array of cantilevers.

[Page 468]
468   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
easier to downscale. Nanomechanical resona-
tors enable the measurement of mass with 
extraordinary sensitivity. Samples as light as 7 
zeptograms have been weighed in vacuum with 
cantilevers.184 Resolving such small mass changes 
requires the resonator to be very light with a 
high Q. In solution, viscosity severely degrades 
both of these characteristics, preventing many 
sensing applications where fluid is required. 
One needs to excite with a positive feedback 
loop of a piezoelectric or measure in air or vac-
uum. FBARs, we saw earlier, can be downscaled 
more easily than BAWs, and for similar size they 
are even more sensitive than cantilevers (see 
Table 8.9).
An alternative approach, avoiding the viscous 
damping problem, is to use a static formulation, 
pioneered by Thundat et al. from Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory,177 and involves the mea-
surement of bending induced by the adsorption 
of molecules onto a thin microcantilever that has 
two chemically different surfaces. The Thundat 
et al. approach was covered in Volume I, Chapter 
4 (Example 4.1).
Burg et al. pioneered yet a different approach 
to eliminate viscous damping by placing the solu-
tion inside a hollow resonator that is  surrounded 
by vacuum.185 This group demonstrated that 
suspended microchannel resonators can weigh 
single nanoparticles, single bacterial cells, and 
submonolayers of adsorbed proteins in water 
with subfemtogram resolution (1 Hz bandwidth). 
The combination of the low resonator mass (100 
ng) and high-quality factor (Q = 15,000) enables 
an improvement in mass resolution of six orders 
of magnitude over a high-end commercial 
quartz crystal microbalance. This development 
gives access to intriguing applications, such as 
mass-based flow cytometry, the direct detection 
of pathogens, or the nonoptical sizing and mass 
density measurement of colloidal particles.
There are several (near) commercial biosen-
sors based on microcantilever structures, as well 
as companies aiming at commercializing such 
products (e.g., Protiveris, Graviton, Concentris 
and Cantisens® Research). The current trend 
in SAW and QCM devices is to work at higher 
frequencies for better sensitivity, and in silicon 
MEMS, micro- and nanocantilvers are replacing 
quartz devices, as they are easier to integrate 
and easier to make into many device arrays. 
The key strength of all these devices is that they 
hold the promise of label-free measurements. In 
Chapter 10, this volume, we will also see that the 
RF-MEMS community is hard at work trying to 
replace quartz and AlN resonators with silicon 
MEMS-based oscillators.
Acknowledgments
With thanks to Ramses Madou, Marleen Madou, 
and George O’Quinn.
Questions
Questions and answers by Dr. Marc Madou, assisted by 
Mr. George O’Quinn, UC Berkeley
 
8.1: Fill in the blank with the correct word.
 
(a) Piezoelectric materials produce 
 
when they are deformed by a force. 
 
(b) Silicon is 
 piezoelectric. 
 
(c) Viscosity of a fluid is the tendency of the 
fluid to 
 .
 
(d) Large field strength can be used to pro-
duce large 
 with smaller 
 .
 
(e) 
 is the major loss mechanism in 
microactuators. 
 
(f) Shape memory alloys recover the shape 
they are given when they are heated to 
a temperature that is higher than the 
.
 
8.2:  What is the difference between a sensor and 
an actuator?
 
8.3:  What is the underlying principle of ferroflu-
ids (FF) and how do they differ from magne-
torheological fluids (MR)? 
 
8.4:  Describe, using equations, why one might 
prefer a parallel-driven parallel plate capaci-
tor in an electrostatic actuator over a verti-
cal-driven one?
 
8.5:  Prove that the snap voltage Vsnap in a parallel 
plate capacitor is given by 1/3 g0, where g0 is 
the initial gap spacing (with V = 0).
 
8.6:  Make a table listing corresponding mechanical 
and electrical equivalent circuit components.
 
8.7:  Suggest a normally closed valve technology 
based on phase-change of a material that 

[Page 469]
Actuators   469
works for both vapors and liquids and does 
not require power to remain closed but only 
to open. 
 
8.8:  What transduction principles are used in 
biosensors? 
 
8.9:  What is the difference between a self-excit-
ing and a modulating sensor? Give at least 
one example of each used to sense the same 
quantity.
 8.10:  Describe different methods to levitate and 
move a biological cell to a desired spot on a 
glass slide.
 8.11:  Why are wobble motors effective when 
small, yet ineffective when large, and what 
role does friction play in a wobble motor?
 8.12:  Explain the Seebeck effect, Peltier effect, 
Thomson effect, and Joule heating. How are 
they important to thermoelectric devices?
 8.13:  What are the characteristics of shape mem-
ory alloy (SMA) actuators that cause them 
to have a slower response time, but higher 
force than piezoelectric and electrostatic 
actuators?
 8.14:  What is the main difference between piezo-
electricity and ferroelectricity?
 8.15:  How are Cooper pairs formed?
 8.16:  Why do good conductors make poor 
superconductors?
 8.17:  Why is the Casimir force an important con-
sideration in MEMS and NEMS?
 8.18:  Explain magnetostriction and compare it to 
the piezoelectric effect.
 8.19:  Name five mechanical measurands.
References
 
1. White, R. M. 1987. A sensor classification scheme. IEEE 
Trans Ultrason Ferroelectr Freq Control UFFC-34:124–26.
 
2. Middlehoek, S., and S. Audet. 1989. Silicon sensors. London: 
Academic Press.
 
3. Lion, K. S. 1969. Transducers: Problems and prospects. 
IEEE Trans Ind Electron 16:2–5.
 
4. Gopel, W., J. Hesse, and J. N. Zemel, eds. 1989. Sensors: A 
comprehensive survey. New York: VCH.
 
5. Habekotte, E. 1993. In Sensoren and Actuatoren in de 
Werktuigbouw/Machinebouw 
15–96. 
The 
Hague, 
the 
Netherlands: Centrum voor Micro-Electronica.
 
6. National Research Council. 1995. NRC.
 
7. Tang, W. C.-K. 1990. Electrostatic comb drive for resonant 
sensor and actuator applications. PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley.
 
8. Tang, W. C., T.-C. H. Nguyen, and R. T. Howe. 1989. 
Laterally driven polysilicon resonant microstructures. 
Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
(MEMS ’89). Salt Lake City, UT, February 20–22, 1989, 
pp. 53–59.
 
9. Denn, M. M. 1980. Process fluid mechanics. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
 10. Schmidt, M. A. 1988. Microsensors for the measurement 
of shear forces in turbulent boundary layers. Ph.D. thesis, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 11. Trimmer, W. S. N., and K. J. Gabriel. 1987. Design con-
siderations for a practical electrostatic micro-motor. Sensors 
Actuators 11:189–206.
 12. Mohr, J., P. Bley, M. Strohrmann, and U. Wallrabe. 1992. 
Microactuators fabricated by the LIGA process. J Micromech 
Microeng 2:234–41.
 13. Roy, S., A. K. McIlwain, R. G. DeAnna, A. J. Fleischman, R. 
K. Burla, C. A. Zorman, and M. Mehregany. 2000. SiC reso-
nant devices for high Q and high temperature applications. 
Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, pp. 22–25. Hilton 
Head Island, SC: Transducers Research Foundation.
 14. Roukes, M. L. 2000. Nanoelectromechanical systems. Solid-
State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, pp. 367–76. Hilton 
Head Island, SC: Transducers Research Foundation.
 15. Busch-Vishniac, I. J. 1992. The case for magnetically driven 
microactuators. Sensors Actuators A A33:207–20.
 16. Mahadevan, R. 1987. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro Robots and 
Teleoperators Workshop, 15/1–8. Hyannis, MA.
 17. Mahadevan, R. 1990. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’90). Napa Valley, CA, February 
11–14, 1990, pp. 120–27.
 18. Kumar, S., D. Cho, and W. N. Carr. 1992. Experimental study 
of electric suspension for microbearings. J Microelectromech 
Syst 1:23–30.
 19. Mehregany, M., P. Nagarkar, S. D. Senturia, and J. H. Lang. 
1990. Operation of microfabricated harmonic and ordi-
nary side-drive motors. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’90). Napa Valley, CA, February 
11–14, 1990, pp. 82–88.
 20. Mehregany, M., S. D. Senturia, and J. H. Lang. 1990. 
Friction and wear in microfabricated harmonic side-drive 
motor. Technical Digest: IEEE Solid-State Sensor and Actuator 
Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, June 4–7, 1990, pp. 
17–22.
 21. Fujita, H., and K. J. Gabriel. 1991. New opportunities for 
micro actuators. 6th International Conference on Solid-State 
Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, CA, 
June 1991, pp. 14–20.
 22. Trimmer, W. S., ed. 1997. Micromechanics and MEMS classic 
and seminal papers to 1990. New York: IEEE.
 23. Price, R. H., S. J. Cunningham, and S. C. Jacobsen. 1992. 
Field analysis for the electrostatic eccentric drive micromo-
tor (wobble motor). J Electrost 28:7–38.
 24. Furuhata, T., T. Hirano, L. H. Lane, R. E. Fontana, L. S. Fan, 
and H. Fujita. 1993. Outer rotor surface-micromachined 
wobble motor. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL, February 7–10, 
1993, pp. 161–66.
 25. Tai, Y., L. Fan, and R. Muller. 1989. IC processed micro-
motors: design, technology, and testing. Proceedings: IEEE 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’89). Salt Lake 
City, UT, February 20–22, 1989, pp. 1–6.
 26. Fujita, H. 1990. In Proceedings: Micro System Technologies 
’90. Berlin, Germany, p. 818.

[Page 470]
470   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 27. Ohnstein, T., T. Fukiura, J. Ridley, and V. Bonne. 1990. 
Micromachined silicon microvalve. Proceedings: IEEE Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’90). Napa Valley, CA, 
February 11–14, 1990, pp. 95–98.
 28. Marxer, C., O. Manzardo, H.-P. Herzig, R. Dändliker, and 
N. F. de Rooij. 1999. An electrostatic actuator with large 
dynamic range and linear displacement-voltage behaviour 
for a miniature spectrometer. Transducers ‘99 1:786–89.
 29. Petersen, K. 1979. Micromechanical membrane switches 
on silicon. IBM J Res Dev Report no. 23:376.
 30. Cady, W. G. 1922. The piezo-electric resonator. Proceedings 
of the Institute of Radio Engineers, April 1922, pp. 83–114.
 31. Fukuda, E., and I. Yasuda. 1957. On the piezoelectric effect 
in bone. J Phys Soc Jpn 12:1158–62.
 32. Gandhi, M. V., and B. S. Thompson. 1992. Smart materials 
and structures. London: Chapman and Hall.
 33. Hueter, T. F., and R. H. Bolt. 1955. Sonics. New York: 
Wiley.
 34. Pallas-Areny, R., and J. G. Webster. 1991. Sensors and signal 
conditioning. New York: Wiley.
 35. Herbert, J. M. 1982. Ferroelectric transducers and sensors. New 
York: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers.
 36. Khazan, A. D. 1994. Transducers and their elements. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PTR Prentice Hall.
 37. Rogacheva, N. N. 1994. The theory of piezoelectric shells 
and plates. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
 38. Cady, W. G. 1964. Piezoelectricity. New York: Dover.
 39. Zelenka, J. 1986. Piezoelectric resonators and their applica-
tions. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
 40. White, R. M., and F. W. Voltmer. 1965. Direct piezoelectric 
coupling to surface elastic waves. Appl Phys Lett 7:314–316.
 41. Flynn, A. M., L. S. Tavrow, S. F. Bart, R. A. Brooks, D. J. Ehrlich, 
K. R. Udayakumar, and L. E. Cross. 1992. Piezoelectric 
micromotors. J Microelectromech Syst 1:44–52.
 42. Abe, T., and M. L. Reed. 1994. In IEEE International Workshop 
on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’94), 164–69. 
Oiso, Japan.
 43. Hunter, I. W., and S. Lafontaine. 1992. A comparison of 
muscle with artificial actuators. Technical Digest: 1992 Solid 
State Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, 
June 22–25, 1992, pp. 178–85.
 44. AMP. 1993. Piezo film sensors. Valley Forge, PA: AMP.
 45. Nalwa, H. S., ed. 1995. Ferroelectric polymers: Chemistry, 
physics, and applications. New York: Marcel Dekker.
 46. Polla, D., and R. S. Muller. 1986. Zinc-oxide thin films for 
integrated-sensor applications. Technical Digest: IEEE Solid-
State Sensors Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, June 2–5, 
1986.
 47. Muller, R. S. 1987. From ICs to microstructures materi-
als and technologies. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Robots and 
Teleoperators Workshop. Hyannis, MA, November 9–11, 
1987, IEEE Catalog No. 87TH0204-8.
 48. Tjhen, W., T. Tamagawa, C.-P. Ye, C.-C. Hsueh, P. Schiller, 
and D. L. Polla. 1991. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan, pp. 114–19.
 49. Hirata, Y., H. Okuyama, S. Ogino, T. Numazawa, and H. 
Takada. 1995. In Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’95). Amsterdam, the Netherlands, pp. 
191–96.
 50. Preu, G., A. Wolff, D. Cramer, and U. Bast. 1991. In 
Proceedings: Second European Ceramic Society Conference 
(2nd ECerS ’91), 2005–9. Augsburg, Germany.
 51. Lubitz, K. 1989. Mikrostrukturierung von piezokeramik. 
Berlin: VDI-Tagungsbericht, 796.
 52. Son, I.-S., A. Lal, B. Hubbard, and T. Olson. 2000. In Solid-
State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, 206–9. Hilton Head 
Island, SC: Transducers Research Foundation.
 53. Christensen, D. A. 1988. Ultrasonic bioinstrumentation. New 
York: Wiley.
 54. Udayakumar, K. R., S. F. Bart, A. M. Flynn, J. Chen, L. S. 
Tavrow, L. E. Cross, R. A. Brooks, and D. J. Ehrlich. 
1991. Ferroelectric thin films for ultrasonic micromo-
tors. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
(MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan, January 30–February 2, 1991, 
pp. 109–13.
 55. van Lintel, H. T. G., F. C. M. van der Pol, and S. Bouwstra. 
1988. A piezoelectric micropump based on micromachin-
ing of silicon. Sensors Actuators 15:153–67.
 56. Smits, J. G. 1990. Piezoelectric micropump with three valves 
working peristaltically. Sensors Actuators A A21:2030–6.
 57. Judy, J. W., D. L. Polla, and W. P. Robbins. 1990. 
Experimental model and IC-process design of a nanometer 
linear piezoelectric stepper motor. Microstructures, Sensors, 
and Actuators. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 
November 1990, pp. 11–17.
 58. Shoji, S., S. Nakagawa, and M. Esashi. 1990. Micropump 
and sample-injector for integrated chemical analyzing sys-
tems. Sensors Actuators A A21:189–92.
 59. Nyborg, W. L. M. 1965. Acoustic streaming. In Physical 
acoustics, ed. W. P. Mason, 265–331. New York: Academic 
Press.
 60. Moroney, R. M., R. M. White, and R. T. Howe. 1990. 
Ultrasonic micromotors: physics and applications. IEEE 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems. New York, February 1990, 
pp. 182–87.
 61. Moroney, R. M., R. M. White, and R. T. Howe. 1991. 
Microtransport induced by ultrasonic waves. Appl Phys Lett 
59:774–76.
 62. Miyazaki, S., T. Kawai, and M. Araragi. 1991. A piezo-elec-
tric pump driven by a flexural progressive wave. Proceedings: 
IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’91). Nara, 
Japan, January 30–February 2, 1991, pp. 283–88.
 63. Ballantine, D. S., R. M. White, S. L. Martin, A. J. Ricco, E. 
T. Zellers, G. C. Frye, and H. Wohltjen. 1997. Acoustic wave 
sensors: Theory, design, and physico-chemical applications. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
 64. Sauerbrey, G. Z. 1959. The use of an oscillator for weighing 
thin layers and for microweighing. Z Phys 155:206–12.
 65. Black, J. P., A. Elium, R. M. White, M. G. Apte, L. A. Gundel, 
and R. Cambie. 2007. 6D-2 MEMS-enabled miniaturized 
particulate matter monitor employing 1.6 GHz aluminum 
nitride thin-film bulk acoustic wave resonator (FBAR) and 
thermophoretic precipitator. Ultrasonics symposium, 2007, 
New York, October 28–31, 2007, pp. 476–79.
 66. Kobrin, P., C. Seabury, A. Harker, and R. O’Toole. 1999. 
Thin-film resonant chemical sensor with resonant acoustic 
 isolator. US Patent 5936150.
 67. Wohltjen, H., and R. E. Dessy. 1979. Surface acoustic 
wave probe for chemical analysis, parts I–III. Anal Chem 
5:1458–75.
 68. Hoenk, M. E., T. R. Van Zandt, D. A. McWatters, R. K. Watson, 
C. Kukkonen III, W. Kaiser, and D. Cheng. 1995. Surface 
acoustic wave hygrometer flight tests on the NASA DC-8 air-
borne laboratory. Pasadena, CA: Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
 69. Bernstein, J. J., J. Bottari, K. Houston, G. Kirkos, and R. 
Miller. 2000. In Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, 
281–84. Hilton Head Island, SC: Transducers Research 
Foundation.

[Page 471]
Actuators   471
 70. Allen, R. 1984. Sensors in silicon. High Technology, 
September: 43–81.
 71. Kolesar, E. S., and C. S. Dyson. 1995. Object imaging with 
a piezoelectric robotic tactile sensor. J Microelectromech Syst 
4:87–96.
 72. Glaser, K., and G. Fuhr. 1987. The spin of cells in rotating 
high frequency electric fields. In Mechanistic approaches to 
interactions of electric and electromagnetic fields with living sys-
tems, eds. M. Blank and E. Findl. New York: Plenum Press, 
271–89.
 73. Fuhr, G., R. Hagedorn, T. Muller, B. Wagner, and W. Benecke. 
1991. Linear motion of dielectric particles and living cells 
in microfabricated structures induced by travelling electric 
fields. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
(MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan, January 30–February 2, 1991, 
pp. 259–64.
 74. Moesner, F. M., and T. Higuchi. 1995. Devices for particle 
handling by an ac electric field. Proceedings: IEEE Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’95). Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands, January 29–February 2, 1995, pp. 66–71.
 75. Fuhr, G., R. Hagedorn, T. Muller, W. Benecke, and B. Wagner. 
1992. Microfabricated electrohydrodynamic (EHD) pumps 
for liquids of higher conductivity. J Microelectromech Syst 
1:95–98.
 76. Bart, S. F., L. S. Tavrow, M. Mehregany, and J. H. Lang. 1990. 
Microfabricated electrohydrodynamic pumps. Sensors 
Actuators A A21:193–97.
 77. Shoji, S. 1998. In Microsystem technology in chemistry and life 
sciences, eds. A. Manz and H. Becker, 161–88. New York: 
Springer.
 78. Richter, A., A. Plettner, K. Hoffmann, and H. Sandmaier. 
1991. Electrohydrodynamic pumping and flow measure-
ment. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
(MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan, January 30–February 2, 1991, pp. 
271–76.
 79. Choi, J.-W., and C. H. Ahn. 2000. An active micro mixer 
using electrohydrodynamic (EHD) convection. Solid-State 
Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, June 
4–8, 2000, pp. 52–55.
 80. Bart, S. F., T. A. Lober, R. T. Howe, J. H. Lang, and M. F. 
Schlecht. 1988. Design considerations for micromachined 
electric actuators. Sensors Actuators 14:269–92.
 81. Melcher, J. R. 1966. Traveling-wave induced electroconvec-
tion. Phys Fluids 9:1548–55.
 82. Bart, S., and J. H. Lang. 1989. An analysis of electroquasis-
tatic induction micromotors. Sensors Actuators 20:97–106.
 83. Fripp, M. L. R., and N. W. Hagood. 1995. Comparison of 
electrostrictive and piezoceramic actuation for vibration 
suppression (Proceedings paper). In Smart structures and 
materials 1995: Smart structures and integrated systems, ed. I. 
Chopra. Bellingham, WA: SPIE, May 8, 1995, pp. 334–48.
 84. Uchino, K. 1993. Ceramic actuators: Principles and appli-
cations. MRS Bull 18:42.
 85. Lang, S. B. 1974. Sourcebook of pyroelectricity. New York: 
Gordon and Breach.
 86. Ye, C., T. Tamagawa, and D. L. Polla. 1991. Pyroelectric PbTiO3 
thin films for microsensor applications 6th International 
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers 
’91). San Francisco, CA, June 24–27, 1991, pp. 904–07.
 87. Hsieh, H. Y., A. Spetz, and J. N. Zemel. 1991. Wide range 
pyroelectric anemometers for gas flow measurements. 6th 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ’91). San Francisco, CA, June 24–27, 1991, pp. 
38–40.
 88. Zavracky, P. M., K. Warner, G. Jenkins, S. Etienne, C. Logan, 
and R. Grace. 1998. In Solid-State Sensor and Actuator 
Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, 209–11.
 89. Hicks, L. D., and M. S. Dresselhaus. 1993. Effect of quan-
tum-well structures on the thermoelectric figure of merit. 
Phys Rev B Condens Matter 47:727–31.
 90. Yang, P., A. I. Hochbaum, R. Chen, R. D. Delgado, W. 
Liang, E. C. Garnett, M. Najarian, and A. Majumdar. 2008. 
Rough silicon nanowires as high performance thermoelec-
tric materials. Nature 451:163–67.
 91. Heath, J. R., A. Boukai, Y. Bunimovich, J. Tahir-Kheli, J. Yu, 
and W. A. Goddard. 2008. Silicon nanowires as efficient 
thermoelectric materials. Nature 451:168–71.
 92. Shakouri, A. 2006. Nanoscale thermal transport and microre-
frigerators on a chip. Proceedings of the IEEE 94:1613–38.
 93. Voorthuyzen, J. A., and P. Bergveld. 1988. The PRESSFET: 
An integrated electret-MOSFET based pressure sensor. 
Sensors Actuators 14:349–60.
 94. Voorthuyzen, J. A., P. Bergveld, and A. J. Sprenkels. 1989. 
Semiconductor-based electret sensors for sound and pres-
sure. IEEE Trans Electr Insul 24:267–76.
 95. Sprenkels, A. J., R. A. Groothengel, A. J. Verloop, and P. 
Bergveld. 1989. Development of an electret microphone in 
silicon. Sensors Actuators 17:509–12.
 96. Wolffenbuttel, R. F., J. F. L. Goosen, and P. M. Sarro. 1991. 
Design considerations for a permanent-rotor-charge excited 
micromotor with an electrostatic bearing. Sensors Actuators 
A A25–27:583–90.
 97. Mascarenhas, S. 1973. The electret state: A new property 
of bone.  Electrets, ed. M. M. Perlman Princeton, NJ: The 
Electrochemical Society, p. 650.
 98. Mascarenhas, S. 1974. The electret effect in bone and 
polymers and the bound-water problem. Ann NY Acad Sci 
238:36.
 99. Fukada, E., T. Takamaster, and I. Yasuda. 1975. Callus for-
mation by electret. Jpn J Appl Phys 14:2079.
 100. Duff, A. W. 1896. The viscosity of polarized dielectrics. Phys 
Rev 41:23–38.
 101. Winslow, W. M. 1947. Method and means for translating elec-
trical impulses into mechanical force. US Patent 2,417,850.
 102. Winslow, W. M. 1947. Induced vibration of suspensions. J 
Appl Phys 20:1137–40.
 103. Rabinow, J. 1948. The magnetic fluid clutch. AIEE Trans 
67(II):1308–15.
 104. Gandhi, M. V., and B. S. Thompson. 1992. Smart materials 
and structures. London: Chapman & Hall.
 105. Ball, P. 1997. Made to measure: New materials for the 21st 
century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 106. Wen, W., X. Huang, S. Yang, K. Lu, and P. Sheng. 2003. The 
giant electrorheolgical effect in suspension of nanoparti-
cles. Nature Materials 2:727–30.
 107. Zipernowsky. 1889. Zipernowsky electrostatic motor. Electr 
World 14:260.
 108. Trimmer, T. 1990. Micromechanical systems. Proceedings, 
Integrated Micro-Motion Systems: Micromachining, Control, 
and Applications (3rd Toyota Conference). Aichi, Japan, 
October 1990, pp. 1–15.
 109. Trimmer, W. S. N. 1989. Microrobots and micromechani-
cal systems. Sensors Actuators 19:267–87.
 110. Kim, Y.-K., M. Katsurai, and H. Fujita. 1990. Fabrication 
and testing of a micro superconducting actuator using the 
Meissner effect. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’90). Napa Valley, CA, February 11–14, 
1990, pp. 61–66.

[Page 472]
472   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 111. Pelrine, R., and I. Busch-Vishniac. 1987. Magnetically levi-
tated micro-machines. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Robots and 
Tele operators Workshop. Hyannis, MA, November 1987, 
19/1–5.
 112. Rousselet, J., G. H. Markx, and R. Pethig. 1998. Separation 
of erythrocytes and latex beads by dielectrophoretic levi-
tation and hyperlayer field-flow fractionation. Colloids 
Surfaces A 140:209–16.
 113. Kumar, S., D. Cho, and W. N. Carr. 1992. Experimental study 
of electric suspension for microbearings. J Microelectromech 
Syst 1:23–30.
 114. Pister, K. S. J., R. S. Fearing, and R. T. Howe. 1990. A planar 
air levitated electrostatic actuator system. Proceedings: IEEE 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’90). Napa Valley, 
CA, February 11–14, 1990, pp. 67–71.
 115. Wagner, B., M. Kreutzer, and W. Benecke. 1993. Permanent 
magnet micromotors on silicon substrates. J Microelectromech 
Syst 2:23–29.
 116. Benecke, W. 1991. Silicon-microactuators: Activation 
mechanisms and scaling problems. In 1991 International 
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers 
’91). San Francisco, CA, June 24–27, 1991, pp. 46–50.
 117. Wagner, B., M. Kreutzer, and W. Benecke. 1991. Electro-
magnetic microactuators with multiple degrees of free-
dom. 6th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, CA, June 24–27, 
1991, pp. 614–17.
 118. Gongora-Rubio, M., L. Sola-Laguna, M. Smith, and J. 
J. Santiago-Aviles. 1999. In Microfluidic devices and sys-
tems II (proceedings of the SPIE). Santa Clara, CA: SPIE, 
230–39.
 119. Price, R. H., S. J. Cunningham, and S. C. Jacobsen. 1992. 
Field analysis for the electrostatic eccentric drive micromo-
tor (wobble motor). J Electrost 28:7–38.
 120. Goemans, P. A. F. M. 1994. Microsystems and energy: the 
role of energy. Microsystem technology: Exploring opportunities, 
ed. G. K. Lebbink. Alphen aan de Rijn/Zaventem: Samsom 
BedrijfsInformatie bv, pp. 50–64.
 121. Christenson, T. R., H. Gückel, K. J. Skrobis, and J. Klein. 
1992. In Solid-State Sensors and Actuators Workshop. Hilton 
Head Island, SC, June 22–25, 1992, pp. 51–54.
 122. Guckel, H., K. J. Skrobis, T. R. Christenson, J. Klein, S. Han, 
B. Choi, E. G. Lovell, and T. W. Chapma. 1991. Fabrication 
and testing of the planar magnetic micromotor. J Micromech 
Microeng 1:135–38.
 123. Ahn, C. H., Y. J. Kim, and M. G. Allen. 1993. A planar 
variable reluctance micromotor with fully integrated sta-
tor and wrapped coils. IEEE microelectromechanical systems. 
Fort Lauderdale, FL, February 1993, pp. 1–6. New York: 
IEEE.
 124. Wallrabe, U., P. Bley, B. Krevet, W. Menz, and J. Mohr. 1994. 
Design rules and test of electrostatic micromotors made by 
the LIGA process. J Micromech Microeng 4:40–45.
 125. Busch-Vishniac, I. J. 1992. The case for magnetically driven 
microactuators. Sensors Actuators A A33:207–20.
 126. Edelstein, R. L., C. R. Tamanaha, P. E. Sheenan, M. M. 
Miller, D. R. Baselt, L. J. Whitman, and R. J. Colton. 2000. 
The BARC biosensor applied to the detection of biological 
warfare agents. Biosens Bioelectron 14:805–13.
 127. Busch, J. D., and A. D. Johnson. 1990. Shape-memory 
properties in Ni-Ti sputter-deposited film. J Appl Phys 
68:6224–28.
 128. Fujita, H., and A. Omodaka. 1987. Electrostatic actuators 
for micromechatronics. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Robots and 
Teleoperators Workshop. Hyannis, MA , November 1987, 
14/1–10.
 129. Fujita, H. 1990. In Proceedings: Micro System Technologies 
’90, 818. Berlin, Germany.
 130. Takeshima, N., K. J. Gabriel, M. Ozaki, J. Takahashi, H. 
Horiguchi, and H. Fujita. 1991. Electrostatic parallelogram 
actuators. 6th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, CA, June 
24–27, 1991, pp. 63–66.
 131. Romankiw, L. T. 1989. In Proceedings: Symposium 
on Magnetic Materials, Processes, and Devices, 39–53. 
Hollywood, FL.
 132. Cardot, F., J. Gobet, M. Bogdanski, and F. Rudolf. 1994. 
Fabrication of a magnetic transducer composed of a high-
density array of microelectromagnets with on-chip elec-
tronics. Sensors Actuators A A43:11–16.
 133. Ahn, C. H., Y. J. Kim, and M. G. Allen. 1993. A fully inte-
grated micromachined toroidal inductor with a nickel-iron 
magnetic core (the switched dc/dc converter applica-
tion). 7th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators (Transducers ’93). Yokohama, Japan, June 7–10, 
1993, pp. 70–73.
 134. Honda, T., K. I. Arai, and M. Yamaguchi. 1994. Fabrication 
of actuators using magnetostrictive thin films. In IEEE 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Micro 
Electro 
Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS ’94). Oiso, Japan, January 25–28, 1994, 
pp. 51–56.
 135. Quandt, E., and K. Seemann. 1995. Fabrication of giant 
magnetostrictive thin film actuators. Proceedings: IEEE Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’95). Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands, January 29–February 2, 1995, pp. 273–77.
 136. Rombach, P., and W. Langheinrich. 1994. An integrated 
sensor head in silicon for contactless detection of torque 
and force. Sensors Actuators A A41–42:410–16.
 137. Hathaway, K. B., and A. E. Clark. 1993. Magnetostrictive 
materials. MRS Bull April: 34.
 138. Fukuda, T., H. Hosokai, H. Ohyama, H. Hashimoto, and 
F. Arai. 1991. Giant magnetostrictive alloy (GMA) appli-
cations to micro-mobile robot as a micro actuator with-
out power supply cables. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan, January 
30–February 2, 1991, pp. 210–15.
 139. Panholzer, R. 1963. Electromagnetic pumps. Elec Eng 
2:128–35.
 140. Heng, K.-H., L. Huang, W. Wang, and M. C. Murphy. 1999. 
Development of a diffuser/nozzle type micropump based 
on magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) principle. Microfluidic 
devices and systems II, eds. C. H. Ahn and A. B. Frazier. San 
Jose, CA, September 20–21, 1999, pp. 66–73.
 141. Lemoff, A. V., A. P. Lee, R. R. Miles, and C. F. McConaghy. 
1999. An ac magnetohydrodynamic micropump: towards 
a true integrated microfluidic system. Technical Digest: 10th 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators. 
Sendai, Japan, pp. 1126–29.
 142. Lemoff, A. V., and A. P. Lee. 2000. In Micro total anal-
ysis systems, eds. A. van den Berg, W. Olthuis, and P. 
Bergveld. Enschede, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
 143. Phule, P., and J. Ginder. 1998. The materials science of 
field-responsive fluids. MRS Bull 23:19–21.

[Page 473]
Actuators   473
 144. Herzer, G. 1997. Nanocrystalline soft magnetic alloys. 
In Handbook of magnetic materials, ed. K. H. J. Buschow, 
417–61. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.
 145. Rinaldi, C., and M. Zahn. 2002. Effects of spin viscosity 
on ferrofluid duct flow profiles in alternating and rotat-
ing magnetic fields. J Magnetism Magnetic Materials 252:
172–75.
 146. Lorenz, C., and M. Zahn. 2003. Hele-Shaw ferrohydro-
dynamics for rotating and dc axial magnetic fields. 2003 
Gallery of Fluid Motion. Phys Fluids 15:S4.
 147. Hartshorne, H., C. J. Backhouse, and W. E. Lee. 2004. 
Ferrofluid-based microchip pump and valve. Sensors 
Actuators B 99:592–600.
 148. Hatch, A., A. Kamholz, G. Holman, P. Yager, and K. 
Bohringer. 2001. A ferrofluidic magnetic micropump. 
J Microelectromech Syst 10:215–21.
 149. Pal, R., M. Yang, B. N. Johnson, D. T. Burke, and M. A. Burns. 
2004. Phase change microvalve for integrated devices. Anal 
Chem 76:3740–48.
 150. Liu, R. H., J. Bonanno, J. Yang, R. Lenigk, and P. Grodzinski. 
2004. Single-use, thermally actuated paraffin valves for 
microfluidic applications. Sens Actuators B 98:328–36.
 151. Oh, K. W., K. Namkoong, and C. Park. 2005. A phase 
change microvalve using meltable magnetic material: 
Ferro-wax. In 9th International Conference on Miniaturized 
Systems for Chemistry and Life Sciences: uTAS. Boston, MA, 
October 9–13, 2005, pp. 554–56.
 152. Park, J. M., Y. Cho, B.-S. Lee, J.-G. Lee, and C. Ko. 2007. 
Multifunctional microvalves controlled by optical illumi-
nation on nanoheaters and its application in centrifugal 
microfluidic devices. Lab Chip 7:557–64.
 153. Zoval, J., and M. J. Madou. 2004. Centrifuge-based fluidic 
platforms. Proc IEEE 92(1):140–53.
 154. Zdeblick, M. J., R. Anderson, J. Jankowski, B. Kline-
Schoder, L. Christel, R. Miles, and W. Weber. 1994. 
Thermopneumatically actuated microvalves and integrated 
electro-fluidic circuits. Technical Digest: 1994 Solid State 
Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, June 
13–16, 1994, pp. 251–55.
 155. Barth, P. W. 1995. Silicon microvalves for gas flow con-
trol. 8th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 
25–29, 1995, pp. 276–80.
 156. Busch, J. D., and A. D. Johnson. 1990. Shape-memory 
pro perties in Ni-Ti sputter-deposited film. J Appl Phys 
68:6224–28.
 157. Walker, J. A., K. J. Gabriel, and M. Mehregany. 1990. 
Thin-film processing of TiNi shape memory alloy. Sensors 
Actuators A A21:243–46.
 158. Johnson, A. D. 1991. Vacuum-deposited TiNi shape mem-
ory film: Characterization and applications in microde-
vices. J Micromech Microeng 1:34–41.
 159. Dario, P., M. Bergamasco, L. Bernardi, and A. Bicchi. 1987. 
A shape memory alloy actuating module for fine manip-
ulation. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Robots and Teleoperators 
Workshop. Hyannis, MA, November 1987, 16/1–5.
 160. Quandt, E., C. Halene, H. Holleck, K. Feit, M. Kohl, and 
P. Schlossmacher. 1995. Sputter deposition of TiNi and 
TiNiPd films displaying the two way shape memory 
effect. 8th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 
25–29, 1995, pp. 202–05.
 161. Hunter, I. W., and S. Lafontaine. 1992. A comparison of 
muscle with artificial actuators. Technical Digest: 1992 Solid 
State Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, 
June 22–25, 1992, pp. 178–85.
 162. Gandhi, M. V., and B. S. Thompson. 1992. Smart materials 
and structures. London: Chapman & Hall.
 163. Gordon, G. B., and P. W. Barth. 1991. Thermally-actuated 
microminiature valve, Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, CA. US 
Patent 5058856.
 164. Barth, P. W., C. C. Beatty, and L. A. Field. 1981. Characteri-
zation of the silicon electrode. Surf Sci 108:135–52.
 165. Jerman, H. 1991. Electrically-activated, normally-closed 
diaphragm valves. 6th International Conference on Solid-State 
Sensors and Actuators (Transducers ’91). San Francisco, CA, 
June 24–27, 1991, pp. 1045–48.
 166. Editorial. 1995. Microflow Analytical.
 167. Hamberg, M. W., C. Neagu, J. G. E. Gardeniers, D. J. Ijntema, 
and M. Elwenspoek. 1995. Electrochemical micro actuator. 
Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS 
’95). Amsterdam, the Netherlands, January 29–February 2, 
1995, pp. 106–10.
 168. Nagakura, T., K. Ishihara, T. Furukawa, K. Masuda, and T. 
Tsuda. 1995. Auto-regulated medical pump without energy 
supply. 8th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors 
and Actuators (Transducers ’95). Stockholm, Sweden, June 
25–29, 1995, pp. 287–90.
 169. Brannon-Peppas, L. 1997. Polymers in controlled drug 
delivery. Med Plastics Biomater 4:34–44.
 170. Lamoreaux, S. K. 1997. Demonstration of the Casimir force 
in the 0.6 to 6 µm range. Phys Rev Lett 78:5.
 171. Bell, D. J., T. J. Lu, N. A. Fleck, and S. M. Spearing. 2005. 
MEMS actuators and sensors: Observations on their perfor-
mance and selection. J Microelectromech Syst 15:S153–64.
 172. Finot, E., A. Passian, and T. Thundat. 2008. Measurement 
of mechanical properties of cantilever shaped materials. 
Sensors 8:3497–541.
 173. Den Hartog, J. P. 1956. Mechanical vibrations. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
 174. Roukes, M. L. 2000. In Solid-State Sensor and Actuator 
Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC: Transducers Research 
Foundation, pp. 367–76.
 175. Petersen, K. E. 1982. Silicon as a mechanical material. Proc 
IEEE 70:420–57.
 176. Oden, P. I., G. Y. Chen, R. A. Steele, R. J. Warmack, and 
T. Thundat. 1996. Viscous drag measurements utilizing 
microfabricated cantilevers. Appl Phys Lett 68:1465–69.
 177. Thundat, T., P. I. Oden, and R. J. Warmack. 1997. 
Microcantilever sensors. Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys 
Eng 1:185–99.
 178. Thundat, T., G. Y. Chen, R. J. Warmack, D. P. Allison, and E. 
A. Wachter. 1995. Vapor detection using resonating micro-
cantilevers. Anal Chem 67:519–21.
 179. Hansen, K. M., H.-F. Ji, G. Wu, R. Datar, R. Cote, A. 
Majumdar, and T. Thundat. 2001. Cantilever-based optical 
deflection assay for discrimination of DNA single-nucle-
otide mismatches. Anal Chem 73:1567–71.
 180. Moulin, A. M. 2000. Microcantilever-based biosensors. 
Ultramicroscopy 82:23–31.
 181. Thundat, T., L. A. Bottomley, S. Meller, W. H. Velander, and 
R. Van Tassell. 2001. In Immunoassays: Methods and proto-
cols, eds. A. L. Ghindilis, A. R. Pavlov, and P. B. Atanajov. 
Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.

[Page 474]
474   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 182. Fritz, J., M. K. Baller, H. P. Lang, H. Rothuizen, P. Vettinger, 
E. Meyer, H.-J. Güntherodt, C. Gerber, and J. K. Gimzewski. 
2000. Translating biomolecular recognition into nanome-
chanics. Science 288:316–18.
 183. Chen, G. Y., T. Thundat, E. A. Wachter, and R. J. Warmack. 
1995. Adsorption-induced surface stress and its effects 
on resonance frequency of cantilevers. J Appl Phys 
77:3618–22.
 184. Yang, Y. T., C. Callegari, X. L. Feng, K. L. Ekinci, and M. 
L. Roukes. 2006. Zeptogram-scale nanomechanical mass 
sensing. Nano Lett 6:583–86.
 185. Burg, T. P., M. Godin, S. M. Knudsen, W. Shen, G. Carlson, 
J. S. Foster, K. Babcock, and S. R. Manalis. 2007. Weighing 
of biomolecules, single cells and single nanoparticles in 
fluid. Nature 446:1066–69.

[Page 475]
475
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Power in MEMS and NEMS
MEMS and NEMS Batteries, 
Capacitors, Fuel Cells, 
Combustion Engines, and Solar 
Cells
Fuel Cells
Microfuel Cells
Fuels and Fuel Storage in Microfuel 
Cells
Heat Engines in MEMS
Solar Cells
MEMS and NEMS in Solar Cells
Energy Scavenging (Harvesting)
Fractal Power
Brains in Miniature Devices
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Questions
References
9
Power and Brains in 
Miniature Devices
Introduction
In this chapter we consider power and brains in miniature devices. We 
analyze the challenges and promises of powering miniaturized devices 
and of the miniaturization of power sources themselves. The power sec-
tion starts with a comparison of onboard energy sources, such as batter-
ies, capacitors, fuel cells, internal combustion engines, and solar cells. 
Next, we consider energy scavenging methods, such as taking advantage 
of environmental vibrations or thermal gradients.
Miniaturization of power sources scales disadvantageously, as the spe-
cific energy (energy per volume unit: l3) of the power source determines 
the volume for a given application. That volume, besides the active mate-
rials (say, Li in a Li-ion battery), must also include packaging, and pack-
aging efficiency degrades as the power source gets smaller.
As in the case of cell phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), distrib-
uted sensor networks, portable computers, etc., small, lightweight, and 
long-lasting energy sources are one of the most urgently needed MEMS 
and NEMS breakthrough technologies. A pertinent quote from Wired 
magazine in April 2004 reads, “If we don’t do something about increasing 
250 ×
3k ×
Initiator
Generator
30k ×
300k ×
100 nm
 Different orders of a Koch curve seen in parallel with carbon fractal electrodes at 
different magnifications. Fractal electrodes can minimize internal resistance while 
maximizing surface-to-volume ratios. Carbon-MEMS shows great promise for use 
in the fabrication of fractal electrodes for electrochemical applications.

[Page 476]
476   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
battery life, we’re toast. The biggest impediment to 
our technological future isn’t extending Moore’s law. 
No, the biggest challenge to progress is much more 
ordinary: It’s battery life.”1
Micro- and nanosystems require even smaller 
power sources, as weight and volume of onboard 
energy sources are disproportionately large com-
pared with the systems they power. The roles of 
energy storage and energy dissipation in microsys-
tems differ considerably from the world of practical 
daily experience. Designing micro- and nanosys-
tems demands close examination of energy budgets 
and taking advantage of the merits of smallness as 
well as minimizing its adverse effects. In Figure 9.1 
we compare progress made in improving processors, 
hard disk drive (HDD) capacity, and battery energy 
stored. Compared with the other technologies, prog-
ress in battery improvement is obviously much more 
sluggish, with a growth of, at most, 2–3% per year: 
there is obviously no Moore’s law for batteries.
The section on power in MEMS and NEMS should 
help the reader in choosing a preferred power source 
for his or her MEMS/NEMS device.
We also consider the implementation of comput-
ing power or “brains” in miniaturized systems. After 
a short summary of current and projected computer 
technology and its comparison with nature’s 
computers, we consider the latest developments in a 
field closely related and important to microrobotics: 
artificial intelligence (AI). We will discuss how both 
bottom-up and top-down approaches to AI might 
impact miniaturization technology. Complexity 
theory and artificial life are examples of bottom-up 
approaches to building AI that feature the self-
organizing or emergent properties touched upon 
in Chapter 3. Artificial neural networks represent a 
bottom-up approach to developing brains heavily 
dependent on learning cycles. Electronic noses and 
tongues have already been developed on the basis of 
such neural nets (see Chapter 10). As in the case of 
machining, we will learn that bottom-up approaches 
for embedding intelligence in miniature devices are 
gaining more and more interest.
Power in MEMS and NEMS
Onboard Energy Sources
Introduction
Onboard energy sources for MEMS devices may 
include radioactive sources, batteries, capacitors, 
fuel cells, internal combustion engines, solar cells, 
etc. Combustion processes for electrical power gen-
eration provide advantages over onboard batteries, 
even when the low conversion efficiency in the com-
bustion process from thermal energy to electrical 
energy is taken into account. For example, hydrocar-
bon fuels provide an energy storage density between 
40 and 50 MJ/kg, whereas modern nickel metal 
hydride batteries, commonly used in laptop com-
puters, provide only 0.4 MJ/kg. Thus, even at only 
4% conversion efficiency from thermal to electrical 
energy, hydrocarbon fuels provide about five times 
higher energy storage density than batteries.
There has been a lot of attention given recently 
to MEMS and even NEMS power sources. The goal 
is to put as much energy as possible in the smallest 
amount of space. To form an idea of what is achiev-
able with known power systems, we list the energy 
one can store in 1 mm3 of various power systems in 
Table 9.1. From this table, the highest energy den-
sity available is from a radioactive source, but such 
sources may never be practical for consumer applica-
tions because of environmental and safety concerns 
(although americium is used as the current source 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
16×
14×
12×
10×
8×
 6×
4×
2×
1×
Improvement (compared to year 0)
Time (years)
Processor (MIPS)
Hard disk (capacity)
Memory (capacity)
Battery (energy stored)
FIGURE 9.1 Progress in improvements made in processors, 
hard disk capacity, and battery energy stored. No Moore’s 
law in batteries: 2–3% growth per year. MIPS, million 
instructions per second.

[Page 477]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   477
in some fire alarms). Chemical energy in the form 
of batteries provides the next highest density. Solar 
light, at noon on a sunny day, gives us 100 mW/cm2 
(office lights are 7.2 mW/cm2). Collectors of solar 
light work with varying efficiency; single-crystal 
Si provides a 14–30% efficient conversion of light 
to power. Polysilicon provides about 10–15% effi-
ciency, and organic dyes are 5–10% efficient.
Future stand-alone microsystems will almost 
surely employ hybrid strategies, using low levels of 
power for low-level activities and quick bursts of 
energy, perhaps relying on a capacitor, for comput-
ing, communication, or maneuvering.
MEMS and NEMS Batteries, Capacitors, Fuel 
Cells, Combustion Engines, and Solar Cells
Batteries
To judge the benefits and problems associated 
with different battery technologies, some general 
properties of batteries must be introduced. It is usu-
ally desirable that the amount of energy stored in a 
given mass or volume of active battery material is as 
high as possible. To compare the energy content of 
batteries, the terms specific energy (expressed in Wh/
kg) and energy density (in Wh/L) are used, whereas 
the rate capability is expressed as specific power (in W/
kg) and power density (in W/L). To reach the goal of 
a high specific energy and energy density, two fun-
damental requirements must be met by the battery 
electrode materials: 1) a high specific charge (in Ah/
kg) and charge density (in Ah/L), i.e., a high number 
of available charge carriers per mass and volume unit 
of the material; and 2) a high (positive electrode) and 
low (negative electrode) standard redox potential of 
the respective electrode redox reactions, leading to 
a high cell voltage (see also Volume I, Chapter 7). 
Moreover, in rechargeable batteries (also called 
reversible or secondary batteries), reactions at both neg-
ative and positive electrode have to be highly revers-
ible to maintain the specific charge for hundreds of 
charge/discharge cycles. With an assumed cycling 
efficiency of even 99% in each cycle, the available 
specific charge after 100 cycles would be only ∼37% 
of the initial value (after 500 cycles, less than 1%), 
and electrode materials should thus combine high 
specific charge with good rechargeability.
In Table 9.2 we list primary and secondary bat-
teries for onboard power systems, and for compar-
ison we also included data on microfuel cells and 
TABLE 9.1 Energy Stored in 1 mm3
Power capacitor
4 µJ/mm3
1 µW for 4 s
Thick-film battery
1 J/mm3
270 µW for 1 h
Thin-film battery
2.5 J/mm3
0.7 mW for l h
Solar cell (1 × 1 × 0.1 mm3)
0.1 mW
Gasoline
300 J/mm3
3 mW for 1 day
180 Ta (T1/2 = 8 h)
≈1 MJ/mm3
34 W
178 Hf (T1/2 = 31 years)
>10 MJ/mm3
160 mW
TABLE 9.2 Examples of Onboard Power Systems
On Chip
Power Sources
Energy Density (Wh/kg)
Wh/L
Power Density (W/kg)
Primary batteries
Zinc air
200
1050–1560
150
Zn-Cl2
150
100–180
 90
Alkaline
125–225
150–440
Silver Oxide
155–285
250–500
Lithium
100–200
340–500
>200
Secondary batteries
Lead-acid
30–40
40
 30–40
Ni-Cd
200
170
150–200
NiMH
150–200
250
150
Li–ion
100
300
200
Microfuel cell
4000
Ultracapacitors
 13–28
200

[Page 478]
478   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
ultracapacitors. The specific energy (energy per vol-
ume unit) of the onboard power sources listed in 
Table 9.2, determines the proper active volume for a 
given application. If the volume of the packaging is 
taken into account, energy volume densities of pri-
mary lithium batteries may reach 340–500 Wh/L; 
these batteries generate the highest specific energy 
of any commercially available battery. If we assume 
that the average power consumption of a MEMS 
device is 100 mW, we need slightly more than 1 cm3 
of lithium battery to last for 1 year, assuming we can 
use 100% of the charge in the battery. The energy 
density of rechargeable batteries is typically less 
than half of that of primary batteries, so in that case 
we need to be recharging every 3–4 months. Today, 
commercially available batteries are obviously too 
big for most MEMS devices, and they are even too 
big for many mobile consumer applications.
An important technical challenge that arises in 
considering downscaling batteries, besides the obvi-
ous fact that their capacity scales as l3, is that battery 
packaging efficiency scales poorly in the microdo-
main: there is relatively more packaging in smaller 
batteries than in large ones. What is needed, then, 
in the microbattery arena is a set of new packaging 
strategies, new materials, and new manufacturing 
techniques. In order to be able to make an onboard 
micropower source using MEMS technology, one 
also expects that the materials involved are com-
patible with microfabrication processes (e.g., being 
stable under vacuum conditions; no liquid electro-
lytes), that the battery is rechargeable (because its 
life cycle will be short), and that the reaction prod-
ucts are compatible with the MEMS device.
In terms of commercially available batteries for 
MEMS, Li primary and Li-ion reversible batteries are 
the two most important choices today. In lithium 
primary batteries, the anode, consisting of high-
purity lithium, may be combined with many differ-
ent cathode materials, resulting in different voltages 
ranging from 1.5 to 3.9 V. For electrolyte, batteries 
contain organic solvents in which lithium salts are 
dissolved or they feature solid polymers that also 
may function as electrolytes. Beyond the button Li 
batteries 4.8 mm (diameter) by 1.4 mm (high) used 
in watches and cameras, progress in miniaturizing 
high-energy-density power sources has been limited. 
Button Li cells are now the best available primary 
energy sources for microsystems. The basic principle 
of rechargeable Li-ion batteries is electrochemical 
intercalation and de-intercalation of lithium in both 
electrodes. As we noted above, an ideal secondary 
or reversible battery has a high-energy capacity, fast 
charging time, and long cycle life. The capacity is 
determined by the lithium saturation concentration 
of the electrode materials. Many materials combi-
nation have been researched, and an often touted 
approach is the use of carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The 
highest Li concentration can be stored in CNTs if all 
the interstitial sites (inter-shell van der Waals spaces, 
inter-tube channels and inner cores) are accessible 
for Li intercalation. Nalimova et al. proved that two 
Li atoms per C atom can be stored in multiwall car-
bon nanotubes (MWCNTs) under a high pressure 
of 6 GPa.2,3 This is a very high Li loading, but it 
involves a chemical reaction, not an intercalation, 
and its usefulness for a battery is not established. 
Gaucher et al. reported high degrees of irreversible 
(500 mAh/g) and reversible (450 mAh/g) insertion 
of lithium ions in MWCNTs in an aprotic medium.4 
They noticed that the structure of the MWCNTs plays 
an important role in specific capacity and cycle sta-
bility. The capacity of less-graphitized MWCNT was 
higher than that of the well-graphitized MWCNT, 
although the latter exhibited better cycle stability 
and charge/discharge rates.4 In spite of such interest-
ing behaviors of CNTs as the host of lithium inter-
calation, their large irreversibility capacity and their 
poor discharge curves relative to those of lithium 
metal leave the material not satisfactory yet for com-
mercial applications.
Batteries and fuel cell materials deposited with 
integrated circuit (IC) technologies on the device 
substrate itself remain in the research stage.5 Often, 
the thin-film materials deposited in constructing 
those batteries, such as Li, TiS2, V2O5, etc., prove 
incompatible with the IC process, and the prospect of 
integrating them with ICs remains remote. Ultrathin, 
solid-state Li cells—“energy paper”—are beginning 
to emerge. Kanebo introduced the polymeric 
polyacenic semiconductor (PAS)-based battery as far 
back as 1993. The polymer PAS film in the battery is 
only 200 µm thick and has an active surface area of 
2200 m2/g. It serves as the anode, and the cathode is 

[Page 479]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   479
lithium based. The voltage is 3.3 V, corresponding to 
3 Ni-Cd elements in series. Unfortunately, the energy 
density, taking the complete, packaged battery into 
account, is only 5.5 Wh/L.6
If a MEMS device uses 10 µW of power continu-
ously, in a day it will consume ∼1 J of energy. Since 
the energy density for Li-ion thin-film systems is 
in the range of ∼2 J mm–3, matching or exceeding 
standard commercial lithium-ion systems, it would 
appear that this battery fits the task. In reality, this 
is not so: thin-film batteries, as shown in Figure 9.2, 
are two-dimensional (2D) devices and are necessar-
ily thin in order to prevent power losses typically 
associated with the slow transport of ions, and this 
form factor leads to a low capacity per mm2. The 
energy per unit area as reported for several lithium 
thin-film batteries ranges from 0.25 to ∼2  × 10–2 
Jmm–2;7 consequently, with a typical device thick-
ness on the order of 15 µm, a thin-film battery 
would require a significant amount of area in order 
to supply 1 Jmm–3.
The real question then becomes whether a thin-
film battery can supply the energy that the MEMS 
device requires within the constraints of the areal 
“footprint” available for the battery. Unfortunately, 
a thin-film battery of 1 mm2, despite having an 
excellent energy per unit volume, falls far short of 
being able to power a typical MEMS for more than 
one day. If the areal footprint is made 100 times 
larger (at 1 cm2), the thin-film approach becomes 
more acceptable,7,8 These important consequences 
of the 2D nature of thin-film batteries are frequently 
overlooked. The calculation by Koeneman et al.,9 
for example, ignored the 2D character of thin-film 
batteries when they concluded that these batteries 
could carry out some 60,000 actuations of a “smart 
bearing.”7 When the actual area available for the 
power source on the device is considered, only about 
1200 actuations are possible. In order to power 
devices with limited real estate and maintain a small 
areal footprint, batteries must somehow make better 
use of their thickness dimension.7
In recent years there has been a growing realiza-
tion that improved microbattery performance can 
be attained by configuring the electrode materials 
currently employed in 2D batteries into micro-three-
 dimensional (µ-3D) architectures (high-rise batter-
ies). In this approach, cell structures are designed 
to maximize power and energy density while main-
taining short ion transport distances.7 There are 
several possible architectures that can achieve this 
same goal, but an underlying principle in all µ-3D 
batteries is that the transport between the electrodes 
remains one-dimensional at the microscopic level, 
while the electrodes are configured in complex non-
planar geometries in order to increase the energy 
density of the cell within the same footprint area.7,10
Detailed calculations by Long et al.7 show that 
microbatteries configured as µ-3D structures can 
readily achieve 1 Jmm–2, the amount required to 
power a typical MEMS device for a day. Perhaps the 
most obvious µ-3D design is one consisting of inter-
digitated electrode posts, shown in Figure 9.3a. The 
anode and cathode consist of arrays of rods sepa-
rated by a continuous electrolyte phase. The spatial 
arrangement of the anode and cathode arrays deter-
mines the current-potential distribution. The short 
transport distances lead to a much lower ohmic 
resistance as compared with traditional planar bat-
tery configurations. The molecular diffusion equa-
tion indicates that diffusion over a 10-µm distance 
is 1 million-fold faster than diffusion over a 1-cm 
distance, since x = (2Dτ)1/2 (Volume I, Equation 
6.100), where D is the diffusion constant and τ the 
time required for a molecule to diffuse over distance 
x. Thus, µ-3D configurations with narrow electrode 
posts offer a means of maintaining “short” diffusion 
distances, thereby increasing the power capacity of 
the battery. For example, Hart et al. first consider 
a thin-film 2D battery that comprises a 1-cm2 area 
for both anode and cathode, each 22.5 µm thick 
and separated by a 5-µm-thick electrolyte.10 The 
total volume of electrodes and electrolyte in this 
case is 5 × 10–3 cm3. It is relatively straightforward 
Cathode
Protective coating
Anode
Electrolyte
Cathode current
collector
Substrate
Anode current
collector
10 µm
FIGURE 9.2 Example thin-film battery.

[Page 480]
480   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
to calculate then that a corresponding µ-3D array 
battery (see Figure 9.3) with a series of 5-µm-radius 
interdigitated cathodes and anodes, a 5-µm surface-
to- surface electrode spacing, and occupying the 
same total volume (i.e., 5 × 10–3 cm3) contains only 
about 39% of the energy capacity of the thin-film 2D 
design. The lower-energy capacity is due to a higher 
percentage of the total volume being occupied by the 
electrolyte. On the other hand, the active cathode 
and anode surface areas in the three-dimensional 
(3D) design are 3.5 cm2 each, significantly larger 
than the 2D design. There are some other intriguing 
advantages of the µ-3D design that are not directly 
reflected in the above numbers. For instance, the 
transport length scale in the thin-film 2D battery 
is 350% larger than in the 3D design. This means 
that the µ-3D design is significantly less susceptible 
to ohmic losses and other transport limitations. To 
achieve equal transport length scales in the 2D design 
would require a 350% increase in the areal footprint 
in order to maintain equal cell volume, a significant 
disadvantage in employing these devices in MEMS 
and microelectronic applications. While the above 
comparison of 2D and µ-3D designs indicates that 
the µ-3D cell has an inherently lower-energy capac-
ity per total cell volume, in fact, the capacity of the 
3D design can be increased without limit by increas-
ing the battery height, without sacrificing the small 
area footprint or high-power density.
For an example of this type of µ-3D electrode con-
figuration, see the carbon-MEMS (C-MEMS) battery 
in Figure 5.18. This type of battery is being devel-
oped by Enevate (http://www.enevate.com/).
Capacitors
Rechargeable and disposable (primary) batteries, 
reviewed above, use a chemical reaction to produce 
energy. The problem is that after many charges and 
discharges, even a rechargeable (secondary) battery 
loses capacity, to the point where the user has to dis-
card it. However, capacitors contain energy stored 
in an electric field between charges on two metal 
electrodes separated by a dielectric. Capacitors 
charge faster and last longer than normal batter-
ies, and their reversibility, absence of polarity, and 
extended lifetime make them an attractive alterna-
tive for power in microsystems. They are useful for 
on-chip power conversion, but their energy density 
(a)
(b)
L
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 9.3 Examples of prospective three-dimensional architectures for charge-insertion batteries. (a) Array of interdig-
itated cylindrical cathodes and anodes; (b) Interdigitated plate array of cathodes and anodes; (c) Rod array of cylindrical 
anodes coated with a thin layer of ion-conducting dielectric (electrolyte), with the remaining free volume filled with the 
cathode material; (d) Aperiodic “sponge” architectures in which the solid network of the sponge serves as the charge-
insertion cathode, which is coated with an ultrathin layer of ion-conducting dielectric (electrolyte), and in which the 
remaining free volume is filled with an interpenetrating, continuous anode.7

[Page 481]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   481
is too low to be a real secondary storage compo-
nent. Electrochemical capacitors improve that per-
spective; with an energy density on the order of 
75 J/cm3, they are a good potential for secondary 
storage.
Electrochemical capacitors are called by a number 
of names: supercapacitors, ultracapacitors, and electro-
chemical double-layer (ECDL) capacitors. Typi cally, 
supercapacitor devices consist of two electrodes and 
an insulating material that separates the electrodes. 
The insulator prevent electrical contact but allows 
ions from the electrolyte to pass through. At each 
electrode, there exists a dipole layer, the so-called 
ECDL. Typically ∼0.4 nm thick, the ECDL acts as 
a capacitor if the potential difference across it is 
less than that needed to dissociate the electrolyte 
(into hydrogen or oxygen in the case of water). If 
the electrolyte is water, this restricts the voltage to 
1.23 V, but higher voltages of 2.3 V are possible by 
using a nonaqueous electrolyte, such as tetraethyl 
ammonium fluoroborate in propylene carbonate. 
The capacitance is given by C = εA/d, where ε is the 
dielectric constant, A is the electrode surface area, 
and d is the ECDL thickness. The electrodes are made 
of materials with a high effective surface area, such 
as porous metal oxides (e.g., IrOx), porous carbon, 
or carbon aerogels, in order to maximize the surface 
area, A, of the double layer and to achieve a small 
double layer thickness, d. By choosing and fabricating 
electrodes with extremely high surface area A (e.g., 
1000 m2/g or greater) and a small d, very large 
capacitances are achievable (e.g., 1000 F). Carbon 
nanotube filaments can further increase the surface 
area of the electrodes and allow capacitors to store 
yet more energy. Single-walled carbon nanotubes 
(SWNTs) have the largest surface area to volume 
ratio of any carbon material, 3000 m2/g, as all their 
atoms are on the surface, and they make for the 
ultimate electrode material. This advantage is used 
for energy storage in nanotube supercapacitors.7
The performance of supercapacitors is judged in 
terms of their energy density (per unit volume) or 
½CV 2 and power density or V 2/R, where R is their 
series discharge resistance. Another advantage of 
CNTs in this regard is that they have a much lower 
resistance than the often-used activated carbon, 
which could greatly increase their power density. 
The limiting factors are contacting CNTs to the elec-
trode backing and having the ability to do this at 
low temperatures and at a low cost, as the competing 
activated carbon is very cheap.
Since it is possible to carbonize photoresist 
materials, make them porous, and charge them, it 
is possible to integrate ultracapacitors on ICs (see 
C-MEMS in Chapter 5). The most challenging tech-
nical issue, just as in the case of a battery, is packag-
ing. Supercapacitors and batteries incorporate very 
corrosive and reactive materials, making the chal-
lenge even more daunting.
The performance of supercapacitors can be 
gleaned from the Ragone plot, as shown in Figure 9.4. 
A Ragone plot is a log-log plot of the specific power 
(W/kg) versus the specific energy (Wh/kg).
As can be seen from this plot, supercapacitors or 
ultracapacitors bridge the gap between capacitors 
and batteries and have the ability to store greater 
amounts of energy than conventional capacitors, and 
they are able to deliver more power than batteries. 
Supercapacitors also possess a number of desirable 
qualities that make them an attractive energy stor-
age option: they store and release charge completely 
reversibly, they are extremely efficient and can with-
stand a large number of charge/discharge cycles, 
they can store or release energy very quickly, and 
they can operate over a wide range of temperatures.
10
100
1,000
1 h
1 s
0.03 s
10 h
Conventional
batteries
Conventional
capacitors
Ultracapacitors
(Boostcap®)
Fuel cells
10,000
1,000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
Power density (W/kg)
Energy density (Wh/kg)
FIGURE 9.4 Ragone plot. The power density versus energy 
density plot distinguishes various electricity storage sys-
tems. Batteries are high-energy density but low-power den-
sity, whereas normal capacitors are low-energy density but 
high-power density. Li+ batteries have the highest energy 
density of any battery. Supercapacitors have a high-energy 
density and high-power density and are intermediate 
between normal capacitors and batteries. See http://www.
tecategroup.com/ultracapacitors/maxwellboostcaps.php.

[Page 482]
482   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Fuel Cells
Introduction
Two major challenges of our times are the shrink-
ing of available fossil energy resources and climate 
change associated with global warming. With 
humans consuming carbon-based fuels (carbon, 
natural gas, coal, and tar shale) faster than they can 
be replaced, yet another “oil war” making the daily 
news, GM still selling 15–20,000 Hummers a year, 
and Tata planning to sell millions of its new Nano 
cars, independence from fossil fuels has finally again 
become what former President Jimmy Carter called 
the “moral equivalent of war.”
One of the often advanced solutions to the energy 
crisis is to replace fossil hydrocarbon-based energy 
with the energy from carbon-free sources such as the 
sun, nuclear energy, or the hot interior of the earth 
and use hydrogen as the energy carrier. Hydrogen 
can be produced by hydrolysis of water using energy 
from carbon-free sources, and the hydrogen thus 
produced can serve as fuel in fuel cells to generate 
electricity, either stationary or mobile.
Fuel cells, discovered in the 1850s, are batter-
ies with renewable energetic materials (fuels) (see 
inset in the heading of Part II and Figure 9.5). The 
electrodes in a fuel cell do not take part in the cell 
reactions they act as reaction sites only. The basic 
reaction in a fuel cell is reversed electrolysis, or:
 
2H
O
2H O
2
2
2
+
=
 
Reaction 9.1
Electricity is produced in an anode reaction:
 
H2 = 2H+ + 2e– 
Reaction 9.2
and a cathode reaction:
 
½ O2 + 2H+ + 2e– = H2O 
Reaction 9.3
Fuel cells can help us generate cleaner power from 
conventional sources more efficiently and can be 
viewed as a temporary energy solution until we can 
harvest more renewable resources (solar, wind) and/
or or more powerful sources (fusion) directly.
Differences in electrolytes used determine the 
type of fuel cell:
 
◾Phosphoric acid fuel cell (PAFC)
 
◾Proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEM, 
SPE™, and PEFC)
 
◾Solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC)
 
◾Molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC)
 
◾Alkaline fuel cell (AFC)
There are quite a few positive fuel cell attributes to 
enumerate. Power and energy density of a fuel cell 
are higher than in batteries [e.g., methanol (1550 
Wh/L, 1738 Wh/kg) versus lithium-ion (450 Wh/L, 
185 Wh/kg); see also the Ragone plot in Figure 9.4]. 
Fuels used in fuel cells typically have much higher 
(approximately 10×) energy densities than their bat-
tery counterparts, and to increase the power density 
of a fuel cell, one only needs to increase the surface-
to-volume ratio within the cell. The latter is a much 
simpler task than engineering new material chemis-
tries for batteries. There is no lengthy recharging, as 
fuel cells are rapidly refueled; instead of charging a 
battery for an extended amount of time, a fuel car-
tridge is inserted. The energy conversion process in 
fuel cells is simpler, and there is an unlimited access 
to active electrochemical material (fuel), while the 
amount of active materials accessible for energy 
conversion in batteries is limited to their volumet-
ric energy density. Fuel cells feature negligible self-
discharge, are clean and environment-friendly, and 
have an unlimited cycle stability. Costs of fuel cells 
are coming down: through sophisticated engineer-
ing the amount of expensive platinum required for 
catalysts is being lowered, and new manufacturing 
Current
Air
Fuel
(hydrogen)
Water
FIGURE 9.5 Schematic of a fuel cell.

[Page 483]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   483
processes are being introduced. While the cost per 
Joule ($/J) has gone up for energy-dense batteries 
(e.g., NiCd weighs 0.5 kg, lasts 1 h, and costs $20, 
and a comparable Li-ion battery lasts 3 h but costs 
more than four times more), the cost of a compa-
rable fuel cell that lasts 30 h has gone down (to per-
haps <$5).
Disadvantages of fuel cells compared with batter-
ies are lower efficiency (up to 50–60%, compared 
with about 90% for Li-ion batteries) and the need 
for peripherals such as pumps, humidifiers, fuel pro-
cessors, power conditioners, etc. These peripherals 
have to do with the need to obtain hydrogen from 
traditional fuels (oil, coal, wood, propane, natural 
gas, ethanol, etc.), to store fuels and hydrogen (the 
storage medium), and to manage heat and water 
(both products of the fuel cell reaction) and power 
(e.g., convert DC to AC). A typical process to obtain 
hydrogen is steam reforming, which can process 
methane into hydrogen (research and development 
is under way to also reform diesel, gasoline, etha-
nol, etc.). The basic steam reforming reaction is as 
follows:
 
CH4 + 2H2O = 3H2 + CO2  
Reaction 9.4
Intermediate steps in this reaction produce CO, 
which is reacted to form CO2. The reaction also 
requires catalysts to speed up reaction rates, and sul-
fur compounds must be removed to protect those 
catalysts.
In Table 9.3 we present a summary of stationary 
fuel cells (data are from 2003). Fuel cells are still 
TABLE 9.3 Summary of Stationary Fuel Cell Products
200 KW PAFC – UTC Fuel cells
250 KW SOFC – Siemens
Type
Electrolyte
Electrode
Fuel 
processor
Temp 
(°C)
Electrical 
Efficiency 
(LHV) 
Cogeneration 
potential
Stage of development
Manufacturer
PAFC
Phosphoric 
acid 
(liquid/gel)
Noble 
metal
External
200
35-40%
Hot water
Steam 
(low psi)
Commercial sales 250 
units in field
UTC fuel cells
SOFC
Zinconium 
oxide 
(solid)
Ceramic
Internal
1000
50-65%
Hot gas 
Steam 
optional
Field demonstrations 
Several units in field 
Siemens 
Westinghouse
MCFC
Alkali 
carbonates 
(liquid) 
Nickel
Internal
650
45-60%
Hot gas 
Steam 
optional
Field demonstrations
Expect to have 
precommercial units 
in place within one 
year
Fuel Cell 
Energy, Inc.
PEMFC
Organic 
polymer 
(solid)
Noble 
metal
External
80
40-45%
NA
Field demonstrations
Commercial sales of 
small residential units
Avista
Ballard
H Power
UTC Fuel cell
Nuvera
Plug Power 
200 KW MCFC – Fuel Cell Energy, Inc.
250 KW PEM – Ballard

[Page 484]
484   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
too expensive, and in order to introduce them into 
the huge mobile market, their miniaturization and 
the integration/simplification of the accompanying 
peripheral gear is a must (see next section).
Microfuel Cells
Introduction
There are many reasons why one might want to 
make a miniature fuel cell. To begin with, small fuel 
cells, especially when they come with less or size-
reduced peripheral equipment, will make many 
more applications possible (e.g., power for mobile 
phones, iPods, laptops, etc.). The comparison 
between 2D and µ-3D batteries carried out earlier 
(see Batteries) can be extended to 2D and µ-3D fuel 
cells. From simple theoretical considerations, for a 
specific µ-3D electrode designs, we calculated a 3.5-
fold larger surface area than the corresponding 2D 
design. The surface area of a fuel cell determines its 
amperage, meaning that fuel cell power is directly 
proportional to the electrode surface area. Smaller 
cells have larger surface areas relative to their 
volume, so they automatically feature increased 
power density. Microfuel cells might eventually also 
come at a lower cost because less material is used in 
their construction. Because of function integration 
possible in microsystems, the overall complexity may 
also be reduced (less peripherals), further reducing 
total weight and volume. Moreover, microfuel cells are 
expected to have a higher efficiency because of their 
high surface-to-volume ratio and the corresponding 
increase in triple points (reaction points where gas, 
liquid, and electrode meet) and the smaller fluidic 
channel sizes, which allow more efficient mass 
transport (for serpentine flow patterns, the flow 
velocity is inversely proportional to the square of 
the length scale). Employing microfluidic strategies, 
gas transport in the cell can be maximized while gas 
stoichiometry can be maintained and “dead zones” 
underneath structures minimized. Microfuel cells 
also may benefit from increased catalyst utilization, 
because microfabrication and nanostructuring 
techniques (see e.g., carbon nanohorns, Figure 9.8) 
allow for more control over catalyst deposition 
and distribution. Finally, it is easier to maintain a 
homogeneous environment within a small area, and 
the internal resistance is lower because of shorter 
conductive paths.
Example 9.1:
There have been many attempts at miniatur-
ization of fuel cells. A recent example comes 
from Toshiba, which unveiled a miniature direct 
methanol fuel cell (DMFC) developed for small 
electronic devices such as digital audio players 
and wireless headsets (Figure 9.6). The fuel cell, 
measures 22 × 56 × 4.5 mm, weighs 8.5 g, and 
can put out 100 mW of power for as long as 20 h 
with a 2 cc charge of 95% methanol. The air-
breathing cell has only passive components.
DMFCs 
are 
a 
subcategory 
of 
polymer 
exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) where 
the fuel, methanol, is not reformed but is fed 
directly into the fuel cell, avoiding complicated 
catalytic reforming steps. When a DMFC is oper-
ating, the methanol solution and oxygen gas are 
fed to the surface of the membrane electrode 
assembly (MEA) through the anode and cath-
ode plates, respectively. Methanol is consumed 
at the anode catalyst layer, producing protons 
and electrons and releasing the byproduct CO2. 
The protons directly transfer through the PEM 
to the cathode, while the electrons, blocked 
by the insulating PEM, have to travel to the 
cathode via the external circuit, resulting in an 
electrical current. The protons and electrons 
combine with O2 at the cathode catalyst layer 
to form H2O. Storage of methanol is easier than 
that of hydrogen because it does not need to 
be done at high pressures or low temperatures, 
since methanol is a liquid. Liquid methanol, as 
FIGURE 9.6 Toshiba’s miniature direct methanol fuel cell.

[Page 485]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   485
the fuel of DMFC, has the advantages of easy 
storage and the ability to refuel instantly with 
no interruption of operation. The methanol cell 
can be directly started and operated at room 
temperature, which is a significant advantage 
for the applications of the portable electronic 
devices. Finally, the energy density of methanol 
is an order of magnitude greater than that of 
even highly compressed hydrogen. Methanol 
has an energy density of 17.6 kJ/cm3, which is 
about 6 times that of a lithium battery.
Unfortunately, the efficiency of DMFCs is 
typically low because of the high permeation of 
methanol through the polymer membrane, a del-
eterious effect known as methanol crossover.
Fuels and Fuel Storage in Microfuel Cells
Introduction
The advent of microfuel cell-powered gadgets will 
require progress in the manufacture of fuel storage 
cartridges (see Figure 9.7).
Fuel sources for fuel cells range from highly flam-
mable to relatively inert. Many miniaturized micro-
fuel cells use methanol to be oxidized directly in 
DMFCs (see the Toshiba cell described above) or they 
consume hydrogen that is reformed “on demand” 
from methanol in reformed methanol fuel cells 
(RMFCs). Formic acid at a concentration of <85% 
by weight may be oxidized directly in a formic acid 
fuel cell. Liquid borohydride is either oxidized 
directly, in direct borohydride fuel cells (DBFCs), or 
reformed to hydrogen on demand, in indirect boro-
hydride fuel cells. A butane or a butane/propane 
mix is oxidized directly by an SOFC system.
Using methanol, Samsung has developed a pro-
totype fuel cell for use in laptops that it claims 
lasts almost twice as long as other fuel cell systems 
being readied (see Figure 9.7). The Samsung fuel 
cell, powered by about 200 cm3 of liquid metha-
nol, has an energy density of 200 Wh/L. The cell 
measures 23 cm wide, 8.2 cm in length, and 
5.3 cm deep and weighs less than 1 kg. In total, 
the fuel cell can supply power to a laptop for about 
15 h. Such performance substantially improves over 
the 100–130 Wh/L energy densities of the fuel cells 
being developed by companies such as Toshiba (see 
Figure 9.6) and NEC for laptops. While hydrogen-
based cells have taken off for home or automobile 
use, versions based on methanol for use in elec-
tronics products have yet to be commercialized. 
Toshiba and NEC are among the companies that 
promised methanol fuel cell-based laptops in pre-
vious years, but each time, technology launches 
have been delayed.
In what follows, we analyze in a bit more detail 
progress made in hydrogen storage using CNTs and 
carbon nanohorns and the prospect of biomass as 
fuels in biofuel cells.
Hydrogen Storage
The chemical energy per mass of hydrogen (142 
MJ kg–1) is at least three times larger than that of 
other chemical fuels (for example, the equiva-
lent value for liquid hydrocarbons is 47 MJ kg–1). 
Also, hydrogen as a fuel leads to pure water as a 
byproduct, and the hydrogen/oxygen reaction is a 
reaction for which catalysts have been researched 
the most. The problem of storing hydrogen safely 
and effectively is one of the major technologi-
cal barriers currently preventing the widespread 
adoption of hydrogen as an energy carrier and 
the subsequent transition to a so-called “hydro-
gen economy.” Practical problems with storage of 
hydrogen gas or liquid make solid state storage the 
Fuel cartridge
FIGURE 9.7 Fuel cell cartridges in consumer electronics.

[Page 486]
486   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
most attractive. To appreciate the challenge, con-
sider that 4 kg of hydrogen gas, which is required 
for a practical driving distance, occupies a volume 
as large as 49 m3. Storage solutions must reduce 
the enormous volume of the hydrogen gas. A 
solid medium capable of absorbing and releasing 
large quantities of hydrogen easily and reliably is 
actively being sought and various types of solids 
have been proposed, including microporous mate-
rials that can store physisorbed molecular hydro-
gen at low temperatures,11 intermetallic hydrides 
that absorb atomic hydrogen as an interstitial,12 
and complex hydrides formed from light elements, 
such as Li, B, Na, Mg, and Al.13,14 GE, for example, 
is working with the Department of Energy (DOE) 
on Li2Mg(NH)2, which contains 5.6% hydrogen 
and has reversible storage capability. As a threshold 
for economical hydrogen storage, the DOE has set 
storage requirements for the DOE Freedom CAR 
program at 6 weight % (wt%) to be considered for 
technological implementation.
Among the storage methods currently being 
explored, storing hydrogen by adsorption in met-
als appears too expensive. However, trapping it 
in porous materials is not only efficient (all the 
hydrogen adsorbed can be recovered) but cheap. 
What’s more, the cycle of hydrogen storage and 
release does not require any reactivation or regen-
eration of the material. Accordingly, considerable 
research efforts are going into the evaluation of 
various nanostructures, such as CNTs, to find 
the most suitable lightweight hydrogen storage 
material. Because of their cylindrical and hol-
low geometry and nanometer-scale diameters, it 
was predicted that CNTs would store liquids or 
gases in their inner cores. Claims of storage of 
hydrogen in CNTs attracted worldwide interest 
when Dillon et al. published 5–10 wt% hydro-
gen storage in single-walled carbon nanotubes 
(SWNTs).15 Subsequently, claims of high hydro-
gen storage capacities at room temperature and 
pressures higher than 100 bar in graphitic nano-
fibers (GNFs) and lithium- and potassium-doped 
multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were 
made. But in the late 1990s, the identification of 
many erroneous measurements of gaseous hydro-
gen uptake by CNTs and CNFs led to a controversy 
that is still lingering today.*16 In light of today’s 
knowledge, it is not very likely that at moderate 
pressures and around room temperature carbon 
nanostructures can store the amount of hydrogen 
required for hydrogen-based fuel cells (at least 
not for fuel cells for cars): using them for storage 
is possible only at extremely low temperatures 
(below –196oC) because of the weak interaction 
between hydrogen and carbon. The future pos-
sibility of storing hydrogen inside carbon-based 
porous materials, as part of a clean energy scheme, 
depends on the force of the interaction between 
hydrogen and carbon and on how easily this force 
can be increased.
Another possibility for hydrogen storage is elec-
trochemical storage in CNTs. In this case, it is not 
a hydrogen molecule but a hydrogen atom that is 
physisorbed. Currently, the storage of hydrogen 
in this absorbed form in carbonaceous materials 
is considered the most appropriate route to solve 
the hydrogen storage problem. While most of the 
studies have focused on the hydrogen storage 
through physisorption, recent density functional 
theory (DFT) calculations for single-walled CNTs 
indicate the potential for up to 7.5 wt% hydro-
gen storage capacity through chemisorption by 
saturating the C-C double bonds in the nanotube 
walls and forming C-H bonds (i.e., hydrogenation; 
see the articles “Generalized Chemical Reactivity 
of Curved Surfaces: Carbon Nanotubes”17 and 
“Theoretical evaluation of hydrogen storage capac-
ity in pure carbon nanostructures”18). However, 
direct experimental evidence of the high values of 
the hydrogen capacity through chemisorption has 
not yet been demonstrated, and so far, the only 
storage systems that have met the DOE targets are 
compressed tanks of gas and liquid. A 2004 report 
by the American Physical Society concluded that 
even the most promising solid-storage technolo-
gies are still several breakthroughs away from 
practical use.
* Some of the physical properties of hydrogen, including its low molar 
mass relative to gas phase impurities and its susceptibility to leakage 
and permeation, together with the sensitivity of the materials that 
can be used to store it, mean that hydrogen sorption measurements 
are particularly prone to error.

[Page 487]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   487
Carbon nanohorns offer a better prospect for 
hydrogen storage in fuel cells than CNTs. Nanohorns 
are pure carbon structures that are 2–3 nm long, are 
cone-shaped, and aggregate to form dahlia-shaped 
structures 80–100 nm in diameter with a large num-
ber of horn-shaped, short, single-layered nanotubes 
that stick out in all directions (Figure 9.8). Since the 
tips of the cones are pointed, it was suspected that 
there might be a stronger hydrogen-substrate inter-
action than in CNTs. Recently, researchers at the 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) 
confirmed that with carbon nanohorns structures, 
the hydrogen-carbon interaction is indeed far more 
stable than with nanotubes.19 This group demon-
strated that nanohorns have remarkable adsorptive 
behavior because of their large surface area (about 
400 m2/g) and excellent catalytic properties because 
Pt catalyst is dispersed more homogeneously on the 
surface of carbon nanohorns. Unlike single-walled 
CNTs, carbon nanohorns can be made without the 
use of catalysts. Carbon nanohorn aggregates can be 
produced with a yield of more than 90% through 
laser vaporization of carbon at room temperature. 
Sumio Iijima’s group showed that they could also 
be produced by laser ablation of graphite, and these 
were the researchers who came up with the name 
nanohorns.20
Carbon nanohorns are expected to perform excel-
lent as gas storage material, making use of their high 
adsorbability.* Carbon nanohorns have actually 
cleared the DOE threshold for commercial adoption 
as methane gas storage material.
Biofuels
Not everyone agrees that improved hydrogen storage 
is the way to further develop microfuel cells. Some 
researchers point out that proponents of a hydrogen 
economy claim to address greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions, but in reality, these experts counterargue, 
the most economic methods of making hydrogen is 
from natural gas and these processes produce sig-
nificant amounts of GHGs. Since virtually all living 
things in the biosphere operate by using biomass as 
fuel and generate power using fuel cells, these sci-
entists propose that a biomimetic approach would 
appear to be the most environmentally sustainable 
method of producing energy. The most common 
energy currencies on the planet, used by virtually 
every living thing, are found in landfills, wastewater 
* Carbon nanohorns selectively adsorb DNA fractions. Inorganic 
materials are mostly used today in selecting DNA fractions. However, 
carbon, with its excellent biocompatibility, may be a better material 
than inorganic substances. See http://www.nanonet.go.jp/english/
mailmag/2004/023a.html.
SW carbon nanohorn aggregates
Single-walled
carbon
nanohorns
100 nm
10 nm
10 nm
FIGURE 9.8 Carbon nanohorn aggregates and individual carbon nanohorns. (From Iijima, S., et al. 1999. Chem Phys Lett 
309:165.20)

[Page 488]
488   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
treatment plants, wood waste, agricultural waste, 
grasses, etc. The mechanism of biofuel cells involves 
the oxidation of substrates such as carbohydrates, 
proteins, or fats by microorganisms or enzymes gen-
erating electrons in an external circuit. Biocatalyzed 
oxidation of organic substances by oxygen or other 
oxidizers in a two-electrode cell provides a poten-
tial means for the conversion of chemical to electri-
cal energy, even in the body of a living subject. Like 
conventional fuel cells (such as methanol fuel cells), 
these types of cells can deliver more energy per vol-
ume weight than conventional batteries, and the 
theoretical efficiency of biofuel cells is estimated to 
be as high as 90% (compared with up to 60% for 
other fuel cells; see above). Abundant organic raw 
materials, such as amino acids or glucose, can be 
used as fuels in biofuel cells for the oxidation pro-
cess, and molecular oxygen can act as the substrate 
being reduced. If the biofuel cells use concentrated 
sources of chemical energy, they can be made safe, 
small, and light. Moreover, biofuel cells differ from 
the traditional fuel cells by the material used to cat-
alyze the electrochemical reaction. Instead of using 
precious metals as catalysts, biofuel cells rely on 
biological molecules, such as enzymes, to carry out 
the reaction.
Biofuel cells are categorized into microbial-based 
and enzymatic biofuel cells, which employ bio-
catalysts, i.e., either microorganisms or enzymes, 
respectively, to convert chemical energy into electri-
cal energy. Biocatalysts are attractive compared with 
transition metal catalysts because 1) they operate at 
moderate temperatures, 2) they allow for the use of 
inexpensive fuel cell components, 3) they are renew-
able, and 4) they can be developed for a variety of 
cheap fuels. Enzymatic biofuel cells are preferred 
over microbial ones. Microbial-based biofuel cells 
have too many disadvantages: complex design, big 
size, poor reproducibility, and short lifetime based 
on bacterial survival.
As an example of an enzymatic biofuel cell, con-
sider the glucose cell in Figure 9.9. Here, oxidation 
of glucose is coupled to the reduction of dissolved 
O2. The cell incorporates an anode consisting of sug-
ar-digesting enzymes and mediator, and a cathode 
comprising oxygen-reducing enzymes and media-
tor. The anode extracts electrons and hydrogen ions 
from the sugar (glucose) through enzymatic oxida-
tion as follows.
 
Glucose → Gluconolactone + 2 H+ + 2e– 
 
 
Reaction 9.4
The hydrogen ion migrates to the cathode, and 
once it arrives at the cathode, the hydrogen ions 
and electrons absorb oxygen from the air to produce 
water.
 
(1/2)O2 + 2 H+ + 2e– → H2O 
Reaction 9.5
Through this electrochemical reaction, electrons 
pass through the outer circuit to generate electricity. 
Power output of this cell is the product of the cell 
voltage, Vcell, and the cell current, Icell. The oxidation 
reaction may be catalyzed by glucose oxidase (I) at 
the anode, and oxygen reduction may be catalyzed 
by laccase (II) (or bilirubin oxidase) at the cathode. 
Since most of the redox enzymes lack direct electri-
cal communication with electrode supports, various 
electron mediators have to be used to contact the 
biocatalyst electrically with the electrodes. A redox 
mediator of appropriate redox potential is required 
to shuttle electrons between the protein and the 
electrode surface, because direct electron transfer to 
buried redox sites within these proteins is generally 
not possible given the distance of the active site from 
the electrode surface (for more details, see Volume I, 
Chapter 7).
For the pictured glucose/O2 biofuel cell, a Vcell 
higher than 0.5 V can be achieved by the utilization 
Glucose
H2O
O2
e–
e–
e–
e–
Gluconolactone
Anode
Cathode
FIGURE 9.9 Biofuel cell based on glucose oxidation and 
oxygen reduction.

[Page 489]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   489
of enzymes and redox mediators of carefully cho-
sen redox potentials. The mediators and enzymes 
can be immobilized on the electrodes by, among 
others, codeposition of redox polymer/enzyme 
and a bifunctional linker, coelectrodeposition and 
enzyme reconstitution at a functionalized electrode 
surface to provide membrane-less biofuel cells. The 
immobilization concept represents an important 
advancement, as it precludes the need to separate 
the anode and cathode half-cells from each other 
using a membrane, provided that no solution redox 
reaction between fuel and oxygen occurs (as is the 
case for glucose). See http://www.tappi.org/content/
events/10nano/papers/20.2.pdf.
Example 9.2:
Sony, one of the world’s largest battery makers, 
has succeeded in creating a sugar-based biofuel 
cell. The biofuel cell does not require mixing or 
convection of the glucose solution or air move-
ment; as it is a passive-type cell, it works simply 
by supplying sugar solution into the unit. Their 
test fuel cells measure 39 mm3 and delivers 50 
mW—currently the world’s highest level for 
passive-type biofuel cells of comparable vol-
ume. The biobattery casing is made of vegeta-
ble-based plastic (polylactate) and is designed 
in the image of a biological cell. By connecting 
four cubic cells, it is possible to power a mem-
ory-type Walkman (NW-E407), together with a 
pair of passive-type speakers (no external power 
source) (see Figure 9.10).
Key achievements in the development of the 
Sony biofuel cell include the following:
 
1. Enhanced immobilization of enzymes and 
mediator on the anode. For effective glucose 
digestion, the anode contains high concentra-
tion of enzymes and mediator. The Sony immo-
bilization technology involves two polymers 
to attach enzyme and mediator to the anode. 
The polymers feature an opposite charge, so 
the electrostatic interaction between the two 
polymers effectively secures the enzymes and 
the mediator closely together. The ionic bal-
ance and immobilization process have been 
optimized for efficient electron extraction 
from the glucose.
 
2. Cathode structure for efficient oxygen absorp-
tion. The water content within the cathode 
environment is vital to ensure optimum con-
ditions for the efficient enzymatic reduction 
of oxygen. The Sony biofuel cell employs 
porous carbon electrodes partitioned using a 
cellophane separator. The optimization of this 
electrode structure ensures that the appropri-
ate water levels are maintained, enhancing 
the reactivity of the cathode.
 
3. Optimization of electrolyte. A phosphate buf-
fer of approximately 0.1 M is generally used 
within enzymology research; however, an 
unusually high 1.0 M concentration buffer is 
used in the Sony biofuel cell. This is based on 
the discovery that such high concentration lev-
els are effective for maintaining the activity 
of enzymes immobilized on the electrodes.
Sony continues its development of immobi-
lization systems, electrode composition, and 
other technologies in order to further enhance 
power output and durability, with the aim of 
realizing practical applications for these biobat-
teries in the near future.21, 22
Despite the many advances in enzyme and poly-
mer membrane modified electrode techniques, 
current enzymatic biofuel cells cannot compete 
with conventional batteries because of their low 
cell voltages and power densities. In addition, other 
key challenges of enzymatic biofuel cells include 
an uncertain storage and operational stability, 
tedious pretreatments of special and expensive 
FIGURE 9.10 Sony’s biofuel cell based on glucose solu-
tions. Four units are shown to power a Sony Walkman. 
(Courtesy of Sony.)

[Page 490]
490   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
electrode materials with a subsequent complex 
chemical, and/or electrochemical functionaliza-
tion, the adsorption of many interfering species on 
the electrodes, etc.
Implantable biofuel cells are proposed to convert 
the energy stored within chemicals present in vivo 
into usable electrical energy. The microbiofuel cell 
is potentially an ideal power source for a variety of 
devices that need to be implanted for short periods 
of time (i.e., from a few days to a period of a couple 
of weeks), such as medical sensor/transmitter sys-
tems and injectable biosensors, because of its easy 
integration with the sensor-transmitter system fab-
ricated by MEMS technologies. Current biofuel cells 
cannot compete with conventional electrochemical 
cells in powering implantable MEMS devices, such 
as in situ and in vivo biosensors. Normally these 
cells would produce continuously a few microwatts, 
of which less than 1 µW l is required for the opera-
tion of the sensor; the transmitter consumes most 
of the power. With a small ultracapacitor storing 
~10 mJ, enough for 1-ms-long 1–10 GHz bursts of 
10  µW every 10 s, the transmitted information 
is easily acquired outside the body. Even though 
microwave irradiation has been used to charge these 
devices, if one considers the potential health risks of 
direct microwave irradiation, the biofuel cell could 
be more convenient and safe for the patients.
Micromachining of Microfuel Cells
To appreciate the many challenges involved in 
micromachining a fuel cell, let us start by consid-
ering how one is typically constructed (see Figure 
9.11). To focus the mind we assume that we are deal-
ing with miniaturization of a passive PEM fuel cell. 
In general, passive-type fuel systems have a more 
simple structure and are more suitable for min-
iaturization, whereas active type systems have a 
more complicated structure and are suited to higher 
power devices. A PEMFC contains an electrolyte that 
is a layer of solid polymer that allows protons to 
be transmitted from one face to the other. PEMFCs 
require hydrogen and oxygen (or air) as inputs, and 
these gases must be humidified in most cases. The 
operating temperatures are relatively low, at around 
60–80°C.
Figure 9.11 shows one fuel cell element only and 
these elements can be either stacked (Figure 9.12a) or 
put in an array. A fuel cell array can either be banded 
or flip-flopped as illustrated in Figure 9.12b.
Bipolar plates have a structural, an electrical, and 
a fluidic function. The requirements for the  bipolar 
plates in the microfuel cells pictured in Figure 9.11 
include high electrical conductivity, resistance to 
corrosion, chemical compatibility, high thermal 
conductivity, low leakage of gases, high mechani-
cal robustness, low weight, manufacturability, and 
low cost. Graphite satisfies all these criteria except 
for mechanical robustness, manufacturability, and 
low cost. Bipolar plates are a significant part of 
the PEMFC stack and account for 80% of the total 
Electr.
consuming
device
Hydrogen Electrolyte
Catalyst
Bipolar plate
Oxygen
(or air)
Water vapor
(and excess air)
FIGURE 9.11 Construction of a typical fuel cell.
Fuel cell
Air (O2) and water (H2O)
Hydrogen (H2)
Air (O2)
Heat
(a)
“Flip-ﬂop”
(b)
Membrane
Electrode
Flow structure
Fuel
Oxidant
Ion ﬂux
Banded
FIGURE 9.12 (a) Fuel cell stack. (b) Two methods for array-
ing fuel cell elements.

[Page 491]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   491
weight  and 45% of stack cost. The bipolar plates 
will obviously be an important first target in minia-
turizing a fuel cell. The membrane electrode assem-
bly (MEA) in a PEMFC, illustrated in Figure 9.13, 
may consist of a Nafion® membrane (Nafion 112, 
Electrochem, Woburn, MA) coated with catalyst 
sandwiched between two carbon paper layers (e.g., 
Toray carbon paper). The carbon papers act as gas 
diffusion layers, and they are pushed up against the 
Nafion membrane using two Teflon gaskets.
A wide variety of micromachining techniques 
have been employed to construct microfuel cells, 
including Si MEMS-based, printed circuit (PC)-
board-based, and carbon MEMS-based. An exam-
ple of a Si-based MEMS-based fuel cell is shown in 
Figure 9.14.23
In this Si design, electropolished tubs in the highly 
conductive Si bipolar plates make for gas flow chan-
nels. Nafion is used as the membrane, and porous Si 
plays the role of gas diffusion layer to bring the gas 
to the Pt/C electrodes on the Nafion surface. Other 
Si MEMS-based fuel cells are reviewed in Table 9.4.
Silicon is expensive compared with the printed 
circuit board-based fuel cell depicted in Figure 9.15.
Dr. Ben Park made the world’s smallest hydro-
gen-air fuel cell with carbon-MEMS bipolar plates 
while working in the author’s laboratory.24 C-MEMS 
describes a manufacturing technique in which car-
bon devices are made by exposing a prepatterned 
organic structure to high temperatures in an inert or 
reducing environment (i.e., pyrolysis). The C-MEMS 
process makes the fabrication of intricate carbon 
shapes as easy as the patterning/machining/mold-
ing of a selected polymer material (see Chapter 5 for 
details).
For the manufacture of C-MEMS bipolar plates, 
20-mil (∼500-µm)-thick Cirlex® (Fralock, Canoga 
Park, CA) plastic sheets were machined using a 
 cir cuit board milling tool (T-Tech, Norcross, GA) 
with 500-µm  diameter end mills to create the 
 fluidics. When starting with a size of the polymer 
bipolar plates  of 1  ×  1 cm, shrinkage during the 
pyrolysis process reduces the plates to 0.8 × 0.8 cm 
(see Figure 9.16).
For the membrane electrode assembly (MEA), 
commercial fuel cell electrodes [1 mg/cm2 loading, 
20 wt% Pt/Vulcan XC-72 (EC-20-10-7; Electrochem-
Woburn, MA)] are pressed into an activated Nafion 
membrane* (Nafion 115) (Figure 9.17).
The fluidic channel walls and separators machined 
from high-temperature polymer sheets are bon-
ded together (using PI-5878G polyimide) to create 
* The Nafion membrane is activated as follows: deionized (DI) water 
for 1 h, 30% H2O2 for 1 h, 10 M H2SO4 for 1 h, and finally a short 
rinse in DI water (all at 80°C). The Nafion is stored in DI water until 
fabrication of the MEA.
Gas diﬀusion layer (Toray carbon paper)
Graphite
 ﬂuidic plate
Graphite
ﬂuidic plate
Teﬂon
mask/gasket
Teﬂon
mask/gasket
Naﬁon membrane
with catalysts
FIGURE 9.13 Bipolar plates (also called graphite fluidic plates) and typical membrane electrode assembly (MEA).
Cathode current collector. Conductive Si.
Platinum or other
conductive mask
H+
2H+ + 4e–
H2
H2
H2
Anode current collector. Conductive Si.
H2
H2
Pt
Pt/C catalyst
2H2O
Naﬁon
4H+ + O2 + 4e–
Electropolished tub
Porous Si membrane
Pt
e–
e–
O2
O2
O2
O2
FIGURE 9.14 Silicon-MEMS-based fuel cell.23

[Page 492]
492   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
fluidic plates as shown in Figure 9.18. The polymide 
physical binder also acts as the electrical binder 
when converted to carbon during pyrolysis. The 
MEA, fluidic plates, and gas inlet/outlets (cut from 
conventional syringes; see Figure 9.19b) are brought 
together, and epoxy is used to seal the entire fuel 
cell structure.
Making bipolar plates by C-MEMS technol-
ogy has several benefits. Because one starts from 
an easy-to-machine polymer, new types of bipo-
lar plates become feasible, and because the bipo-
lar plate fluidics, gas diffusion layer, and catalyst 
support layer are all made of carbon, they can be 
integrated and fabricated into a single monolithic 
structure. This reduces weight, size, complexity, 
and internal resistance while increasing mechani-
cal robustness. Control over the carbon precursor 
material allows materials engineering of the car-
bon itself.
The open-circuit voltage of an individual unopti-
mized C-MEMS cell has been measured at 871 mV, 
and the closed-circuit current draw of the fuel cell 
stabilized at 3.11 mA (with a voltage of 110 mV). The 
maximum power output was 0.773 mW (1.21 mW/
cm2), with an internal resistance of about 210 Ω.24
Our team also successfully fabricated a hydrogen-
air C-MEMS fuel cell stack, as depicted in Figure 
9.19.24 The gaskets between cell elements are made of 
silicon rubber, which provides elastic support of the 
repeating parts and prevents leakage of gases. The 
end plates are machined in a T-Tech circuit board 
milling tool to create the screw holes and openings 
for gas ports. The latter are cut from conventional 
syringes. Repeating the bipolar plates, the gaskets, 
and the MEAs and then compressing them with four 
screws in the four corners of the whole structure 
results in the completed fuel cell stack, as shown in 
Figure 9.19.
TABLE 9.4 Silicon-MEMS-Based Fuel Cells
Source
Design
Fuels
Power Density
S.C. Kelley 
University of Minnesota
Front and back KOH-etched Si wafer, 
Nafion Membrane with custom Pt, Pt-Ru 
catalysts coatings
0.2 L/min hydrated neat 
hydrogen
0.2 L/min ambient air
130 mW/cm2
J.P. Meyers
Bell Labs
Porus Si etching, electropolished channels, 
Nafion membrane, Pt/C catalyst
Hydrogen and oxygen at 1 
atm
60 mW/cm2
S.J. Lee
Stanford University
Front and back RIE Si wafer, Nafion 
membrane, carbon cloth and platinum, 
series-connected
Compressed hydrogen and 
oxygen
40 mW/cm2
R. Hahn
Fraunhofer, IZM
Wafer level and foil processes, screen 
printing
0.5 sccm hydrogen (DMFC) NO 
AIR PUMPING
80 mW/cm2
S.C. Kelley 
University of Minnesota
Front and back KOH-etched Si wafer, 
Nafion Membrane with custom Pt, Pt-Ru 
catalysts coatings
0.2 L/min 0.5 M methanol, H2O
0.2 L/min ambient air
15 mW/cm2
Y.H. Seo
KAIST, Korea
Front and back KOH and RIE Si Wafer, 
Nafion membrane, Pt catalyst
Methanol and ambient air NO 
FUEL OR AIR PUMPING
0.1 mW/cm2
Source: Presentation by Hahn, R., S. Wagner, H. Reichl, M. Krumm, and K. Marquardt. 2003. Fraunhofer IZM and TU-Berlin. Development 
of micro fuel cells with help of MEMS technologies. MINATEC 2003.
H2 inner board
H2 ﬂow structure
O2 inner board
O2 ﬂow
structure
MEA
FIGURE 9.15 Printed circuit board fuel cell. (From 
O’Hayre, R. 2004. Microscale electrochemistry: Application 
to fuel cells. Thesis, Stanford University.)
1
MM
2
3
METRIC
FIGURE 9.16 Cirlex bipolar plates of 1 × 1 cm (one struc-
ture on the right) shrink during the pyrolysis process to 
0.8 × 0.8 cm (two structures on the left).

[Page 493]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   493
The C-MEMS fuel cell could be further improved 
by engineering the carbon electrodes further. This 
may involve at least three strategies: incorpora-
tion of SWNTs and/or multiwall carbon nanotubes 
(MWNTs), the use of carbon horns, and the use of 
carbon fractals. Compared with other forms of car-
bon electrodes (such as graphite and bare glassy 
carbon electrode), MWNT microelectrodes show 
better performances because of the dimensions of 
the MWNTs and their electronic structure.24 As we 
pointed out above, fuel cell electrodes, made of car-
bon nanohorns are expected to help improve the 
cells’ power-generation capacity even further and 
extend their lifetime, because platinum catalyst 
nanoparticles disperse better among carbon nano-
horns and do not aggregate.24 The concept of imple-
menting carbon fractal electrodes for both batteries 
and fuel cells is introduced below (see “Fractals and 
Fractal Dimensions”).
Finally, in the microbiofuel cell context, we briefly 
highlight hybrid insect-MEMS (HI-MEMS; also 
called cyborg bugs, or cybugs), a concept sponsored 
by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA). The MEMS on the insect are coupled to 
the insect anatomy and nervous system and draw 
power from the insect to control its locomotion by 
obtaining motion trajectories either from global posi-
tioning system (GPS) coordinates or by using radiof-
requency (RF)-, optical-, or ultrasonic-based remote 
control. DARPA has military applications in mind for 
HI-MEMS, with visions of insect swarms with various 
embedded MEMS sensors (such as cameras, micro-
phones, and chemical sniffers) penetrating enemy 
territory (e.g., the Crawford Ranch). The HI-MEMS 
battalions would perform reconnaissance missions 
beyond the capabilities of soldiers. But robo-insects, 
equipped with chemical sensors, might also have civil 
applications, perhaps to explore a hazardous chemi-
cal spill zone and report back about it to humans in a 
FIGURE 9.17 The membrane electrode assembly. A Nafion 
sheet (transparent) is sandwiched between two carbon 
electrodes. 
Microﬂuidic
ﬂow channels
Microﬂuidic
ﬂow 
channels
Naﬁon
Gas diﬀusion layer/electrode/
catalyst support layer
Epoxy sealing
Naﬁon
FIGURE 9.18 Assembly of carbon-MEMS fuel cell.
FIGURE 9.19 Hydrogen-air carbon-MEMS fuel cell stack. 
(a) The MEA, fluidic plates, and gas inlet/outlets (cut from 
conventional syringes) are brought together, and epoxy is 
used to seal the entire fuel cell structure (b).

[Page 494]
494   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
safe zone. A recent embodiment of the HI-MEMS con-
cept comes from a University of Michigan team that 
successfully created a cyborg unicorn beetle micro-
system (Figure 9.20A).25 The University of Michigan 
researchers equipped a North American unicorn 
beetle with an IC, button battery, and a flight direc-
tion indicator consisting of ten light-emitting diodes 
(LEDs) and succeeded in controlling its flight exter-
nally. Flight control is handled by inserting electrodes 
into a portion of the brain immediately behind the 
beetle’s eye and into wing muscles, and injecting AC 
pulses. The LED directional controller constitutes an 
independent control system and utilizes the beetle’s 
proclivity to follow a blinking light. The cyborg bee-
tle is able to take off and land, turn left or right, and 
demonstrate a number of other flight control behav-
iors. Electrical stimulation of wing muscles on either 
side initiates a turn (Figure 9.20B).
The DARPA program director, Dr. Amit Lal, got 
the idea for remote-controlled insects from the 1990 
science fiction novel Sparrowhawk by Thomas A. 
Easton. In that novel, Easton writes about genetically 
engineered animals that are greatly enlarged and 
then outfitted with implanted control structures.
Heat Engines in MEMS
A heat engine converts heat to mechanical energy. 
Examples of everyday heat engines include the 
steam engine, the diesel engine, and the gasoline 
(petrol) engine in an automobile. Heat engines 
are divided into two groups: external-combustion 
engines and internal-combustion engines. External-
combustion engines produce hot gases that trans-
fer heat to another fluid, and the energy in this 
fluid, in turn, is changed into mechanical energy. 
External-combustion engines include gas and steam 
turbines and reciprocating steam engines. Internal-
combustion engines produce hot gases whose heat 
energy is changed directly into mechanical energy.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Li-ion rechargeable battery
(ML614; Matsushita electric
industrial) 3V, 3.4mAh, 160 mg
Flight indicator
LEDs
Flight control
stimulation wire
Wire to opposite
electrode
Microcontroller (MSP430; TI) 62mg
Brain stimulation wire
(parylene board)
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 9.20 (A) Cyborg beetle system. The microcontroller controls flight by stimulating brain, wing, and other nerves. 
An array of ten light-emitting diodes hanging in front of the beetle’s eyes is lit to control flight without direct nerve 
stimulation. The beetle weighs 1–2 g, and the total control system weighs 422 mg. (From Nikkei Electronics Asia, April 
2008.) (B) Electrical stimulation of wing muscles on either side initiates a turn. Beetles mounted on a long string (10 cm) 
were programmed with a continuous sequence of left, pause, right, pause instructions; each instruction lasted 2 s. Left 
flight muscle stimulation generates a right turn (a), followed by a pause during which the beetle zigs and zags (b), fol-
lowed by right muscle stimulation that generates a left turn (c). Each photograph consists of ten frames; frames were 
taken every 0.2 s. (From MEMS 2008, an international academic conference on MEMS that took place January 13–17, 
2008, in Tucson, AZ.)

[Page 495]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   495
Several groups involved in power MEMS are inves-
tigating scaled-down versions of well-established 
macroscale combustion devices. The idea is that 
since batteries have low specific energy, and liquid 
hydrocarbon fuels have a very high specific energy, 
a miniaturized power generating device, even with a 
relatively inefficient conversion of hydrocarbon fuels 
to power would result in increased lifetime and/or 
reduced weight of an electronic or mechanical sys-
tem that currently requires batteries for power. A gas 
turbine powering a generator, for example, could in 
principle pack thirty times the energy of any battery. 
Refueling would replace recharging. There are quite 
a few difficulties with this approach, though, one 
being that flames extinguish because of heat losses if 
the dimensions of the combustion chamber are too 
small. Furthermore, even if flame quenching does 
not occur, heat and friction losses become increas-
ingly important at smaller scales, since the heat 
release due to combustion and thus power output 
scales with the volume of the engine, whereas the 
heat and friction losses scale with the surface area.
As an example application of microcombustion 
engines, consider satellite missions that deal with 
smaller and smaller satellites, so that launch sys-
tems and altitude control thrusters of reduced mass 
and volume are now needed. Thrusters are devices 
in which propellant is burnt or disintegrates to pro-
duce a controlled force in a selected direction. These 
small rocket engines are expected to produce thrust 
of the order of tens of newtons at a thrust-to-weight 
of over 1000, i.e., 10 times the thrust-to-weight of 
conventional chemical liquid bipropellant engines. 
A simple MEMS thruster fabricated of a silicon/glass 
structure is shown in Figure 9.21.26
The nozzle, plenum, chamber, and injector of 
this MEMS thruster are all etched in silicon, and 
a glass ceiling is bonded to the etched silicon part. 
Propellants that have been used in this structure 
include H2O2 and N2H4 with silver and platinum on 
Al2O3 as catalysts. Hydrogen peroxide is fed through 
the plenum and injector and reacts in the presence of 
the catalyst to produce heat and gases in the cham-
ber. The gases expand through the nozzle to produce 
thrust.
Another postage-stamp-size microthruster, fab-
ricated at Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT), was made of six layers of silicon fused together 
Nozzle
Silicon
component
Tube
Plenum
Injector
Nozzle
Chamber
and catalyst
Plenum
Propellant
inlet
Chamber and
catalyst
Glass cover
FIGURE 9.21 Simple silicon/glass thruster structure. (From a talk by Apurva Varia, NASA Goddard Thermal Model of 
MEMS Thruster.)

[Page 496]
496   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
to make a sandwich 3 mm thick and was projected 
to produce up to 15 N of thrust by burning oxygen 
and methane. To prevent melting, ethanol coolant 
circulates around the tiny flat thrust chamber. The 
thrust level from these micromachined devices is 
expected to be very high in relation to their mass. 
MIT’s Adam London thinks that a two-stage, 80-kg 
rocket might be sufficient to put a Coke-can-sized 
payload in orbit using 800 of his Si thrusters.27 A 
more recent MIT microrocket engine thrust cham-
ber and nozzle design measures 18 × 14 × 3 mm and 
builds on London’s earlier gaseous propellant work, 
expanding the operating envelope of these motors to 
higher thrust levels.28 Directions for improved spe-
cific impulse engines include increasing the engine 
size by a factor of 2–4 and research on hydrogen per-
oxide as a coolant. Another approach is to use liquid 
hydrocarbons or solid propellants. With the com-
bustor working at 1500–1600 K, Si with a melting 
point of 1685 K is out as a building material. SiC and 
perhaps quartz are alternative candidate materials.
MEMS thruster arrays for satellites offer several 
advantages over conventional thrusters: they have 
no moving parts; utilize a variety of propellants; are 
scalable; eliminate the need for tanks, fuel lines, and 
valves; and fully integrate the structure of the satel-
lite with the propulsion to power it. The Honeywell-
Princeton MEMS Megapixel Microthruster Array 
(MMMA) consists of a 256 × 256 array of pixels, 
each one capable of being fired as a separate thruster 
(Figure 9.22). The thruster operates by first igniting 
a small amount of lead styphanate, which in turn 
ignites the main propellant of a nitrocellulose mix-
ture. This is then exhausted from the fired pixel out 
a channel to produce thrust. Thrusters in this class 
give very small and precise impulse bits (on the 
order of tens of mN-s). Another microthruster array, 
developed by TRW, Caltech, and the Aerospace 
Corp., is fabricated as a three-layer silicon and glass 
sandwich, with the middle layer consisting of mul-
tiple small propellant cells sealed with a rupturable 
diaphragm on one side and an ignitor on the other. 
Each cell is a separate thruster, and when ignited, 
delivers one impulse bit. Delivering propulsion in 
discrete increments by igniting thrusters in con-
trolled sequences has lent the technology the name 
“digital propulsion.”
The MEMS thrusters discussed above are all 
internal-combustion devices. External-combustion 
MEMS devices, with power generation by the alter-
nate heating and cooling of a working fluid or a solid 
(e.g., shape memory alloys) integrated on a chip, have 
been attempted for driving a load as well. The heat-
ing in such an engine results typically from passing 
a current through a resistor. It would be preferable to 
use infrared radiation instead, since in that case no 
leads need to connect to the chip. It has been pro-
jected that a gas-based external heat engine of 5 × 
5 × 5 mm3 might provide an output of 10–100 W/kg. 
With actuators based on shape memory alloys, an 
output of up to 1 kW/kg is feasible, with an efficiency 
ten times lower.6 Problems associated with crafting 
MEMS external heat engines include the thermal 
isolation of heating and cooling sections, minimiza-
tion of friction, and the difficulty of implementing a 
flywheel. Some of these problems were successfully 
addressed by Sniegowski and coworkers,29,30 who 
demonstrated a surface micromachined microengine 
capable of delivering torque to a micromechanism. 
Angular velocities of 600,000 rpm were registered 
for this engine, driven by steam.
Solar Cells
Introduction
The conversion of light (photons) to electricity (volt-
age) in a solar cell is called the photovoltaic (PV) 
FIGURE 9.22 The MEMS Megapixel Microthruster Array 
ignitor thruster with its firing control board (http://alfven.
princeton.edu/projects/MEMS1.htm).

[Page 497]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   497
effect. The most iconic form of solar power, the solar 
cell, consumes no fuel, has a wide power-handling 
capacity, has a high power-to-weight ratio, produces 
no pollution, and is more and more often made 
from inexpensive polycrystalline or amorphous 
materials, with even polymer-based solar cells being 
introduced. The operating principle of a solar cell 
was covered in Volume I, Chapter 4 (Figure 4.42), 
and in Table 9.5 we present a short historical over-
view of some important solar cell related milestones 
since the original observation of the photoeffect 
by Antoine Becquerel in 1839. As with batteries, 
progress in improving solar cell efficiency has been 
rather slow (there is no Moore’s law curve for solar 
cells, either). Several important measures are used to 
characterize solar cells, the most obvious one being 
the total amount of electrical power produced for 
a given amount of solar power input. Expressed as 
a percentage, this is known as the solar conversion 
efficiency. Electrical power is the product of current 
and voltage, so the maximum values for these mea-
surements are important as well: Jsc (short circuit 
current) and Voc (open circuit voltage), respectively. 
Finally, in order to understand the underlying phys-
ics, the quantum efficiency is used to compare the 
chance that one photon (of a particular energy) will 
create one electron. A solar cell must be capable of 
producing electricity for at least twenty years with-
out a significant decrease in efficiency, so lifespan is 
another crucial characteristic.
Because of the soaring oil prices, solar energy is 
a hot topic again, as it was under President Carter 
(even Republicans now concede that cheap oil is 
not a US birthright). The photovoltaic cell is cur-
rently the fastest-growing form of alternative energy, 
increasing by 50% a year, and where a kWh of PV 
electricity cost 50 cents in 1995, it fell to 20 cents in 
2005. BBC Research, which charts technology mar-
kets, expects the global solar market to grow to $32 
billion by 2012, with thin-film solar cells expanding 
45% a year.
At the earth’s surface, the average solar energy is 
∼4 × 1024 J per year, and the 2001 global energy use 
was ∼4 × 1020 J per year (increasing ∼2% annually). In 
the United States alone, the average power require-
ment is 3.3 TW. With a 10% efficient solar cell, this 
means that we would need 1.7% of the land area 
of the United States devoted to PV to quench this 
thirst; this roughly corresponds to the area occupied 
by the interstate highways.
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 4, a traditional 
semiconductor solar cell is made from an n-type 
and a p-type semiconductor put in contact with 
each other. The result is a region at the interface, 
the p-n junction, where charge carriers are depleted 
and/or accumulated on each side of the interface. 
The transfer of charge carriers produces a potential 
barrier, typically 0.6–0.7 V high. In the case of sili-
con (bandgap = 1.1 eV), sunlight provides enough 
energy to promote electrons out of the valence band 
into the conduction band, and when a load is placed 
across the cell, these electrons flow from the p-type 
to the n-type material, move through the external 
circuit, and then stream back into the p-type mate-
rial, where they recombine with the valence-band 
holes they left behind. How sunlight creates an 
TABLE 9.5 Milestones in Solar Cell Development
1839:  Discovery of photovoltaic effect between two 
electrodes in a liquid (Antoine Cesar Becquerel)
1876: Photovoltaic effect in Se (Heinrich Hertz)
1883: First solar electric module (Charles Fritts)
1906:  Pochettino studies the photoconductivity of 
anthracene
1930: Research on Cu2O/Cu solar cell 
1941: Patent on Si solar cell (R. Ohl in Bell Labs) 
1954: Crystalline Si solar cell (Bell Labs); 4% efficiency 
1958:  Solar panels as backup and power assist in space 
(Vanguard 1); 5 mW
1970:  Zhores Alferov and his team in the USSR created 
the first GaAs heterostructure solar cells
1973:  Oil crisis—solar energy is hot, subsequent 
Republican United States president kills Carter’s 
efforts in favor of oil
1980: Solar cell using CdTe, CuInSe2,TiO2, etc.
1991:  Liquid-junction solar cells with photosensitized 
anode invented by Michael Grätzel and Brian 
O’Regan at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne, known as Grätzel cells
1995:  Yu and Hall make the first bulk polymer/polymer 
heterojunction photovoltaic cell
2000:  Peters/van Hall used oligomer-C60 diads/triads as 
the active material in photovoltaic cells (see 
Figure 3.15, for an example coming from the 
Stoddard-Zinc group)
2001:  Schmidt-Mende made a self-organized liquid 
crystalline solar cell of hexabenzocoronene and 
perylene

[Page 498]
498   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
electrical current in a solar cell is detailed a bit fur-
ther in Figure 9.23.
If the incoming photon energy Eγ < Eg, then the 
photon is not absorbed; with Eγ > Eg, the photon is 
absorbed and the energy Eγ – Eg is lost via thermal-
ization. Additional losses occur through radiative 
recombination, trap states, and Auger recombina-
tion. If the carrier lifetime is less than the recom-
bination lifetime then the charge is swept away by 
the inbuilt electric field (E). This depends on carrier 
mobility, defect density, carrier diffusion length, 
and exciton energy.
The conventional approach to PVs, as sketched in 
Figure 9.23, comes with several disadvantages. First, 
the semiconductor bandgap dictates that only pho-
tons with the bandgap energy or more contribute to 
producing a current. Higher-energy photons, at the 
blue end of the spectrum, have more than enough 
energy to cross the bandgap, but much of it is wasted 
as heat.
A cascade or tandem cell can achieve a higher 
total conversion efficiency by capturing a larger 
portion of the solar spectrum. In a typical multi-
junction cell, individual cells with different band-
gaps are stacked on top of one another. The cells 
are stacked in such a way that sunlight falls first on 
the material having the largest bandgap. Photons 
not absorbed in the first cell are transmitted to the 
second cell, which then absorbs the higher-energy 
portion of the remaining solar radiation while 
remaining transparent to the lower-energy pho-
tons. These selective absorption processes continue 
through to the final cell, which has the smallest 
bandgap (Figure 9.24). The ideal bandgap combi-
nation for a tandem solar cell is typically 1.75 and 
1.1 eV. Such bandgap combinations can be attained 
using lattice-matched III–V semiconductor mate-
rial combinations. The best monolithic combina-
tion is represented by the GaInP/GaAs tandem cell, 
possessing an AM 0 efficiency of 26.9%. The ideal 
efficiency for an infinite stack is 86.8%, and for a 
GaInP/GaAs/Ge triple-junction cell an efficiency of 
32% has been measured.
Multijunction solar cells dramatically improve 
efficiency, but these cells are still very high-cost and 
suitable only for large commercial deployments 
(combinations include GaAs/InGaP, Ge/InGaAsN, 
InP/InAlAs, InP/InGaAs, and GaN/InGaN). In 
general terms, the types of cells suitable for roof-
top deployment have not changed significantly in 
efficiency, although costs have dropped somewhat 
because of increased supply.
A higher light intensity can be focused on the solar 
cells by the use of mirror and lens systems, perhaps 
even a system that tracks the sun. This is perhaps too 
expensive a solution for rooftop implementation but 
could be useful in MEMS devices.
Another problem associated with conventional 
solar cells is that in order to capture enough pho-
tons in the p-type layer, that part has to be quite 
“thick.” However, a thick p-type layer also increases 
the chance that electrons and holes will recombine 
before reaching the p-n junction. These effects com-
bine to produce an upper limit of about 20% on the 
efficiency of silicon solar cells. The current problem 
with solar cells is not really the efficiency (20%), but 
rather the cost of production. Though it has come 
Conduction
band
Valence
band
E
Termalization
Hole
swept
away
Electron
swept
away
Photon
Eg
Distance
Energy
Eγ
FIGURE 9.23 Energy diagram of a solar cell.
Decreasing bandgap
Sunlight
Solar cells
FIGURE 9.24 Multijunction, cascade, or tandem solar cell.

[Page 499]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   499
down by a factor of 100 in fifty years, it still has to 
go down by a factor of 2–5 to be competitive with 
fossil plants.
The best known solar cells today remain 
based on Si, and they are either monocrystalline, 
polycrystalline, or hydrogenated amorphous (α-Si:H) 
based. Polycrystalline films are poured and are 
cheaper and simpler to make than monocrystalline 
silicon that is Czochralski grown (see Volume I, 
Chapter 4). The efficiency of polycrystalline  cells 
is, however, somewhat less than that of mono-
crystalline cells. Hydrogenated amorphous Si 
(α-Si:H) cells are relatively cheap, but they come 
with the lowest efficiency (see Table 9.6). Although 
its semiconducting properties are inferior to 
those of single-crystal Si, we learned in Chapter 5 
that α-Si:H, manufactured by plasma-enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) from silane, 
can be doped both n- and p-type (in contrast to 
α-Si) (see Table 5.8 for state-of-the-art parameters 
of PECVD α-Si:H). Exposure of α-Si:H to light 
increases photoconductivity by four to six orders of 
magnitude, and the absorption coefficient of α-Si:H 
is more than an order of magnitude larger than that 
of single-crystal Si near the maximum solar photon 
energy region of 500 nm. Accordingly, the optimum 
thickness of the active layer in an α-Si:H solar cell 
can measure 1 µm, much smaller than that of single-
crystal Si solar cells. In Figure  5.15, we compared 
polycrystalline-based solar cells with ultrathin 
amorphous Si on glass and ultrathin amorphous Si 
on flexible substrates.
Solar cell technology represents the most MEMS-
compatible technology for power integration. Lee et 
al.31 note that hydrogenated amorphous silicon solar 
cells are a particularly attractive means to realize 
an onboard MEMS power supply, and they imple-
mented a high-voltage integrated solar cell array31 
as an electrostatic MEMS power supply. By intercon-
necting 100 individual solar cells in series, this team 
measured an open circuit potential as high as 150 
V under AM 1.5 conditions, a voltage high enough 
to drive onboard electrostatic actuators. The conver-
sion efficiency in that effort was only 0.2%, however. 
Sakakibara et al.32 were able to generate more than 
200 V with a similar solar cell on an area of 1 cm2 
and obtained a conversion efficiency of 4.65%. In 
both cases, amorphous silicon was used in a triple-
stacked PV structure generating up to 2.3 V per cell. 
To obtain a very dense packing of array elements 
and to make the series connection of the solar cells, 
the latter group used focused laser beams for pat-
terning electrodes and PV materials.
Since solar light is only intermittently available, 
electric storage elements need to be implemented 
as well. Along this line, Kimura et al.33 fabricated a 
miniature optoelectric transformer consisting of a 
p-n junction photocell and a multilayer spiral coil 
transformer.
III/V solar cells are cells with a high efficiency, 
but they are made of very expensive semiconduct-
ing materials. A single junction cell based on GaAs 
comes with an efficiency of 25.1%. In 1970, Zhores 
Alferov and his team in the USSR created the first 
GaAs heterostructure solar cells. Today, the combi-
nation of GaAs with germanium and indium gal-
lium phosphide is the basis of a triple-junction solar 
cell that holds the record for solar light conversion 
efficiency of over 32% and can operate also with 
light as concentrated as 2000 Suns.* This type of 
solar cell powers the robots Spirit and Opportunity, 
which are exploring the surface of Mars.
Newer solar cell materials include thin films of 
copper indium diselenide (CuInSe2), copper indium 
gallium diselenide (CIGS), and cadmium telluride 
(CdTe). Commercial leaders in this area are a firm 
called First Solar, which uses cadmium telluride, 
and Miasolé, which manufactures a thin-film PV 
cell based on an ultrathin layer of photoactive CIGS 
on a stainless steel foil only 50 µm thick. The latter 
can easily be used in PV modules or incorporated 
into building materials such as membrane roofing. 
The efficiencies and bandgaps of GaAs and two of 
* Where 1 Sun equals 1000 W/m² at the point of arrival. One Sun is a 
unit of power flux.
TABLE 9.6 Silicon-Based Solar Cell Efficiency in %
Type
Efficiency in 
Laboratory
Efficiency in 
Production
Monocrystalline
24
14–17
Polycrystalline
18
13–15
Amorphous
13
5–7

[Page 500]
500   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the newer solar materials are compared with those 
of single-crystal and amorphous Si in Figure 9.25.
One development that made organic PVs an 
attractive option is the availability of light-sensitive 
conjugated polymers: polymers with alternating sin-
gle and double carbon-carbon (sometimes carbon-
nitrogen) bonds. In the 1970s, it was discovered that 
chemical doping of conjugated polymers increased 
electronic conductivity several orders of magnitude. 
Since that time, electronically conducting materi-
als based on conjugated polymers have found many 
applications, including sensors, LEDs, and solar 
cells. Advantages of polymer or organic PVs (OPVs) 
include the fact that they are easily processed over 
large areas using spin-coating, doctor blade tech-
niques (wet-processing), evaporation through a 
mask (dry processing), and printing (Figure 9.26). 
The usage of roll-to-roll printing, especially, guaran-
tees a favorable cost (see Figure 1.5). They also have 
a low weight, exhibit mechanical flexibility and 
transparency, and have a bandgap that can easily be 
tuned chemically by incorporation of different func-
tional groups. Efficiencies stand at 5%, but there are 
no obstacles identified for 10%. The low cost of plas-
tic PV may enable solar power in applications where 
it was previously uneconomic (e.g., solar tents, sails, 
packaging, etc.). For rigid cells, ITO (Indium tin 
oxide)-coated glass usually serves as the substrate 
for these organic cells.
Figure 9.27 summarizes the best research solar 
cell efficiencies for a broad range of materials from 
universities, research institutes, and private compa-
nies. Besides PV converters for solar light and laser 
0.8
50
40
30
20
10
0
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Bandgaps in eV
CulnSe2
GaAs
CdTe
Si
(amorph)
Si
Eﬃciency in %
FIGURE 9.25 Bandgaps and efficiencies of the most 
important solar cell materials. The bars represent theoreti-
cal efficiencies, and the smooth line represents practical 
efficiencies.
FIGURE 9.26 Polymer or organic photovoltaics.
Eﬃciency (%)
University
of Maine
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
ARCO
NREL
Boeing
Euro-CIS
2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
NREL/
Spectrolab
NREL
NREL
Japan
Energy
Spire
No. Carolina
State University
Multijunction concentrators
Tree-junction (2-terminal, monolithic)
Two-junction (2-terminal, monolithic)
Crystalline Si cells
Single crystal
Multicrystalline
Tin ﬁlm technologies
Cu(ln,Ga)Se2
CdTe
Amorphous Si:H (stabilized)
Emerging PV
Dye cells
Organic cells
(various technologies)
Varian
RCA
Solarex
UNSW
UNSW
ARCO
UNSW
UNSW
UNSW
Spire
Stanford
Westing-
house
UNSW
Georgia Tech
Georgia Tech Sharp
NREL
 Spectrolab
NREL
Masushita
MonosolarKodak
Kodak
AMETEK
Photon Energy
University
So. Florida
NREL
NREL
NREL
Cu(In,Ga)Se2
14x concentration
NREL
United Solar
RCA
RCA
RCA
RCARCARCA
 Spectrolab
Solarex
12
8
4
0
16
20
24
28
32
36
University of
Lausanne
University of
Lausanne
Siemens
2005
Kodak
UCSB
Cambridge
Groningen
University Linz
Berkeley
Princeton 
University
Linz
United Solar
FIGURE 9.27 Research solar cell efficiencies. (From Art Nozik, DOE Solar Energy Workshop, 2005.)

[Page 501]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   501
light, microwaves could be used to power micro-
systems. In the latter, extremely small receivers and 
converters need to be constructed.
MEMS and NEMS in Solar Cells
Introduction
Micro- and nanotechnologies are crucial to increas-
ing the efficiency of existing solar cells, and NEMS 
is enabling totally new solar cell designs as well. 
MEMS techniques allow for the fabrication of lenses 
(including Fresnel lenses), mirrors, photonic crys-
tals, and cavities and the texturing of solar cell sur-
faces to enhance the interaction of incoming photons 
with the solar cell active junctions. As an example of 
a nanoenhancement of existing solar cells, consider 
the use of quantum dots (QDs) to replace dyes in 
luminescent concentrators.
 NEMS may make a much bigger impact, though, 
on future solar cells. QDs, for example, exhibit opti-
cal properties that are absent in the bulk material 
due to the confinement of electron-hole pairs, in 
a region of a few nanometers and the wavelength 
at which a QD absorbs or emits radiation can be 
adjusted at will (see Volume I, Chapters 3 and 5). 
A first advantage of QDs, then, stems from the fact 
that an optimum bandgap, corresponding to the 
highest possible solar-electric energy conversion, 
can be achieved by using a mixture of QDs of differ-
ent sizes for harvesting the maximum amount of the 
incident light (Eγ). A second advantage stems from 
the increased possibility of multiphoton absorption 
by nanoparticles. The formation of multiple exci-
tons per absorbed photon takes place only when the 
energy of the absorbed photon is far greater than 
the semiconductor bandgap (Eg). Multiple photon 
absorption does not readily occur in bulk semicon-
ductors, where the excess energy quickly dissipates 
as heat before it can create other electron-hole pairs. 
However, in semiconducting QDs, the rate of energy 
dissipation is reduced dramatically, and with the 
charge carriers confined within a nanovolume, their 
interactions are enhanced, increasing the probabil-
ity for multiple excitons per incoming photon. A 
third advantage of QDs is that in contrast to tradi-
tional crystalline semiconductor materials that are 
rigid, QDs can be molded into a variety of different 
forms, such as sheets or three-dimensional arrays. 
Quantum dots can easily be combined with organic 
polymers or dyes or made into porous films, and in 
colloidal form, they can be processed to create junc-
tions on inexpensive substrates such as plastics or 
thin metal foils. A fourth advantage of QDs is that it 
is quite easy to decouple the absorption and charge 
separation process. Decoupling charge separation 
from light absorption results in many more engi-
neering options to make the solar cell of the future. 
For example, the charge separation may be achieved 
in a semiconductor QD, while the light absorption 
may be in an organic dye adsorbed on its surface.
The broader quantum solar cell strategy is thus 
to sensitize a first material with bandgap Eg with 
another material of bandgap (Eq) smaller than Eg 
(i.e., Eq < Eγ < Eg), and this second semiconductor 
material can be a dye (monomeric), a photoactive 
biopolymer, a QD, or a quantum well. QDs have 
the advantage over dyes as they degrade less in sun-
light. In its simplest form, a quantum well solar cell 
(QWSC) consists of a p-i-n solar cell with a multiple 
quantum well (MQW) system added to the intrinsic 
(i) region. The idea, as with a tandem solar cell, is 
that the quantum wells absorb light of energy below 
the bulk bandgap, Eg.
MEMS in Solar Cells
MEMS techniques allow for the fabrication of 
lenses (including Fresnel lenses), mirrors, photonic 
crystals, cavities, and solar cell surface textures to 
enhance the interaction of incoming photons with 
the solar cell. A simple method to put MEMS to 
work in a conventional solar cell is by surface struc-
turing the cell so that the light hits the PV several 
times, as illustrated in the pyramid structuring in 
Figure 9.28.34 
NEMS in Solar Cells
We present examples of quantum technology ben-
efiting solar cells by highlighting nanoporous semi-
conductors in the liquid-junction Grätzel solar cell, 
two-photon excitation in hybrid organic-QD PV 
devices, and increased efficiency in a QWSCs.
In Volume I, Chapter 7, we learned that in liquid-
junction solar cells, to avoid corrosion of the cell, one 
chooses a redox system where the maximum density 

[Page 502]
502   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
of states of the reductant (the peak of the Gaussian 
in Volume I, Figure 7.62) is at the same level as the 
valence band edge of the semiconductor.35 In this 
configuration, empty levels (holes) in the valence 
band, generated by shining light on the electrolyte/
semiconductor interface, react with the reductant 
rather than with the semiconductor itself. In such 
liquid-junction solar cells, appropriate reductants 
thus compete effectively with the oxidation/corro-
sion of the semiconductor because they react more 
avidly with the holes in the valence band than the 
material itself.36 The maximum voltage generated 
by such a cell, in theory, is simply the difference 
between the Fermi level of the semiconductor and 
the redox potential of the electrolyte.
The best known liquid-junction solar cell today 
is the dye-sensitized Grätzel design.37–39 The 
Grätzel cell is significantly different from a con-
ventional semiconductor solar cell, in which the 
semiconductor acts as the source of photoelectrons 
and also provides the potential barrier to separate 
the charges to generate the current. In contrast, in 
the Grätzel dye-sensitized solar cell, the semicon-
ductor is used solely for charge separation, and the 
photoelectrons are provided from a separate pho-
tosensitive dye. As shown in Figure 9.29 the solar 
cell consists of a TiO2 layer forming a nanoporous 
structure with a dye (e.g., ruthenium-polypyridine) 
spread throughout its surface. The dye molecules are 
small, and in order to capture a reasonable amount 
of the incoming light, the nanoporous structure 
is used as a scaffold holding large numbers of the 
molecules in a 3D matrix, vastly increasing the 
number of molecules for a given surface area. The 
charge separation is provided by the semiconduc-
tor-liquid junction contact. The TiO2 layer sits on 
a transparent anode made of fluorine-doped tin 
oxide (SnO2:F) deposited on the side of the glass 
plate facing the TiO2 layer.
The electrolyte solution also holds a redox couple 
(e.g., I–/I3
–) mediator, located in the space between 
the dye-coated TiO2 and a cathode, typically a 
thin film of platinum metal. Photons enter the cell 
through the transparent SnO2:F window, and if they 
have enough energy, they are absorbed by the dye, 
creating an excited dye state. From this excited state 
an electron is “injected” into the conduction band 
of the TiO2. This way, the dye molecule is oxidized, 
and it would decompose if it didn’t quickly react 
with iodide in the electrolyte oxidizing it to form 
 triiodide (dye regeneration reaction):
 
3
2
I
I
e
3
−→
+
−
− 
Reaction 9.6
The reaction with iodide occurs very quickly 
compared with the recombination of the injected 
electron with the oxidized dye molecule, effec-
tively preventing short-circuiting the solar cell. The 
injected electron then travels to the cathode via the 
external circuit, and the triiodide recovers its miss-
ing electron by diffusing through the solution to the 
Oxide
Metal
p-type plated metal
p+
n+
n++
FIGURE 9.28 Surface structuring of a solar cell surface.34 
Conducting
glass
TiO2
Dye
Injection
S*
Electrolyte
Red
Mediator
Interception
Diﬀusion
Maximum
voltage
Ox
S° /S+
hv
Cathode
Red = I–
Ox = I3
–
FIGURE 9.29 A liquid-junction solar cell: the dye-
 sensitized Grätzel design. The S energy levels represent 
the photosensitive dye levels.

[Page 503]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   503
cathode, where it is reduced back to iodide (redox 
regeneration reaction):
 
I
e
I
3
−+
→
−
−
2
3
 
Reaction 9.7
The electron injection process does not intro-
duce a hole in the TiO2, only an extra electron, and 
recombination of this electron directly from the 
TiO2 to the electrolyte is not possible because of dif-
ferences in energy levels (see Volume I, Chapter 7: 
if there are no overlapping energy levels, no reac-
tion can occur). This is a very important property of 
the dye-sensitized Grätzel design: the electron-hole 
recombination that plagues the efficiency of tradi-
tional cells does not exist here. The potential used 
for external work in this solar cell is given by the 
following equation:
 
V
E
V
ext
F
redox
=
−
 
(9.1)
The quantum efficiency of a Grätzel-cell is very 
high because the huge surface area of the TiO2 
nanostructure makes the chance that a photon will 
be absorbed very high, and the dyes are very effec-
tive at converting photons to electrons. Most of 
the losses are due to conduction losses in the TiO2 
and the clear anode, and the optical losses stem 
from the front electrode as well. The overall quan-
tum efficiency is about 90%, with the “lost” 10% 
being largely accounted for by the optical losses in 
the anode. Although the dye is highly efficient in 
turning photons into electrons, only those electrons 
with enough energy to cross the TiO2 bandgap result 
in current being produced. The bandgap is larger 
than that of silicon, which means that fewer of the 
photons in sunlight are usable for power generation. 
In addition, the electrolyte limits the speed at which 
the dye molecules can regain their electrons and 
become available for photoexcitation again. These 
factors limit the current generated by a liquid-junc-
tion solar cell; for comparison, a traditional silicon-
based solar cell offers about 35 mA/cm², whereas 
a Grätzel cell offers about 20 mA/cm². The closest 
competitors in price-performance terms are the vari-
ous thin-film approaches, which are currently some-
what more developed commercially.
The dyes used in early experimental Grätzel cells 
were sensitive only in the high-frequency end of the 
solar spectrum (ultraviolet and blue). Newer ver-
sions have a much wider frequency response; nota-
bly, the triscarboxy-terpyridine ruthenium complex 
[Ru(2,2’,2”-(COOH)3-terpy)(NCS)3] is efficient right 
into the low-frequency range of red and infrared 
(IR) light. The wide spectral response results in 
the dye having a deep brown-black color, and it is 
referred to simply as black dye.39 These polymers also 
are also sensitive to infrared are called thermovolta-
ics, and they generate electricity from both light and 
heat. Current Grätzel cells demonstrate a conversion 
efficiency of about 11%, whereas common low-cost 
commercial panels operate between 12% and 15%. 
Flexible thin-film cells are typically around 8%. 
Perhaps the major disadvantage of a liquid-junction 
solar cell is the use of liquid electrolytes, which 
brings leakage and corrosion problems, as well as 
temperature stability problems. At low temperatures, 
the electrolyte can freeze, ending power production 
and potentially leading to physical damage. Higher 
temperatures cause the liquid to expand, making 
sealing the cells a serious problem.
To avoid the above problems of liquid-junction 
solar cells, several research groups aim to produce 
a hybrid organic-QD PV device as the solid analog 
to the Grätzel cell. Researchers at the University 
of Toronto mixed lead sulfide (PbS) QDs with 
the  polymer poly(2-methoxy-5-[2′-ethylhexyloxy-
p-phenylenevinylene]) 
(MEH-PPV). 
Wrapping 
MEH-PPV around the QDs shifted the polymer’s 
absorption into the infrared: on its own the polymer 
absorbs between ∼400 and ∼600 nm, and the QDs 
have absorption peaks that can be tuned from ∼800 
to ∼2000 nm (see Figure 9.30).40 The best efficiency 
registered thus far with this approach is 1.6%.41
In 2000, Nozik from the National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory in Golden, Colorado, predicted 
that theoretically, QDs could increase the efficiency 
of solar cells through multiple exciton generation.42 
“We have shown that solar cells based on QDs theo-
retically could convert more than 65 percent of the 
sun’s energy into electricity, approximately doubling 
the efficiency of solar cells,” said Nozik.42
In 2004, Schaller and Klimov from the Los Alamos 
National Laboratory in New Mexico were the first 
to demonstrate this phenomenon experimentally, 
using QDs made of lead selenide.43 Multiple excitons 

[Page 504]
504   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
start to form simultaneously as soon as the photon 
energy reaches twice the bandgap, and a group of 
researchers led by Nozik demonstrated that the 
absorption of a single photon by 2.9 nm PbSe QDs 
yielded not one exciton but three when the energy of 
the photon absorbed is four times that of the band-
gap43 (a quantum yield of 300%). Quantum dots 
made of PbS also showed the same phenomenon.
Quantum wells, as we saw in Volume I, Chapters 
3 and 5, are ultrathin layers (nanostructures) of 
a narrower bandgap material (e.g., a GaAs well) 
sandwiched between regions of wider bandgap 
(e.g., AlGaAs barrier). They are made possible by 
the development of modern crystal growth tech-
niques such as molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and 
 metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE). We 
also saw how quantum well lasers work at high 
forward bias and how quantum well photodiodes 
operate at reverse current and reverse bias. Quantum 
well solar cells (QWSCs) work in the forward bias 
and reverse current quadrant of the current-voltage 
plot, where power can be extracted.44 In Figure 9.31 
a first material with bandgap Eg is contacted with 
another material of bandgap (Eq) smaller than Eg, 
i.e., Eq < Eγ < Eg. The idea, as with a tandem solar 
cell, is that the quantum wells absorb light of energy 
below the bulk bandgap, Eg.
In the simplest QWSC, several quantum wells are 
added to the i-region of a conventional p-i-n solar 
cell of wider bandgap (Eg). The quantum wells do 
absorb light of energy below the bulk bandgap Eg. 
If carriers escape from the wells before recombin-
ing, they enhance the output current, and short-
circuit current (Isc) can be strongly enhanced. The 
open- circuit voltage (Voc) is reduced, but the cell’s 
efficiency is considerably enhanced.
Energy Scavenging (Harvesting)
MEMS devices either feature onboard power sources 
such as batteries, capacitors, fuel cells, radioactive 
elements, etc.; are powered by energy that is beamed 
in on purpose; or harvest energy from their own 
PbS
Quantum dots
MEH-PPV
OCH3
CH=CHCH3
OCH2CHCH2(CH2)2CH3
CH2CH3
MEH-PPV PbS
Composite
FIGURE 9.30 Lead sulfide (PbS) quantum dots are mixed with poly(2-methoxy-5-[2′-ethylhexyloxy-p-phenylenevinylene]) 
(MEH-PVV) to make a MEH-PPV PbS composite.40 
Conduction
band
Valence
band
E
Electron
thermal
escape
Photon
Eγ
Eg
Distance
Energy
Hole
thermal
escape
Eq
FIGURE 9.31 Schematic illustrating the quantum well 
solar cell.

[Page 505]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   505
environment. Energy harvesting is the process of 
capturing minute amounts of energy from one or 
more naturally occurring energy sources and stor-
ing that energy for later use. Harvestable energy 
sources for a MEMS device include mechanical 
(from sources such as vibration, mechanical stress, 
and strain, captured by ratchets and springs), ther-
mal (waste energy from furnaces, heaters, and fric-
tion, captured by thermocouples, bimorphs, and 
thermoelectrics), light (captured from sunlight or 
room light via photosensors, photodiodes, or solar 
panels), electromagnetic (from inductors, coils, 
and transformers, captured by coils), natural (wind 
and ocean currents), the human body (a combina-
tion of mechanical and thermal energy naturally 
generated from bio-organisms or through actions 
such as walking and sitting), and other energy 
from chemical and biological sources. All these 
energy sources are virtually unlimited and essen-
tially free, if they can be captured at or near the 
system location.
Naturally 
occurring 
temperature 
gradients 
are one potential source of power. Stark and 
Stordeur,45 for example, demonstrated a thermo-
electric device that can produce 15 mW of power 
from a 10°C temperature difference. The thermal 
gradient principle is employed in satellites, which 
are hot on the side turned toward the sun but cold 
on the side facing away from the sun. A satellite 
can be powered by the energy thus generated for 
up to thirty years. The principle also operates in 
reverse: thermoelectric elements can produce cold 
from electricity and are used these days to cool 
the interiors of computers. In the 1960s, it was 
believed that if transistors could replace vacuum 
tubes for electronics, then surely thermoelectrics 
could replace refrigerators. Requirements for a 
good thermoelectric (TE) material are a high figure 
of merit, ZT; this requires a high Seebeck coeffi-
cient, S, a high electrical conductivity, σ, and a low 
thermal conductivity, κ (see Equations 8.70–8.73). 
Unfortunately, ZT has to be improved from ∼0.9 to 
3 or higher to become commercially attractive. (ZT 
needs to improve to over 1.3 at 300 K for a major 
impact in electronics cooling and to around 2.5 
for a revolutionary impact in air conditioning and 
power from waste heat.)
Some researchers have focused on scavenging 
power from the human body. Shenck and Paradiso,46 
for example, did create shoe inserts capable of gen-
erating 8.4 mW of power under normal walking 
conditions. [See also MIT Media Lab’s Parasitic 
Power Harvesting project for devices built  into 
a  shoe (http://www.media.mit.edu/resenv/power.
html).]
Mechanical vibrations are another promising 
power source. Scavenging the power from com-
monly occurring vibrations for use by electronics 
is both feasible and attractive for certain applica-
tions. Three popular methods to harvest energy 
from vibrations are piezoelectric, capacitive, and 
inductive. In the piezoelectric method, the strain 
in a piezoelectric material causes a charge separa-
tion (voltage across capacitor). Ottman et al.47 have 
designed and optimized power circuitry to be used 
with a piezoelectric vibration-based generator. In a 
capacitive pick-up, a change in capacitance causes 
either a voltage or charge increase. Roundy et al.48 
have published electrostatic MEMS designs with 
simulated power outputs in the range of tens of 
microwatts per cubic centimeter. With an inductive 
pick-up, a coil moves through a magnetic field caus-
ing current in a wire. Amirtharajah, Chandrakasan, 
and coworkers49 demonstrated an electromagnetic 
vibration-to-electricity converter with a 160-cm3 
volume (4 × 4 × 10 cm) that produces 400 mW of 
power (or 2.5 mW/cm3). Table 9.7 compares the fea-
tures of different vibrational harvesting techniques. 
Currently, a piezoelectric approach with PZT is the 
most popular because of its compact configura-
tion and compatibility with MEMS, but its inher-
ent limitations, including aging, depolarization, 
brittleness, and high-output impedance, limit many 
applications.50
As Goemans points out, the possibility of con-
verting motion into electrical energy can be very 
attractive for cases where battery replacement is 
unacceptable, kinetic energy is abundantly avail-
able, and space is not too limited.6 He lists biomedi-
cal implants, tire pressure monitoring systems, and 
electronic locks as potential application areas.6 
Some power harvesting systems are compared with 
batteries, fuel cells, solar power, and nuclear power 
in Table 9.8.

[Page 506]
506   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Fractal Power
Introduction
In this section, we show how the use of fractal-like 
electrodes in batteries and fuel cells minimizes the 
internal resistance while maximizing surface-to-
volume ratios. We also demonstrate how C-MEMS 
techniques show great promise for use in the fabri-
cation of such fractal electrodes for electrochemical 
applications. 
Fractals and Fractal Dimensions
A fractal is a rough or fragmented geometric shape, 
each part of which is, at least approximately, a smaller 
copy of the whole. Another definition holds that a 
fractal is an irregular geometric object with an infi-
nite nesting of structure at all scales. Fractals are said 
to be self-similar because no matter what the scale of 
observation, whether we zoom in or out, we appear 
to be seeing the same object. Fractals came to the 
public attention through the stunning abstractions 
generated in computer screen savers by the famous 
Mandelbrot set. Mandelbrot* introduced the idea of 
* As a child in France, Mandelbrot wondered how to use the smooth 
regularities of Euclidean shapes to model the complexity of the 
world he saw around him. Where were the circles in nature? Where 
were the parallel lines and infinite planes? He concluded “clouds are 
not spheres, mountains are not cones, coastlines are not circles, and 
bark is not smooth nor does lightning travel in a straight line.”51
TABLE 9.7 Summary Comparison of the Different Vibrational Types of Harvesting 
Mechanisms50
Type
Advantages
Disadvantages
Electromagnetic
• No need of smart material
• No external voltage source
• Bulky size: magnets and pick-up 
coil
• Difficult to integrate with MEMS
• Maximum voltage of 0.1 V
Electrostatic
• No need of smart material
• Compatible with MEMS
• Voltages of 2~10 V
• External voltage (or charge) source
• Mechanical constraints needed
• Capacitive
Piezoelectric
• No external voltage source
• High voltages of 2~10 V
• Compact configuration
• Compatible with MEMS
• High coupling in single crystals
• Depolarization
• Brittleness in PZT
• Poor coupling in piezo film (PVDF) 
charge leakage
• High-output impedance
Magnetostrictive
• Ultrahigh coupling coefficient 
>0.9
• No depolarization problem
• High flexibility
• Suited to high-frequency 
vibration
• Nonlinear effect
• Pick-up coil
• May need bias magnets
• Difficult to integrate with MEMS
TABLE 9.8 Energy Harvesting Compared with 
Batteries, Fuel Cells, and Nuclear Power
Power (Energy) 
Density
Source of 
Estimates
Batteries 
(zinc-air)
1050–1560 mWh/
cm3 (1.4 V)
Published data 
from 
manufacturers
Batteries 
(lithium ion)
300 mWh/cm3 (3–4 V)
Published data 
from 
manufacturers
Solar 
(outdoors)
15 mW/cm2 – direct 
sun
0.15 mW/cm2 
– cloudy day
Published data and 
testing
Solar 
(indoor)
0.006 mW/cm2 – my 
desk
0.57 m/Wcm2 – 12 
in. under a 60 W 
bulb
Testing
Vibrations
0.001–0.1 m/Wcm3
Simulations and 
testing
Acoustic 
noise
3E-6 mW/cm2 at 75 
Db sound level
9.6E-4 mW/cm2 at 
100 Db sound level
Direct calculations 
from acoustic 
theory
Passive 
human 
powered
1.8 mW (shoe inserts 
>> 1 cm2)
Published study
Thermal 
conversion
0.0018 mW – 10 
deg. C gradient
Published study
Nuclear 
reaction
80 mW/cm3
1E6 mWh/cm3
Published data
Fuel cells
300–500 mW/cm3
~4000 mWh/cm3
Published data

[Page 507]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   507
fractals in a paper that asked, how long is the coast-
line of Great Britain?51 The coastline is irregular, so 
a measure with a straight ruler provides an estimate 
only. The estimated coastal length, L, equals the 
length of the ruler, s, multiplied by N, the number 
of such rulers needed to cover the measured object. 
Mandelbrot realized that the smaller his measuring 
stick, the longer the coast would turn out to be and 
that using molecular distances, the coast would have 
an infinite length. This means, Mandelbrot conjec-
tured, that the Euclidean dimension, D, of a coast-
line is between the one dimension of a straight line 
and the two of a plane.
If we take an object residing in Euclidean dimen-
sion D and reduce its linear size by 1/r in each spa-
tial direction, its measure (length, area, or volume) 
would increase by N times the original, with N given 
by the following equation:
 
N = rD 
(9.2)
This is pictured in Figure 9.32.
The German mathematician Felix Hausdorff 
introduced a more general treatment of dimension 
D. He pointed out that taking the log of both sides of 
Equation 9.2 one obtains the following:
 
log(N) = D log(r) 
(9.3)
And if we solve for D, we get the following:
 
D = log(N)/log(r) 
(9.4)
The point that emerges is that if dimensionality, 
D, is examined this way, D need not be an integer, 
as it is in Euclidean geometry. It could be a fraction, 
as it is in fractal geometry. This approach has proved 
very useful for describing all types of natural objects 
and for evaluating trajectories of dynamic systems.
It was Lewis Fry Richardson who first noted the 
regularity between the length L of coastlines, riv-
ers, continental boundaries, etc., and the scale size 
r: when plotted in a log-log plot, a linear relation is 
obtained between log [L(r)] and log(r). Mandelbrot 
assigned the term (1 – D) to the slope of such a log-
log plot, or:
 
log[L(r)] = (1 – D)log(r) + b  
(9.5)
where D is the fractal dimension and b a constant.
For Great Britain, the slope 1 – D = –0.24, approx-
imately, or D = 1.24, a fractional value. The coastline 
of South Africa is very smooth, virtually an arc of a 
circle, and the slope is very near zero, and this gives 
a fractional dimension D = 1 – 0 = 1. This makes 
sense because the coastline is very nearly a regular 
Euclidean object, a line, which has dimensionality 
of 1. In general, the “rougher” the line, the steeper 
the slope and the larger the fractal dimension (the 
fractal dimension for the Nile delta is 1.4; that of the 
Amazon basin is 1.85).
Hausdorffian dimensionality is further illus-
trated by considering the Koch curve shown in the 
inset of the header of this chapter. To make a Koch 
curve, a one-dimensional (1D) line is buckled to 
take on some fractional dimension between 1D 
and 2D. We begin with a straight line of length 1, 
called the initiator. We then remove the middle third 
of the line, and replace it with two lines that each 
have the same length (1/3) as the remaining lines 
on each side. This new form is called the generator, 
because it specifies a rule that is used to generate a 
new form. The rule says to take each line and replace 
it with four lines, each one-third the length of the 
original. We can do this iteratively without end; the 
length of the curve increases with each iteration, 
and it asymptotically approaches infinite length. 
If we treat the Koch curve as we did the coastlines 
and continents, the relation between log[L(r)] and 
log(r) for the Koch curve gives us D = log(4)/log(3) = 
1.26. It is a number that the Koch curve approaches 
N = rD
D = 1
D = 2
D = 3
N = 2
N = 4
N = 8
N = 27
N = 9
N = 3
r = 3
r = 2
FIGURE 9.32 Fractal dimensionality: the Hausdorff 
dimension.

[Page 508]
508   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
as it becomes ever more finely broken over all pos-
sible scales. A huge number of everyday phenom-
ena do seem ruled by such power-laws rather than 
Gaussian statistics. Some are well-known examples, 
such as earthquakes and species extinctions. Fractal 
organization is to be found in all kinds of dissipa-
tive structure—structures that “chaotically” branch 
in order to dump a load of energy as fast as possible 
(see Chapter 3,  “Self-Organization”).
Fractals in Nature
Nature always strives for the highest efficiency in all 
its organisms, and fractal-like networks are nature’s 
answer to this maximization problem, literally 
“giving life an additional dimension.”52 Fractals in 
nature represent the geometry of irregular shapes 
and chaotic systems: trees, rivers, brains, lungs, the 
cardiovascular system, clouds, and coastlines all can 
be described by fractals.
In nature, the fundamental equation that 
describes scaling of various variables with relation 
to body mass, we saw in Chapter 7, is an allometric 
equation of the following form:
 
V = aMb  
(7.1)
where V is the variable in question, a is a constant, 
and b is the scaling exponent (in Chapter 7 we used 
y = bxa). The fascinating empirical observation that 
has perplexed many scientists and has been a source 
of much debate is the fact that the exponents (b in 
Equation 7.1) of many variables, including cellular 
metabolism (b = –1/4), heartbeat (b = –1/4), maxi-
mal population growth (b = –1/4), lifespan (b = 1/4), 
blood circulation (b = 1/4), embryonic growth/devel-
opment (b = 1/4), metabolic rates of entire organ-
isms (b = 3/4), cross-sectional areas of mammalian 
aortas (b = 3/4), and cross-sectional areas of tree 
trunks (b = 3/4) are multiples of 1/4 instead of 1/3.52 
Pure geometric scaling of area (l2) and volume (l3) 
leads to a scaling constant of 2/3, but as Max Kleiber 
discovered in the early 1930s, the metabolic rates 
of entire organisms (which should scale with area) 
scale with respect to body mass (which should scale 
with volume), with a scaling constant of 3/4. This 
relationship is now referred to as Kleiber’s law (see 
Figure 7.4). We also saw that West et al.52 proposed a 
general model for this extra “fourth dimension”. By 
modeling the cardiovascular system as a fractal-like 
network that ends in terminal units (capillaries) of 
the same size, they have shown that minimizing the 
work that the heart performs in pulsatile systems 
leads to the proper scaling constants that are empiri-
cally observed.
Fractals in Electrochemistry
Just as nature has benefited from fractal structures 
in almost all of its organisms, biomimetic fractal 
designs in electrochemical devices such as power 
conversion devices and sensors can also lead to ben-
efits in scaling.
Fractals are an optimal geometry for minimizing 
the work lost due to the transfer network while max-
imizing the effective surface area. In many electro-
chemical systems, it is advantageous to have a large 
surface-to-volume ratio, while needing to transfer 
the signal or power effectively to an electrical net-
work. Electrochemical energy conversion devices, 
such as fuel cells and some types of batteries, as well 
as sensors, such as glucose sensors, are examples of 
such applications. Miniaturization of these electro-
chemical devices to create miniature electrochemi-
cal devices poses several problems due to scaling. 
One issue is that there is a problem of increasing 
internal resistance in miniature 3D devices. In cases 
where an electrode is composed of materials that 
are excellent electrical conductors, such as metals, 
the internal resistance contribution of the electrode 
is minimal and can be ignored, but if the electrode 
is composed of carbon or another material that is 
a optimal electrochemical material, but not neces-
sarily an optimal electrical material, the internal 
resistance contribution due to the electrodes can be 
significant.53
The resistance of a bulk or porous network scales 
inversely to the length scale l if scaled isometrically, 
as illustrated in Figure 9.33a. Figure 9.33b illustrates 
the scaling involved when scaling area with a con-
stant thickness. Since the volumes of the structures 
can be written as follows:
 
V = l3 
for Figure 9.33a 
(9.6)
 
V = tl2 ∝ l2 
for Figure 9.33b 
(9.7)

[Page 509]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   509
From this figure it can be concluded that resis-
tance of a bulk material scales as follows:
 
R ∼ V−1/3 
for Figure 9.33a 
(9.8)
when scaling isometrically and as:
 
R ∼ V−1 
for Figure 9.33b 
(9.9)
when scaling area only.
The surface area and the scaling of the surface-to-
volume ratios of the two cases in Figure 9.33 are as 
follows (assuming t << l).
 
A
V
2
3
∝
=
l
l
l
1  
for Figure 9.33a 
(9.10)
and:
 
A
4 t
2
and A
V
2
2
2
2
=
+
≈
∝
=
l
l
l
l
l
2
1
 
 
for Figure 9.33b 
(9.11)
The surface-to-volume ratio of a bulk material is 
inversely proportional to the length scale (1/l) when 
scaling isometrically in three dimensions and is 
invariant (1) when scaling in two dimensions.
In the case of conventional Li-ion batteries and 
fuel cells, where the dimensions of the fundamen-
tal building blocks (the anode/electrolyte/cathode 
sandwich) are smaller than the final device dimen-
sions and need to be scaled up, areal scaling is 
advantageous. As can be seen from Equations 9.8 to 
9.11, 2D scaling from a small fundamental building 
block results in lower internal resistance and higher 
effective area compared with an isometric three-
dimensional scaling approach. Indeed, commercial 
Li-ion batteries and fuel cells are composed of many 
layers of anode, cathode, and electrolyte that are 
rolled, folded, or stacked on top of each other. In 
the case of miniature power devices, where con-
ventional methods of rolling, folding, and stack-
ing are not applicable, microfabrication deposition 
techniques have been used to create thin-film bat-
teries. Although applicable in some circumstances, 
there are instances where a 3D package is needed. 
As mentioned by Long et al.7, the limiting factor of 
increasing the height of 3D miniature batteries is 
the increased internal resistance of the high-aspect-
ratio structures. The use of better electronic and 
ionic conductors, in addition to the optimal geom-
etries, determines the practical upper limit of these 
devices. This author believes that fractal networks 
can prove to be a more favorable architecture for 
miniature electrochemical devices. Other than the 
purely electrical advantages, fractal architectures 
provide a middle ground between high-surface-
area electrodes composed of nanomaterials and 
solid electrodes. Although the high surface area of 
nanomaterial electrodes does increase performance 
in many areas, much of the volume of the entire 
battery can be “wasted” because of the electrolyte 
around the electrode. In a fractal electrode, much of 
the volume that would be composed of electrolyte is 
replaced with electrode material.
The approach used by West et al.52 to model the 
fractal nature of the cardiovascular system is mir-
rored and directly converted to that of a fractal 
network of electrically conductive material in the 
model of Park et al.53 The purpose of this exercise 
was not to model a specific system but to provide an 
idealized zeroth-order approximation for a fractal 
electrochemical system.
There are three general assumptions made by 
West et al.52 The first assumption is that a fractal-like 
branching network is required to supply a volume 
effectively. In an electrochemical device, it is impor-
tant to maximize the use of space. For example, fuel 
cell engineers strive to maximize the density of triple 
phase boundaries (most of the time by increasing 
the effective surface area), and batteries and sensors 
benefit from large surface-to-volume ratios because, 
in many cases, the chemistry is largely a surface phe-
nomenon (limited by a process near the surface). 
l
(a)
(b)
l
l
l
t
l
Te resistance of this object is measured
from the front to the back surface. If scaled
isometrically, the resistance of this cube,
In instances of scaling of area, where the area,
l2 is scaled, while the thickness, t, is kept
constant, the resistance, 
R ∝
R ∝ V–1/3
R ∝ V –1
V = l3
∝
l
l2
1
l
R ∝
∝
t
l2
1
l2
V = t l2 ∝ l2
A
V
1
l
l2
l3
∝
=
A
V
l2
l2
∝
= 1
FIGURE 9.33 Scaling of a cube (a) and a sheet (b).

[Page 510]
510   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
In situations where the reaction is limited by mass 
transfer, the mass transfer problem can be alleviated 
by reducing the distance the reactants need to travel, 
i.e., by spreading the reaction sites throughout the 
entire volume of the device. Just as capillaries are 
spread out throughout an organism because each 
capillary can only supply a certain volume of space 
with oxygen and nutrients, it is beneficial to spread 
out the reaction surface throughout the volume in 
an electrochemical device. It is possible to spread 
out the effective surface area throughout a 3D space 
using a sponge-like or web-like material composed of 
fibers or particulates, but in many cases, it becomes 
difficult to transfer the charge from and to the reac-
tion sites.
Space-filling fractal networks can work to ensure 
that there is efficient charge transfer from a huge 
effective surface area to a current collector. The sec-
ond assumption is that the smallest fractal structure 
is a size-invariant unit independent of the total vol-
ume. There are physical and practical limitations in 
size for all materials, even though these limits may 
differ from material to material. Nanoparticles, 
nanofibers, nanotubes, and other nanoscale mate-
rials are all examples of a fundamental building 
block. The final assumption is that energy used to 
distribute resources should be minimized.
Figure 9.34 illustrates the fractal electrochemical 
network with three branches (fractal levels) and a 
branching factor, n, of two as assumed by our team 
for our fractal model. Nk is the number of elements 
at fractal level k, and each level has Nk = nk elements; 
s is the fractal level for the smallest elements. Jlimit is 
the maximum current density of any element, and 
Rk, ρ, lk, Ak, rk, vk are the resistance, resistivity, length, 
area, radius, and service volume, respectively, for a 
fractal element at level k. A cylindrical geometry for 
each element is assumed.53
In electrochemical devices, there is loss of energy 
and an associated voltage drop due to the internal 
resistance. Minimization of this internal resistance 
is key to achieving efficient power transfer. This 
becomes more crucial as the current to the electrical 
load becomes larger because of Ohm’s law:
 
E = IR  
(9.12)
where E is the electrical potential, I is the current, 
and R is the resistance. In situations where the elec-
trochemical system is limited by surface phenom-
ena, there is a limiting interface current density Jlimit. 
The total current, Itotal, flowing through an electrode 
with a total surface area (total exchange area) of Atotal 
operating in a surface-phenomena-limited regime is 
as follows:
 
Itotal = Jlimit Atotal  
(9.13)
We define the fractal level with the smallest ele-
ments as level s and Nk to be the number of elements 
at level k. We derived that the total exchange sur-
face area, Atotal, is proportional to the number of the 
smallest elements, Ns:
 
I
N
total
s
∝
 
(9.14)
The total current is thus proportional to the number 
of the smallest elements within the fractal network. 
Obviously, maximizing the number of small ele-
ments within a fractal structure is desired. We also 
derived the following:
 
R
N
total
s
∝1  
(9.15)
Again, as with Equation 9.14, maximizing the num-
ber of the smallest elements is desirable. This ensures 
that current is maximized, while the internal resis-
tance is minimized. From Ohm’s law and Equations 
9.14 and 9.15, it can be concluded that if a fractal 
network geometry is used, the voltage drop across 
the entire structure is as follows:
 Etotal internal voltage drop = Itotal Rtotal = constant  
(9.16)
Highest k = s = 2, highest Nk = ns = Ns = 4
k = 0
k = 1
k = 2
FIGURE 9.34 A simple fractal electrode.53

[Page 511]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   511
The power dissipation, in turn, scales with Ns:
 
P = Etotal Itotal = I2
total Rtotal ∝ Ns  
(9.17)
We also calculated that V0, the volume of the liquid 
where effective exchange occurs with the electrode, 
the exchange volume can take place as given by the 
following (for details see Park et al.53):
 
V0 ∝ Ns  
(9.18)
Combining Equation 9.18 with Equations 9.14, 9.15, 
9.16, and 9.17, one can then summarize the volu-
metric scaling of the electrical characteristics of a 
fractal network:
 
Itotal ∝ Vo  
(9.19)
and:
 
R
V
total
o
∝1
 
(9.20)
So that Etotal internal voltage drop = Itotal Rtotal = constant 
again, and:
 
P ∝ V0  
(9.21)
We also obtained the following:
 
A
V
constant
total
0
⊕
 
(9.22)
In other words the surface-to-volume ratio of a fractal 
electrode does not change as the volume changes.
Comparing Equation 9.20 with Equation 9.9, it 
can be concluded that the resistance of fractal elec-
trodes scale similar to a thinly layered structure, not 
to an isometrically scaled volumetric geometry, and 
comparing Equation 9.22 with Equation 9.11, the 
surface-to-volume ratio of a fractal electrode does 
not change as the volume changes; again the frac-
tal geometry scales more like a layered film than 
a volumetric electrode. The scaling of the electri-
cal properties of a fractal electrode is summarized 
and compared with that of a 2D or 3D electrode in 
Table 9.9.
C-MEMS Fractals
The author believes that C-MEMS54–57 technology 
is an attractive path toward the fabrication of 3D 
fractal-like carbon electrodes. C-MEMS describes 
a fabrication technique in which carbon devices 
are made by treating a prestructured organic mate-
rial with high temperatures (typically 900°C and 
higher) in an inert or reducing environment. The 
details of the fabrication process are described in 
Chapter 5.
Fabricating a multilevel fractal structure that is 
idealized by the model that we have described above 
(and shown in Figure 9.34) is not a trivial issue. One 
reason behind the difficulty of this task is that the 
tools that are used for 3D microfabrication do not 
apply over a large range of length scales. Hybrid 
3D fabrication techniques that combine different 
fabrication methods are therefore required (see 
Figure 3.11). An example hybrid method is briefly 
described below for the construction of a 3D fractal-
like C-MEMS structure.
Example 9.3: Doped Photoresist Method 
to Make Fractal-Like Carbon Structures
In this method, standard photolithography is 
used on a photoresist (SU-8) premixed with 
carbon nanofibers (CNFs). The CNFs (Hawaii 
Industrial Labs) are first mixed with the SU-8 
100 resin (1% by weight). The doped photore-
sist is then spin-coated onto a silicon wafer to 
an approximate 100-µm thickness. The standard 
photolithographic process to pattern the desired 
cylindrical photoresist posts then follows. After 
development, the posts exhibit a few clumps of 
CNFs on their surfaces that are partially embed-
ded inside the SU-8. Pyrolysis of these structures 
converts the entire structure into carbon, with 
a thick coat of clumps of CNFs now covering the 
side walls of the posts. The CNFs shown can with-
stand the pyrolysis process and stay attached 
to the carbon posts. The process of all the 
TABLE 9.9 Scaling of a Fractal Compared with Two-
Dimensional and Three-Dimensional Scaling
Fractal
3D Scaling
2D Scaling
I
V
total ∝
0
R
1
V
total
0
∝
R
V
∝
−1 3
/
R
V
∝
−1
E
constant
totalinternal voltage drop =
P
V
∝
0
A
V
total
0
⊕constant
A
V
l
l
l
∝
=
2
3
1.
A
V
l
l
∝
= 1
2
2

[Page 512]
512   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
nanofibers migrating to the cylinder walls dur-
ing pyrolysis is not yet understood. Figure 9.35 
shows a scanning electron microscope image of 
this fractal-like structure. This is a direct attempt 
at mimicking the branching that we have math-
ematically modeled above (see Figure 9.34). 
Obviously this represents a rather poor fractal-
like structure, with only two possible length 
scales, i.e., 100 µm (for the posts or tree stems 
defined by lithography) and nanometer-sized 
CNFs (the “branches”).
For a sensor application, a single tree-like car-
bon microelectrode would already make for a 
big improvement over current sensor electrodes 
since it comes with the largest surface area 
while keeping the internal resistance minimal. 
Such a tree-like structure could be decorated 
with catalyst molecules like the decorations on 
a Christmas tree.
As illustrated in Figure 9.36, plant matter can 
be converted into carbon, much as charcoal is 
formed. One could then envision the use of nat-
ural occurring organic matter-based fractals to 
make carbon fractals.
In order to create a truly C-MEMS biomi-
metic energy conversion device, the anode and 
cathode, both fractal structures, must be inter-
twined while maintaining a pinhole-free elec-
trolyte separation between the two in a manner 
similar to the blood vessels and air pathways in a 
mammalian lung. This may prove to be the most 
difficult task in arriving at a fully C-MEMS fractal 
battery or fuel cell.
Brains in Miniature Devices
Introduction
Before considering the implementation of comput-
ing power or brains in miniaturized systems, such as 
in microrobots, it is a good idea to briefly look at the 
state of the art in computer development in general 
and compare it with nature’s arsenal using neurons 
and brains. After this introductory section, we con-
sider the latest developments in artificial intelligence 
(AI). We discuss how both bottom-up and top-down 
approaches to AI might affect MEMS. Complexity 
theory and artificial life are considered next as two 
examples of bottom-up approaches to building AI 
that feature the self-organizing or emergent prop-
erties touched upon in Chapter 3. Artificial neural 
networks represent a bottom-up approach heavily 
dependent on learning cycles. Electronic noses and 
tongues have already been developed on the basis 
of such neural nets. As in the case of machining, we 
will learn that bottom-up approaches for embed-
ding intelligence in MEMS are gaining more and 
more interest.
FIGURE 9.35 Scanning electron microscope image of a 
carbon post with nanofibers.
FIGURE 9.36 In the charcoal process, the structure of the plant cells is preserved. The high- temperature process is carried 
out in an oxygen-starved environment. (a) Twig of a tree with plant cells. (b) Charcoal. The original plant cell walls are 
preserved in the carbon.

[Page 513]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   513
State of the Art in Computer Development
IBM’s ASCI White is a 12.3 trillion calculations per 
second machine the size of two basketball courts; 
it weighs 106 tons and cost $110 million. The 
machine runs programs on 8192 central processing 
units (CPUs) in parallel, resides at the Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory, and is the property 
of the US Department of Energy. Today, the most 
ambitious development effort to reach petaflop 
computers (flops is an acronym for floating point 
operations per second) is being carried out by a 
consortium headed by Caltech. The new system 
will have 150-GHz chips, cooled to near absolute 
zero. Because of their size and cost, such systems 
obviously remain out of range for MEMS. Closer 
to home are PCs. Intel’s 0.18-µm manufacturing 
process is used to produce Coppermine Pentium 
III chips for PCs, which, when working at full 
speed, are as fast as 1.5 GHz. As we have seen in 
Volume II, Chapters 1 and 2, Moore’s law will con-
tinue to hold for the next three to four MOSFET 
generations, reducing any mainframe to PC status 
eventually. In Volume I, Chapter 4, we saw how the 
fundamental thermodynamic limit of a MOSFET 
switch in a computer is the energy required to pro-
duce a binary transition that can be distinguished. 
The von Neumann-Landauer formula sets that the-
oretical limit (at 300K) as:
 
Ebit > kT ln 2 ≈ 18 meV
 
(Volume I, Equation 4.70)
If a MOSFET switch consumes an amount of free 
energy E and performs N useful operations, the 
energy efficiency, we saw, is given by the following:
 
η = E/N 
(Volume I, Equation 4.71)
with η in units of operations per unit energy, or 
operations/second/watt. Using the thermodynamic 
energy limit per bit, this, in theory, enables an 
energy efficiency of η = 3.5 × 1020 operations/sec-
ond/watt. In practice, using the case of 90 nm VLSI 
technology as an example, E is on the order of 1 fJ 
(femtojoule) and η = 1015 operations/second/watt. 
This means that theoretically we can increase com-
puting efficiency by a factor of more than 100,000. 
MOSFET downscaling is hampered by energy level 
quantization, though. The quantum mechanical 
limits on MOSFET scaling, based on the Heisenberg 
uncertainty principle, we summarized as follows:
 x
p
m E
m k Tln2
nm
min
x
e
bit
e
B
=
=
=
=
ℏ
ℏ
ℏ
Δ
2
2
1 5
.
  
 
 (Volume I, Equation 4.72)
which puts a fundamental limit on the integration 
density. For a limit on switching speed, we calcu-
lated the following:
 
Δ Δ
E t
h
2
≥
=
π
ℏ
 
⇒ τ ∼0.04 ps or 25 Tbits/second 
 
(Volume I, Equation 4.73)
Thus, quantum mechanics allows for a very small 
switch, but other factors, such as a material’s tem-
perature tolerance range, will limit before this 
fundamental limit sets in. Maintaining Moore’s 
exponential increase in transistor count, however, 
will become progressively more difficult and expen-
sive. Cost may ultimately become more significant 
than technical boundaries, since it dictates every 
investment in research and development. Memory 
storage devices are improving even faster than ICs, 
but they will also encounter similar obstacles. This 
has fueled the drive to look beyond silicon and cur-
rent transistor logic to totally new areas, such as 
optical, DNA, and quantum computing.
Radical modifications to current computer archi-
tecture are under consideration today. For example, 
it is the electron charge that is used in the conven-
tional semiconductors that comprise the CPUs 
and dynamic random access memories (DRAMs) 
in computers today. For the nonvolatile memory, 
magnetic disk drives are used, and these rely on 
the spin state of electrons to store large amounts of 
information and in particular to preserve informa-
tion when the computer is shut down. There is now 
the possibility of developing devices that simulta-
neously use the spin and charge of the electron to 
vastly increase the capability of information pro-
cessing, in what are called spintronics (spin-based 
electronics) devices. All spintronic devices behave 
according to this simple scheme: 1) informa-
tion is stored (written) into spins as a particular 

[Page 514]
514   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
spin orientation (up or down), 2) the spins, being 
attached to mobile electrons, carry the information 
along a wire, and 3) the information is read at a 
terminal. Spin orientation of conduction electrons 
survives for a relatively long time (nanoseconds, 
compared with tens of femtoseconds during which 
electron momentum decays), which makes spin-
tronic devices particularly attractive for memory 
storage, magnetic sensors applications, and quan-
tum computing, where electron spin represents 
a bit (called a qubit) of information. A qubit can 
exist not only in a state corresponding to the logi-
cal state 0 or 1 as in a classical bit, but also in states 
corresponding to a blend or superposition of these 
classical states. In other words, a qubit can exist as 
a zero, a one, or simultaneously as both 0 and 1, 
with a numerical coefficient representing the prob-
ability for each state. Four pairs of classical bits are 
needed to represent the same information as 1 pair 
of qubits. With eight qubits we can represent every 
number between 0 and 255 simultaneously. This 
allows for the compression of massive amounts of 
data. Quantum computing thus takes advantage of 
the concepts of superposition of states and entagle-
ment introduced in Volume I, Chapter 3. This gives 
rise to many more states of the system, and thus in 
principle the ability to represent much more infor-
mation without increasing the number of compo-
nents—providing that it is possible to devise a way 
for the states of the system to interact quantum 
mechanically.58
Quantum computers with a handful of qubits 
have been made, but it seems hard to envision one 
with more than ten qubits. These early prototypes 
tend to suffer from decoherence after around 1000 
operations. An interesting approach is to work with 
electrons on nanodots instead of on individual 
atoms as qubits. Nanowires are used to connect 
these nanodots and provide a physical entangle-
ment. Providing entanglement through a physical 
connection between individual atoms is impossible, 
but between nanodots it can be done and it might 
avoid decoherence.
Research in these computing alternatives is well 
under way and even though non-silicon-based pro-
cessors will not appear for many years to come, it 
seems quite certain that information technology will 
not be stopped when Moore’s law ceases to be valid. 
For integrating computing power in MEMS, there 
are already good solutions today. The evolution of 
ICs and microprocessors has miniaturized the size 
of the computing aspect to the point where ubiq-
uitous computing (ubicomp) has become possible, 
but sensors, output devices, data storage, and power 
supplies have a lot of catching up to do. It is precisely 
in this domain—the coupling of computation to the 
physical world—that micromachining will make its 
biggest contribution yet. To appreciate how to pro-
gram memory embedded in MEMS with powerful 
top-down algorithms or simpler bottom-up learning 
routines, we will now look at how brains in nature 
work and consider the latest developments in AI, 
complexity theory, and artificial life.
The human brain and senses, just like nature’s 
manufacturing methods, evolved in a biological 
context and are concerned mainly with survival and 
reproduction. Computing needs in MEMS are differ-
ent, so we do not want to blindly mimic the brain 
but study it to learn and adapt strategies that fit our 
needs.
From Neurons to a Brain
It is important to realize that in nature, the simplest 
forms of life already exhibit complex reflexive behav-
ior without any nerve cells or a brain at all. Even 
nature’s reflexive behavior is often more complex 
than what even our “smart” robots can do today. 
Thus, the topic deserves some attention. A very 
simple brainless and nerveless organism, such as a 
paramecium, moves toward food or a comfortable 
temperature zone, orients itself in gravitational and 
centrifugal fields, responds to sound waves, swims 
upstream in a water current and toward a cathode at 
low applied currents and toward the anode at higher 
currents, moves away from damaging UV radiation 
and away from a touch and unfamiliar chemicals. 
Insects with only a few hundred thousand neurons 
also manage to fly around in real time and manage 
to avoid obstacles, although their computers are 
immensely slow, so they obviously must be able to 
manage their intelligence in some other ways than 
our large computers do.

[Page 515]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   515
In biology, nerve cells connect sense organs to 
the brain, and the brain processes incoming sig-
nals into perceptions. Nerve cells also run the other 
way—from the brain to the sense organs, enabling 
the brain to fine-tune its senses to pick up whatever 
it considers most important; in other words, per-
ception is a two-way street. The brain itself relies 
on 1010 interconnected neurons (Figure 9.37) in 3.5 
pounds or 15 cm3 of gray matter. These neurons 
act like armies of switches, interconnected at 1014 
synapses and collectively firing 1016 times a second 
while consuming less power than an ordinary light 
bulb, making today’s attempts at artificial neural 
networks (see below) a pale version of their natu-
ral counterpart. An individual nerve cell does not 
posses a smidgen of intelligence; the latter emerges 
only from the interaction of billions of nerve cells. 
Nerve cells form long, thin fibers that carry electri-
cal signals. The signals involve ions, not free elec-
trons. The ions do not travel along the nerve cell 
but across its cell membrane. Electrical activity at 
one position along the nerve triggers activity in the 
next position. A charge pulse travels along the axon 
of a neuron (Figure 9.37) at a speed of 300 feet per 
second (200 miles per hour). This is slow compared 
with the speed of an electrical pulse in a wire and a 
million times slower than that in a Si-based switch 
(milliseconds versus nanoseconds).59 Nature obvi-
ously does not get its advantage from speed; people 
are not able to learn, and later remember, more than 
about 2 bits per second for any extended period. If 
you could maintain that rate for 12 h every day for 
100 years, the total would be about three billion 
bits–less than what we can store today on a regular 
5-in. compact disc (CD).60 The merits of our brain 
stem from its 3D nature and interconnections of 
neurons, as well as their individual complexity. The 
number advantage of human brains might disap-
pear soon enough. As depicted in Volume II, Figure 
2.1, the total number of transistors on a 2D chip 
will reach the number of neurons in the human 
brain by the year 2010; computers, some predict, 
will achieve parity in memory capacity with the 
human brain shortly after (in Volume II, Figure 
2.1, the year 2020 is projected for this event).61 The 
area density of the neurons was actually surpassed 
in the mid-1980s.62 Neurons are not limited to 
communicating in an on/off or fire/no-fire mode; 
they send information in the form of rate of fir-
ing, a myriad complicated mechanisms increase 
or decrease signal strengths at synapses, neurons 
constantly adapt and change (growth and move-
ment of axons and dendrites), and the brain does 
not employ a single generic neuron.59 So not only 
does nature have an advantage in total number of 
interconnected switches, the switching behavior of 
a neuron is also significantly more complex than 
that of a computer switch.
DNA constitutes the long-term read-only mem-
ory storage at the heart of life as it evolved on 
planet earth. A DNA strand with about 2 × 108 
nucleotides is tightly packed into a volume of 500 
µm3 (see Figure 4.1). With the assumption that 
a set of three nucleotides is analogous to a byte, 
this corresponds to a memory volume density of 
1.2 Mb/µm3 and about 1  Kb/µm in linear den-
sity, indicating that memory chips based on DNA 
as the active elements could have extremely high 
density. Transcription, or the process of reading 
Oligodendrocyte
Myelin sheath
Axon
Cell body
Dendrites
Synaptic
terminal
Receptor
Postsynaptic
membrane
Neurotransmitter
release
Synapse
FIGURE 9.37 A neuron cell.

[Page 516]
516   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the DNA code, base by base, to make proteins, was 
illustrated in Figure 2.12. Both the packing density 
and the transcription process are perfect illustra-
tions of the power of nanochemistry at work in 
nature. The evolutionary development of brains 
is very slow, though, and that of Homo sapiens—
evolution’s crown jewel (despite Howard Stern and 
Rush Limbaugh)—emerged only tens of thousands 
of years ago. According to Kurzweil’s law of accel-
erating returns (Volume II, Chapter 2), the next 
salient events (e.g., “intelligent machines making 
other intelligent machines”) will emerge much 
faster than mutations in our DNA can accommo-
date. For these next salient events, nature’s DNA 
process is too slow: human intelligence has taken 
over already, and technological innovations will 
accumulate faster and faster.
DNA computing utilizes the information cod-
ing sequence of DNA and the interactions between 
complimentary strands to perform complex compu-
tations. DNA computing was first demonstrated by 
Adleman of the University of Southern California, 
in 1994.63 The computation in Adleman’s experi-
ment ran along at 1014 operations per second, a rate 
of 100 teraflops, or 100 trillion floating point opera-
tions per second. Contrast this with the world’s fast-
est supercomputer, NEC’s Earth Simulator, running 
at just 35.8 teraflops. Obviously, computing with 
DNA has some advantages over current machines. 
Whereas today’s computing technology rests on a 
highly linear principle of logic and one computation 
must be completed before the next can begin, the 
use of DNA means that an enormous number of cal-
culations can take place simultaneously: the largest 
supercomputers have a few hundred processors run 
in parallel, but in some first DNA experiments there 
were 1 trillion processes running in parallel. This 
parallel power is many times faster than that of tra-
ditional machines—a mix of 1,018 strands of DNA 
could operate at 10,000 times the speed of today’s 
advanced supercomputers.
In such a computer, the hardware consists 
of enzymes (restriction nuclease and ligase), a 
double strand of DNA as input data, and a few 
short DNA molecules as transition rules or soft-
ware. The solutions come as pieces of DNA that 
must be isolated to be read. The process uses only 
one-ten-billionth of a watt versus tens of watts for 
an electronic microprocessor. There are some very 
serious limitations though. Although DNA can 
store a trillion times more information than cur-
rent storage media, the way in which the informa-
tion is processed necessitates a massive amount 
of DNA if larger-scale problems are to be solved. 
Furthermore, although the computation process 
takes place at an awesome speed, the “printout” of 
the result is excruciatingly sluggish, and involves 
many steps—it took Adleman a week of laboratory 
work to extract the potential solutions from his 
DNA cocktail.
Artificial Intelligence
Two Contenders: Top-Down and Bottom-Up
Introduction
Artificial intelligence is the field of research that 
attempts to embed intelligence into machines; it 
includes knowledge-based systems, pattern recogni-
tion, automatic learning, natural-language under-
standing, robotics, etc. Two distinct camps within 
the AI community today are the very ambitious 
and traditional, analytical top-down approach and 
the more modest, natural bottom-up approach. It 
is interesting to note that the same top-down and 
bottom-up duality showed up in manufacturing a 
couple of decades later. Traditionalists represent a 
rational approach to AI, building intelligence from 
logical first principles and complex algorithms. 
Research fields influencing this approach are semi-
conductor technology, cognitive psychology, and 
information science. Intelligence has proved very 
difficult (perhaps too difficult) to describe this way, 
and although the naturalist approach represents a 
lower level of computing, it has recently been more 
successful than traditional AI. Nature-inspired AI 
emphasizes neural network computing, complex 
system interactions, and self-organization. The 
natural approach to AI draws from research such 
as neuroscience, complex adaptive systems, and 
molecular biology. As in many research fields, ratio-
nal statements about the relative merits of these two 
approaches are hard to find. Comparisons are based 
not so much on proven scientific facts as on the 

[Page 517]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   517
powerful egos, reputations of their institutions, and 
the old-boy networks propagating their views and 
influencing government funding agencies; the latter 
often listen only to the “loudest” voice. From the 
status of the two contending approaches discussed 
below, it appears that the natural AI approach has 
been the more successful. The two AI camps are 
compared in Table 9.10.
Traditional AI
Traditional AI got its unofficial baptism in 1956 at 
a small conference in Dartmouth, New Hampshire. 
Present at the time were luminaries such as Marvin 
Minsky, John McCarthy, and Edward Feigenbaum, 
and although they were, as many visionary scien-
tists tend to be, over-the-top optimistic, the fruits 
of AI are now being realized.59 An example of the 
optimism reigning in the early days of AI was the 
prediction about the early successful realization of 
the Turing test. Alan Turing, mathematician and 
computer scientist, had predicted, in a 1950 paper, 
that by the year 2000 a human judge interviewing a 
computer and a human foil, both hidden from view, 
would not be able to differentiate the computer from 
the human when questioning both via a terminal. 
Although this has not yet materialized, Ray Kurzweil 
maintains that Turing was correct and might simply 
be off by about twenty years.61
Surprisingly, breakthroughs in AI did not come 
from software programs reasoning in a precise, 
highly ordered, step-by-step fashion, as the logicist 
originators of AI had predicted but from simpler, 
so-called expert systems that made headway in the 
early 1980s. The latter sort of AI represents a rather 
practical or heuristic approach to addressing ques-
tions in very specific fields, such as the stock market, 
geophysics, or diagnosis of trouble with humans or 
cars. These simpler programs rely on rules learned 
by experience or training fed into the computer. An 
expert system will typically have a large number of 
if-then rules, and because the computer can quickly 
analyze thousands of these rules, it can outperform 
its human experts easily in more and more fields. 
One prominent example of AI’s accomplishments 
is IBM’s Deep Thought computer. Deep Thought 
beat grand chess master Brent Larsen in 1988 and 
sailed past world champion Garry Kasparov in May 
1997.59 The chess program has a human-like ability 
to zero in on a few most promising pattern of moves 
but does not really have a deep understanding of 
chess strategy. This makes it more akin to the natu-
ral AI approach we review next. Another example 
is the huge data and rule base of Lenat’s Cyc 9 (Cyc 
from encyclopedia).59 Besides information, Cyc again 
incorporates many rules; half of its memory content 
is facts, the other half is rules. The highly touted, 
ten-year-long Japanese Fifth Generation Project, a 
program from the 1980s meant to catch Japan up 
with the United States in software development and 
based on traditional AI, is widely seen as a failure 
now. The logical and heuristic approach simply 
proved to be inadequate. Interestingly, the Sixth 
Generation Project, also known as the Real-World 
Computing Project, started in Japan in 1992, aimed 
to achieve human-brain-like computing capabilities 
by the year 2002. Also this milestone was not met. 
Clearly, natural AI is today a more favored approach 
than traditional AI.
TABLE 9.10 Two Directions in Artificial Intelligence (AI) Research
AI
Traditional
Semiconductor technology
Information sciences
Cognitive psychology
Reductionist
Analytical
Top-down (see nanomachining)
e.g., rule-based expert systems
Natural
Molecular biology
Neurosciences
Complex adaptive systems
Complex interactions
Bottom-up (see nanochemistry)
Self-organization
e.g., neural networks

[Page 518]
518   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Marvin Minsky remains a strong proponent of the 
traditional approach to AI, and in The Society of Mind 
he tries to put the field back on track.64 In a typi-
cal broadside against the bottom-up school, Minsky 
says, “Why bother building a robot that’s capable of 
getting from here to there, if one gets there it can’t tell 
the difference between a table and a cup of coffee?”65 
The book proposes that one should take multiple 
approaches to solving a problem. Lenat’s Cyc, he 
claims, does not have enough different approaches, 
and neural networks are just too dumb.
Natural AI
In the early 1980s, some scientists recognized that 
traditional AI had been trying to solve problems too 
much from a top-down mode, whereas a bottoms-up 
mode might be more appropriate. The very complex 
programs of traditional AI had not been adapting 
to or learning from the world around them, an 
innate capability of even the simplest animals. As in 
manufacturing today, it appeared that nature might 
provide some guidance. Neuroscientists speculated 
that the processing of conscious information takes 
up as little as a thousandth of the human brain’s 
power and that most of the rest goes into lower-level 
aspects of survival.61 In other words, there are deep 
connections between the need to get food and mate 
(i.e., survival) and intelligence. It is not so surpris-
ing, then, that Homo sapiens’ DNA is 98.6% the same 
as that of the lowland gorilla and 97.8% the same as 
that of the orangutan. On the basis of these observa-
tions, the neuroscientist Wilson introduced the con-
cept of creating computer simulations or even simple 
robots that could avoid danger, find food, and deal in 
general with a more or less complex environment.66 
Wilson called his computer simulations animats. 
Brooks and coworkers at MIT have been implement-
ing similar ideas into a series of small robots that 
interact and learn from their environment rather 
than being loaded up front with a blueprint of 
every possible scenario the robots might encounter. 
Sensor data from these robots are shared with all 
of the different microprocessors on the machines. 
Maes and coworkers enhanced this type of thinking 
by adding programs that enable the robot to learn 
from its mistakes by implementing “positive” and 
“negative” feedback as well as attempting programs 
for “motivation,” such as “aggression,” “curiosity,” 
and “hunger.”66 Brooks’s robots are a far cry from 
von Neumann’s self-replicating robots but probably 
closer to what we can expect to accomplish in this 
decade with smart MEMS.
Complexity Theory
The science of complexity is preoccupied with the 
investigation of emergent, self-organizing proper-
ties in complex systems. The term emergent is used 
for phenomena in which the whole is greater than 
the sum of the parts; the whole system exhibits col-
lective behavior that seems not to be built into the 
individual components in an obvious or explicit 
manner. In Chapter 3 we saw how Ilya Prigogine 
with his theory of “dissipative structures” was the 
first to describe, in a rigid mathematical framework, 
the coexistence of structure and change, balance 
and flow, stillness and motion, stability and insta-
bility, order and disorder, equilibrium and nonequi-
librium, and being and becoming characterizing 
complex systems.67 The name dissipative structures 
conveys the notion of dissipation on the one hand 
and order or structure on the other. Prigogine’s 
monumental and revealing theory is exemplified 
by living organisms maintaining themselves in a 
stable state far from equilibrium despite continual 
flow of matter and energy (metabolism) through 
their system. Systems far from equilibrium cannot 
be described by classical thermodynamics, which 
applies only to systems close to equilibrium. The 
linear mathematics applicable for small flows (also 
called fluxes) characteristic of systems close to equi-
librium must be replaced by nonlinear expressions 
describing the large fluxes associated with nonequi-
librium systems. Dissipative structures do not tend 
toward equilibrium; on the contrary, they exhibit 
instabilities, bifurcation points, leading to new 
forms of order that move the system farther and far-
ther away from the equilibrium state with an accom-
panying increase in complexity. The greater the 
complexity, the higher the degree of nonlinearity. 
The behavior of such a nonequilibrium system can-
not be described from the individual parts; instead 
it behaves as an interconnected whole with mul-
tiple feedback loops. Nonlinear equations describ-
ing dissipative systems usually have more than one 

[Page 519]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   519
solution, and as a consequence, new situations may 
emerge at any moment. This contrasts with classi-
cal thermodynamics, where a system is completely 
predictable and pinned down by one solution only. 
From Prigogine we learn that the solution or path 
taken at an instability or bifurcation point in a dis-
sipative structure depends on the previous history 
of the system and that its behavior is no longer uni-
versal but quite unique to the individual system 
itself. Moving away from equilibrium, we thus move 
away from the universal to the unique, from deter-
minacy to indeterminacy, from individual com-
ponents to an interconnected structure with links 
between structure and its history and a richness and 
variety as embodied by life itself.68 Indeterminacy 
in dissipative structures is also introduced through 
small random variations, that is, “noise” from the 
environment. At bifurcation points, the path taken 
depends very sensitively on such noise, and the out-
come becomes even more unpredictable, with new 
structures and higher order and complexity emerg-
ing spontaneously.
That order increases at bifurcation points does not 
contradict the second law of thermodynamics, as the 
increased order comes at the expense of greater dis-
order of the environment. Contrary to our intuition, 
chaotic systems are highly organized, exhibiting 
complex patterns dividing and subdividing again 
and again at smaller and smaller scales. In fluidic 
instabilities, turbulence will appear at sufficiently 
large velocities. In the case of chemical reactions, 
instabilities appear through repeated self-amplify-
ing feedback. In both cases, self-organization, the 
spontaneous emergence of order, results from the 
combined effects of nonequilibrium, irreversibil-
ity, feedback loops, and instability. In fluidics, an 
example is the bathtub vortex, and in chemistry, 
examples include the so-called chemical clocks and 
catalytic networks of enzymes. The latter were shown 
to not only self-organize but also self-reproduce and 
evolve (see Chapter 3). In physics, an example is 
laser light, in which, under special circumstances, 
far from equilibrium and by “pumping” in energy 
from the outside, coherence spontaneously emerges 
from incoherent light. The most spectacular exam-
ple of a self-organizing systems is the earth itself, 
as detailed in Lovelock and Margulis’ Gaia theory.69 
Although often under attack, this theory is gaining 
more acceptance.
The reductionist approach of traditional AI fails 
when problems become extremely complex, and 
often no understanding is gained by breaking them 
down into their component parts. Earlier we saw 
how individual neurons or nerve cells work; not one 
exhibits any intelligence by itself, but intelligence in 
our brain emerges as a consequence of the interac-
tions of billions of them. This is true for chemical 
and biological interactions that go on in living organ-
isms, social structures, the weather, the economy, 
etc. Life itself, according to Kauffman, is nothing 
but an emergent property of a certain kind of com-
plex system.70 Although complexity theory seems to 
have made impact on market prediction, its impact 
on understanding life and evolution is still a matter 
of debate; this debate will probably go on for some 
time (see also Volume I, Chapter 7). Whereas natural 
AI is already useful in designing smart MEMS, com-
plexity theory will start becoming important only 
when we work in the nanodomain and deal with 
self-organizing molecular systems.
Artificial Life
Artificial life, or a-life, is the study of lifelike crea-
tures built by humans. This new science was offi-
cially inaugurated in Los Alamos, New Mexico, 
at a 1987 gathering organized by Christopher G. 
Langton.66 Computer-generated entities or cellular 
automata behaving as self-operating machines, pro-
cessing information about their surroundings, pro-
ceeding logically, and replicating themselves, were 
already predicted by the legendary mathematician 
von Neumann in the late 1940s. Today, many crea-
tures of this type—really nothing more than software 
code—have been demonstrated, even on laptop com-
puters. Some practitioners believe that by watching 
these creatures evolve on the computer screen and 
subjecting them to a variety of stresses, we can learn 
important lessons about the evolution of real-life 
systems more quickly and less expensively than with 
standard experimentation. Early a-life programs 
include Boids (http://www.lifeartificial.info/flocking-
boid-behavior), which exhibit flocking behavior 
uncannily similar to that of real birds. The simple 
rules in this program control only individual Boids, 

[Page 520]
520   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
but somehow flocking group behavior emerges (see 
complexity theory).71 Network Tierra by Thomas Ray 
features software simulations of organisms—crea-
tures in which each cell has its own DNA-like genetic 
code.71 Tierra can be downloaded from http://www.
hip.atr.co.jp/∼ray/tierra/tierra.html. Tierra organ-
isms, in their simulated world, compete for a limited 
resource (energy) provided by the computer CPU. The 
seed electronic organism, the Ancestor in Tierra, has 
only three genes, and besides feeding it is designed 
to replicate itself and to mutate. Several sources of 
mutations are programmed in. There is also a reaper 
that kills off creatures that are less well adapted and 
those that are too old. To everyone’s surprise, Tierra 
very quickly developed some lifelike evolution char-
acteristics, such as the development of new species, 
parasites, defense mechanisms against parasites, 
symbiotic relationships, competition for food, and 
even something akin to punctuated equilibrium as 
proposed by Gould and Eldredge in 1972.70 The dis-
cussion about how increasing complexity arose is an 
ongoing one. In the case of Tierra, there was no ten-
dency toward increasing complexity; on the contrary, 
simpler creatures evolved over time. Emergence of 
complexity is a fact of life, though, and Ray is trying 
to induce it in Network Tierra. For evolution to pro-
ceed in this artificial world, it has become clear that 
a lifelike complexity must challenge the organisms. 
Ray is doing this now by letting his organisms grow 
on the Internet with its diverse electronic life. The 
organism, like a screensaver, becomes active only 
when the host computer is inactive. Ray speculates 
on the emergence of such intelligent life in Tierra-
like environments; it will make the Turing test irrel-
evant. For interested readers, more on artificial life 
can be found at Avida Artificial Life Group (http://
www.krl.caltech.edu/avida), Boids (http://hmt.com/ 
cwr/boids.html), Complexity On-Line (http://www. 
csu.edu.au/complex), Dawkins (http://www.spacelab. 
net/∼catalj), Primordial Soup Kitchen (http://www.
psoup.math.wisc.edu/kitchen.html), Stuart Kauffman 
(http://www.santafe.edu.edu/People/kauffman), 
Swarm (http://www.santafe.edu/projects/swarm), and 
Tierra (http://www.hip.atr.co.jp/∼ray/tierra/tierra.html). 
As in the case of complexity theory, artificial life is 
bound to become more important as we move from 
MEMS to NEMS.
Artificial Neural Network Software
As we have seen, neurons, to a first-order approxi-
mation, work by gathering signals from other neu-
rons, weighing each by varying algebraic amounts, 
and then internally summing all the inputs. If this 
cumulative signal exceeds some internally stored 
threshold value, the neuron fires its own signal 
that is subsequently gathered in by other down-
stream neurons. John Hopfield, in 1982, invented a 
simple mathematical model of a network of nerve 
cells, called a neural net. As a quantum physicist 
Hopfield asked himself if a neuron in a brain might 
not act like an atom in a lattice. He reasoned that 
like an atom can take on discrete states, a neuron 
might also be found in discrete states: it can fire or 
not fire. His idea boiled down to the simple idea 
that just as atoms in a crystal arrange themselves 
to minimize the energy, so must a neural network 
minimize its “energy.” This led to his celebrated 
1982 paper, “Neural Networks and Physical Systems 
with Emergent Collective Computational Abilities.” 
He showed that if many neural units were hooked 
together, they acquired computational abilities. 
The artificial neuron is a mathematical construct 
that emulates the more salient functions of biologi-
cal neurons, i.e., the signal integration and thresh-
old firing behavior. The most basic neural software 
consists of a layer of input and output nodes. When 
the input nodes receive a strong enough signal they 
“fire,” sending their own signals to the output nodes 
attached to them. The input nodes in such a sim-
ple system represent an array of input stimuli, and 
a response is picked up from the output nodes. To 
make the neural network produce the right answer, 
an outside controller, usually a human or a com-
puter programmed with the correct database, must 
adjust the switches between the input and output 
till the output produces the right answer. In neu-
ral network jargon, these settings are called weights. 
In the simplest case, we make the weights either 
one or zero; in general, though we set the weights 
to any of a range of signal pass-through strengths. 
Increasing the weight between an input and output 
node means that the input node signal will make a 
larger contribution to the likelihood that the con-
nected output node will fire. This corresponds to an 

[Page 521]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   521
excitatory signal in a nerve cell. A decrease in weight 
corresponds to an inhibitory signal and can stop a 
branch in the net from cascading throughout the net 
or shut off a nerve cell in the biological equivalent. 
The intelligence within the neural network is stored 
within these sundry algebraic connection weights. 
The process of teaching the network the appropriate 
weights is a complicated and often lengthy process. 
Frank Rosenblatt designed the first neural net-
work—a so-called perceptron—that could be trained 
by consecutive small adaptations of the weighing 
factors.59 This was achieved by comparing the results 
of consecutive network attempts at the right answer 
with the desired results and making small changes 
to the weighing factors after each comparison; more 
dramatic adjustments would have wiped out all pre-
vious training and give the wrong answers for any 
other pattern recognition.
Using a Hopfield-style neural net, Sahley and 
Gelperin worked out a model that faithfully cap-
tured the learning a common garden slug (Limax 
maximus) displayed when confronted with smells 
such as that of quinine (which it dislikes) and carrots 
(which it likes).70 Their model neural net is shown in 
Figure 9.38.
Neural nets have been used in sensor array appli-
cations such as artificial noses and tongues.72 In these 
instruments, a small number of odor and taste sen-
sors are trained to smell and taste food and drinks 
containing hundreds of different chemicals. Making 
selective sensors for each separate chemical would 
be impossible, but a limited sensor array develops 
specific patterns (fingerprints) for complex chemical 
mixtures that correlate well with the human sensory 
evaluation. This approach has taken a rap for being 
a “black box”—it gives the right results but does not 
explain why. Indeed, neural net software packages 
develop connection traces internally that embody 
the rules behind the conceptual space on which 
they are training. For many chemical and biological 
applications, however, it is not important to know 
the identity of the individual components of a com-
plex mixture, but it is important to sound an alarm 
if an unusual pattern is detected; for this applica-
tion, natural AI seems the appropriate way to embed 
intelligence.
Acknowledgments
With special thanks to Ramses Madou and Drs. 
Rabih Zaouk and Benjamin Park.
Questions
 
9.1:  What is meant by bottom-up and top-down 
artificial intelligence approaches? Which 
approach makes most sense for the develop-
ment of smart MEMS?
 
9.2:  Compare the function of a set of neurons in 
the brain with an artificial neural net. Find 
some real-life examples where neural nets 
are used today.
 
9.3:  Explain how µ-3D batteries are better than thin- 
film batteries for powering a MEMS device.
 
9.4:  Sketch a rough Ragone plot for capacitors, 
supercapacitors, batteries and fuel cells.
 
9.5:  What MEMS power would you put into a 
microrobot? A microrocket? A microsubma-
rine? A microbutterfly?
 
9.6:  Discuss some options for hydrogen storage. 
Why is it so important for the future of fuel 
cells?
 
9.7:  As far as fuel cells are concerned what is the 
merit of biofuel cells?
 
9.8:  Explain for what uses you might prefer a 
supercapacitor over a Li-ion battery. 
 
9.9:  What is the role of a bipolar plate in a fuel 
cell? How could C-MEMS make for better 
bipolar plates?
+
Apple
Carrot
1
1
2
3
4
2 3 4
Taste
categorizer
and memory
Lip
Reward
Eat
Flee
Quinine
FIGURE 9.38 Model neural network for learning in the slug.

[Page 522]
522   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 9.10:  What are some of the promises and challenges 
involved with building micromachined com-
bustion engines?
 9.11:  In what ways can MEMS and NEMS improve 
solar cells?
 9.12:  Explain with a diagram how a Grätzel solar 
cell works.
 9.13:  What are the fundamental limits in comput-
ing power? Use equations.
 9.14:  Explain how a fractal design of the electrodes 
might benefit a fuel cell.
 9.15:  Explain the scaling behavior of a cube and 
a sheet in terms of resistance and surface to 
volume ratio.
References
 
1. Malone, M. S. 2004. Moore’s second law. Wired, April. http://
www.wired.com/wired/archive/12.04/start.html?pg=2.
 
2. Chesnokov, S. A., V. A. Nalimova, A. G. Rinzler, R. E. 
Smalley, and J. E. Fischer. 1999. Mechanical energy storage 
in carbon nanotube springs. Phys Rev Lett 82:343–46.
 
3. Nalimova, V. A., D. E. Sklovsky, G. N. Bondarenko, H. A. 
Gaucher, S. Bonnamy, and F. Beguin. 1997. Lithium inter-
action with carbon nanotubes. Syn Met 88:89–93.
 
4. Gaucher, H., E. Frackowiak, S. Gautier, S. Bonnamy, and F. 
Beguin. 1999. Electrochemical storage of lithium in multi-
walled carbon nanotubes. Carbon 37:61–69.
 
5. Bates, J. B., G. R. Gruzalski, and C. F. Luck. 1993. Rechargeable 
solid-state lithium microbatteries. Proceedings: IEEE Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL, 
February 1993, pp. 82–86.
 
6. Goemans, P. A. F. M. 1994. Microsystems and energy: the 
role of energy. Microsystem technology: Exploring opportunities, 
ed. G. K. Lebbink. Alphen aan de Rijn/Zaventem: Samsom 
BedrijfsInformatie bv, pp. 50–64.
 
7. Long, J. W., B. Dunn, D. R. Rolison, and H. S. White. 
2004. Three-dimensional battery architectures. Chem Rev 
104:4463.
 
8. LaFollette, R. M., J. N. Harb, and P. Humble. 2001. 
Microfabricated secondary batteries for remote, autono-
mous electrical devices. The Sixteenth Annual Battery 
Conference on Applications and Advances, 2001. Long Beach, 
CA, January 9–12, 2001, pp. 349–54.
 
9. Koeneman, P. B., I. J. Busch-Vishniac, and K. L. Wood. 
1997. Feasibility of micro power supplies for MEMS. J 
Microelectromech Syst 6:355–62.
 10. Hart, R. W., H. S. White, B. Dunn, and D. R. Rolison. 2003. 
3D microbatteries. Electrochem Commun 5:120–23.
 11. Thomas, P., Y. Y. Fei, and X. D. Zhu. 2007. Adsorption and 
desorption of hydrogen on bare and Xe-covered Cu(111). 
Appl Phys A 86:115–21.
 12. Sandronk, G. 1999. A panoramic overview of hydrogen 
storage alloys from a gas reaction point of view. J Alloys 
Compounds 293:887–88.
 13. Schuth, F., B. Bogdanovic, and M. Felderhoff. 2004. Light 
metal hydrides and complex hydrides for hydrogen storage. 
Chem Commun 20:2249–58.
 14. Orimo, S., and Y. Nakamori. 2004. Li-N based hydrogen 
storage materials. Mater Sci Eng B 108:48–50.
 15. Dillon, A. C., K. M. Jones, T. A. Bekkedahl, and C. H. Kiang. 
1997. Storage of hydrogen in single-walled carbon nano-
tubes. Nature 386:377–79.
 16. Langmi, H. W., and G. S. McGrady. 2008. Ternary nitrides 
for hydrogen storage: Li–B–N, Li–Al–N and Li–Ga–N sys-
tems. J Alloys Compounds 466:287–92.
 17. Park, S., D. Srivatava, and K. Cho. 2003. Generalized chem-
ical reactivity of curved surfaces: carbon nanotubes. Nano 
Lett. 3:1273–77.
 18. Li, J., T. Furuta, H. Goto, T. Ohashi, Y. Fujiwara, and S. Yip. 
2003. Theoretical evaluation of hydrogen storage capacity 
in pure carbon nanostructures. J Chem Phys 119:2376–85.
 19. Fernandez-Alonso, F., F. J. Bermejo, C. Cabrillo, R. O. 
Loutfy, V. Leon, and M. L. Saboungi. 2007. Nature of the 
bound states of molecular hydrogen in carbon nanohorns. 
Phys Rev Lett 98:215503.
 20. Iijima, S. 1999. Nano-aggregates of single-walled graphitic 
carbon nano-horns. Chem Phys Lett 309:13.
 21. Sakai, H., Y. Tokita, and T. Hatazawa. 2007. A high-power 
glucose/oxygen biofuel cell. Fuel Cell Technology: Biofuel 
Cells, Enzymatic and Microbial, Division of Fuel Chemistry, 
234th ACS National Meeting. Boston, MA, August 19–23, 
2007, p. 196.
 22. Admin. 2007. http://www.ecoustics.com.
 23. Meyers, J. P., and H. L. Maynard. 2002. Design consider-
ations for miniaturized PEM fuel cells. J Power Sources 
109:76–88.
 24. Park, B., and M. J. Madou. 2006. Design, fabrication, and 
initial testing of a miniature PEM fuel cell with micro-
scale pyrolyzed carbon fluidic plates. J Power Sources 
162:369–79.
 25. Sato, H., C. W. Berry, B. E. Casey, G. Lavella, Y. Yao, J. 
M. VandenBrooks, and M. M. Maharbiz. 2008. A cyborg 
beetle: insect flight control through an implantable, teth-
erless microsystem. IEEE 21st International Conference on 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 2008. Tucson, AZ, January 
13–17, 2008, pp. 164–67.
 26. Varia, A. 2003. Thermal model of MEMS thruster. FEMCI 
Workshop 2003. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, May 
7–8, 2003.
 27. London, A. P. 2000. Development and test of a microfabri-
cated birpropellant rocket engine, PhD diss. Cambridge, MA: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 28. Protz, C. S. 2004. Experimental investigation of microfabri-
cated bipropellant rocket engines, PhD diss. Cambridge, MA: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 29. Sniegowski, J., and E. Garcia. 1995. Microfabricated 
actuators and their application to optics. Micro-Optics/
Micromechanics and Laser Scanning and Shaping (Proceedings 
of the SPIE). San Jose, CA, February 7–9, 1995, pp. 46–64.
 30. Garcia, E., and J. Sniegowski. 1995. Surface micromachined 
microengine. Sensors Actuators A A48:203–14.
 31. Lee, J. B., Z. Chen, M. G. Allen, A. Rohatgi, and R. Arya. 
1995. A miniaturized high-voltage solar cell array as an 
electrostatic MEMS power supply. J Microelectromech Syst 
4:102–08.
 32. Salalibara, T., H. Izu, T. Kura, W. Shinohara, H. Iwata, 
S. Kiyama, and S. Tsuda. 1995. High-voltage photovol-
taic micro-devices fabricated by a new laser-processing. 
Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS 
’95). Amsterdam, the Netherlands, January 29–February 2, 
1995, pp. 282–87.

[Page 523]
Power and Brains in Miniature Devices   523
 33. Kimura, M., N. Miyakoshi, and M. Daibou. 1991. A min-
iature opto-electric transformer. Proceedings: IEEE Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’91). Nara, Japan, January 
30–February 2, 1991, pp. 227–32.
 34. 2008. School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy 
Engineering, University of New South Wales.
 35. Mao, F., N. Mano, and A. Heller. 2003. Long tethers bind-
ing redox centers to polymer backbones enhance electron 
transport in enzyme “wiring” hydrogels. J Am Chem Soc 
125:4951–57.
 36. Madou, M. J., and S. R. Morrison. 1989. Chemical sensing 
with solid state devices. New York: Academic Press.
 37. Gratzel, M. 2001. Photoelectrochemical cells. Nature 414:15.
 38. Gratzel, M. 2005. Solar energy conversion by dye-sensitized 
photovoltaic cells. Inorg Chem 44:6841–51.
 39. O’Regan, B., and M. Gratzel. 1991. A low-cost, high-effi-
ciency solar cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal TiO2 
films. Nature 353:737–40.
 40. Greenham, N. C., X. Peng, and A. P. Alivisatos. 1996. 
Charge separation and transport in conjugated-polymer/
semiconductor-nanocrystal composites studied by photo-
luminescence quenching and photoconductivity. Phys Rev 
B 54:17628–37.
 41. Huynh, W., J. J. Dittmer, and A. P. Alivisatos. 2002. Hybrid 
nanorod-polymer solar cells. Science 295:2425–27.
 42. Nozik, A. J. 2002. Quantum dot solar cells. Pysica E 
14:115–20.
 43. Pietryga, J. M., R. D. Schaller, D. Werder, M. H. Stewart, V. 
I. Klimov, and J. A. Hollinasworth. 2004. Pushing the band 
gap envelope: Mid-infrared emitting colloidal PbSe quan-
tum dots. J Am Chem Soc 126:11752–53.
 44. Branham, K., J. L. Marques, J. Hassard, and P. O’Brien. 
2000. Quantum-dot concentrator and thermodynamic 
model for the global redshift. Appl Phys Lett 76:1197.
 45. Stark, I., and M. Strodeur. 1999. New micro thermoelec-
tric devices based on bismuth telluride-type thin solid 
films. Eighteenth International Conference on Thermoelectrics. 
Baltimore, MD, Aug. 29–Sept. 2, 1999, pp. 465–72.
 46. Shenck, N. S., and J. A. Paradiso. 2001. Energy scavenging 
with shoe-mounted piezoelectrics. IEEE Micro 21:30–42.
 47. Ottman, G. K., H. F. Hofmann, A. C. Bhatt, and G. A. 
Lesieutre. 2002. Adaptive piezoelectric energy harvesting 
circuit for wireless remote power supply. IEEE Trans Power 
Electron 17:669–76.
 48. Roundy, S., B. P. Otis, Y. H. Chee, J. M. Rabaey, and 
P. Wright. A 1.9-GHz transmit beacon using environmen-
tally scavenged energy. ISPLED 2003. Seoul Korea, August 
25–27, 2003.
 49. Meninger, S., T. O. Mur-Miranda, R. Amirtharajah, A. 
Chandrakasan, and J. Lang. 1999. Vibration-to-electric 
energy conversion. 1999 International Symposium on Low Power 
Electronics and Design. New York: ACM Press, pp. 48–53.
 50. Wang, L., and F. G. Yuan. 2007. Energy harvesting by mag-
netostrictive material (MsM) for powering wireless sensors 
in SHM. SPIE Smart Structures and Materials and NDE and 
Health Monitoring, 14th International Symposium (SSN07), 
March 18–22, 2007.
 51. Mandelbrot, B. B., and J. A. Wheeler. 1983. The fractal 
geometry of nature. Am J Phys 51:286–87.
 52. West, G. B., J. H. Brown, and B. J. Enquist. 1997. A general 
model for the origin of allometric scaling laws in biology. 
Science 276:122–26.
 53. Park, B., R. Zaouk, W. Chunlei, and M. J. Madou. 2007. A 
case for fractal electrodes in electrochemical applications. J 
Electrochem Soc 154:1–5.
 54. Park, B. Y., R. Zaouk, C. Wang, and M. J. Madou. 2007. A 
case for fractal electrodes in electrochemical applications. J 
Electrochem Soc 154:1–5.
 55. Wang, C., G. Jia, L. H. Taherabadi, and M. J. Madou. 
2005. A novel method for the fabrication of high-aspect 
ratio C-MEMS structures. J Microelectromechan Syst 14: 
348–58.
 56. Wang, C., L. Taherabadi, G. Jia, M. Madou, Y. Yeh, and B. 
Dunn. 2004. C-MEMS for the manufacture of 3D micro-
batteries. Electrochem Solid-State Lett 7:A435–38.
 57. Wang, C., and M. Madou. 2005. From MEMS to NEMs with 
carbon. Biosens Bioelectron 20:2181–87.
 58. Wolf, S. DARPA—DSO. http://www.darpa.mil/dso/thrust/
math/quist.htm.
 59. Freeman, D. H. 1994. Brainmakers. New York: Touchstone.
 60. Minsky, M. 1994. Will robots inherit the earth? Scientific 
American, 271 (October):108–13.
 61. Kurzweil, R. 1999. The age of the spiritual machine. New 
York: Penguin.
 62. Bashir, R. 2001. DNA-mediated artificial nano-bio-
structures: State of the art, future directions. Superlattice 
Microstruct 29:1–16.
 63. Adleman, L. M. 1994. Molecular computation of solutions 
to combinatorial problems. Science 266:1021–24.
 64. Minsky, M. 1987. The society of mind. New York: Simon and 
Schuster.
 65. Kaku, M. 1997. Visions: How science will revolutionize the 21st 
century. New York: Oxford University Press.
 66. Levy, S. 1992. Artificial life. New York: Vintage Books.
 67. Prigogine, I., and I. Stengers. 1984. Order out of chaos. New 
York: Bantam.
 68. Capra, F. 1996. The web of life. New York: Anchor Books.
 69. Lovelock, J., and L. Margulis. 1974. Biological modulation 
of the earth’s atmosphere. Icarus 21:471–89.
 70. Stewart, I. 1988. Life’s other secret. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons.
 71. Morris, R. 1999. Artificial worlds. New York: Plenum Trade.
 72. Toko, K. 2000. Biomimetic sensor technology. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

[Page 524]
[empty page]

[Page 525]
PART III
Miniaturization 
Application
 (a) The controller that is included as part of the popular Guitar Hero video game 
relies on (b) a three-axis motion-sensing accelerometer from STMicroelectronics. 
(From http://archive.electronicdesign.com/files/29/19285/fig_01.gif. With permission.)

[Page 526]
526   Scaling Laws, Actuators, and Power and Brains in Miniature Devices
Introduction to Part III
Chapter 10 MEMS and NEMS Applications
Introduction to Part III
In Chapter 10 on MEMS and NEMS applications we 
cover the market dynamics for MEMS and NEMS 
commercial products. We cover both lithography- 
and nonlithography-based MEMS. After an analy-
sis of the total world market in MEMS, we consider 
some selected market categories, i.e., MEMS in 
the automotive market; MEMS in medical and 
bio technology markets (bio-MEMS); MEMS in 
industrial automation, including environmental 
monitoring markets; and MEMS in information 
technology peripherals and telecommunications 
markets.
The market expectations for NEMS today are much 
greater than they ever were for MEMS. An important 
objective in the section on nanotechnology mar-
kets is to try to help the reader distinguish between 
hype and science/facts, perhaps helping to avoid yet 
another lurking technology bubble.  

[Page 527]
527
O u t l i n e
Introduction
Preamble on the MEMS Market
Deﬁnitions
Overall Market for Micromachines
MEMS Market Segments
MEMS in Medical and 
Biotechnology Markets: 
Bio-MEMS
µ-TAS and LOC in Sample 
Preparation for Molecular 
Diagnostics
General Sample Preparation 
Protocols
Examples of Integrated Sample 
Preparation
MEMS in Industrial Automation, 
Including Environmental 
Monitoring Markets
MEMS in IT Peripherals and 
Telecommunications Markets
Nanotechnology Markets
Questions
References
10
MEMS and NEMS 
Applications
 Picture of packaged digital micromirror devices (DMD™) from Texas Instruments 
(TI). These are pixel devices; shown are the VGA (640 × 480), the SVGA (800 × 
600), and the XGA (1024 × 768). Digital mirror devices constitute the largest 
microelectromechanical system (MEMS) product after read-write heads and 
 ink-jet heads.
Nucleation
Bubble growth
Drop ejection
and reﬁll
 Another major microelectromechanical system (MEMS) application: an ink-jet 
printer head. These represent the second largest MEMS market, after read-write 
heads.

[Page 528]
528   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Prediction is extremely difficult. Especially 
about the future.
Niels Bohr
Cars will cost as little as $200. People will have 
two-month vacations. They will care little for 
possessions. The happiest people live in one-
factory villages.
Predictions for 1960 by General Motors 
in a “Futurama”exhibit at the 1939–1940 
New York World’s Fair
To the electron—may it never be of any use to 
anybody.
Favorite toast of hardheaded Cavendish 
scientists in the early 1900s
Michael Riordan and Lillian Hoddeson, Crystal 
Fire (W. W. Norton, 1998)
People will work every bit as hard to fool 
themselves as they will to fool others—
which makes it very difficult to tell just where 
the line between foolishness and fraud is 
located.
Robert Park
Voodoo Science (Oxford University Press, 2000)
Introduction
The field of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) 
and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) is cur-
rently undergoing a total makeover. Mechanical and 
optical MEMS (MOEMS) products have made the 
transition out of the laboratory and into the mar-
ketplace with a plethora of new products, includ-
ing a strong entry into the consumer electronics 
field (mobile phones, cameras, laptop computers, 
games, etc.). Biological MEMS (bio-MEMS), on the 
other hand, is in the doldrums, with little commer-
cial acceptance, while NEMS, especially BIONEMS, 
is stealing all the research dollars. In commercial 
terms, if MEMS is entering adolescence, the word 
nano still seems to derive from a verb that means “to 
seek and get venture capital funding” instead of from 
the Greek noun for dwarf. Today the market dynam-
ics for MEMS and NEMS commercial products are 
very different, and we treat MEMS and NEMS appli-
cations separately.
We start with a preamble about today’s MEMS 
market character and the current and future posi-
tion of the United States in MEMS and NEMS  in 
general. We are interested in both  lithography-based 
and  non-lithography-based MEMS. Compared with 
lithography-based MEMS, the non-lithography MEMS 
approach is underreported, and it is especially in 
 A nanonet of companies, small and large, involved in nanotechnology. Notice that only start-ups use “nano” in 
their names.

[Page 529]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   529
the latter area that progress in the United States is 
lacking.
To understand where revenues in MEMS are 
derived from, and to appreciate where further growth 
can be expected from, we provide definitions of 
MEMS, bio-MEMS, microsystems technology (MST), 
micrototal analysis system (µ-TAS), lab-on-a-chip 
(LOC), micromechatronics, miniature sensors and 
actuators, microstructures or microcomponents, 
and first-level packaged MEMS/MST and the small-
est commercialized unit. These terms are familiar 
to micromachinists but are sometimes confused in 
marketing reports. An evaluation of MEMS applica-
tions better describing the MEMS contribution to 
the final product and the manufacturing method 
used to produce the MEMS [e.g., non-lithography-
based, such as computer numerical control (CNC) 
machined, or fabricated using a lithography-based 
technique, such as LIGA] might be of help in inter-
preting market studies that are often vague about 
what the term microfabricated products comprises. 
Companies and research organizations interested 
in entering the field might then at least be able to 
judge, based on the underlying study, whether they 
have the manufacturing expertise or know-how to 
make them possible contenders.
After an analysis of the total world market in 
MEMS, we consider some selected market catego-
ries, i.e., MEMS in the automotive market; MEMS in 
medical and biotechnology markets (bio-MEMS); 
MEMS in industrial automation, including envi-
ronmental monitoring markets; and MEMS in 
information technology (IT) peripherals and tele-
communications markets.
The market expectations for nanotechnology 
today are much greater than they ever were for MEMS. 
An important objective in the section on nanotech-
nology markets is to try to help the reader distinguish 
between hype and factual science,  perhaps helping 
to avoid yet another lurking technology bubble.
As highlighted in Chapter 1, which compares 
traditional manufacturing and MEMS and NEMS, 
we hope that a better understanding of how to 
match different manufacturing options with a 
given application will guide the identification of 
additional killer MEMS and NEMS applications 
and encourage more companies and research 
organizations to innovate faster based on their 
in-house manufacturing tools and know-how.
Preamble on the MEMS Market
Lithography-Based MEMS
Lithography-based MEMS defines all microman-
ufacturing involving a lithography step. It was not 
too long ago that lithography-based MEMS was 
surrounded with a similar hype that surrounds 
NEMS today. It was said that MEMS, by using highly 
automated, 
parallel-manufacturing 
techniques, 
would enjoy the same economy of scale as 
integrated circuits (ICs) and ride similar cost curves. 
Using “micromachining” technology (much of it 
borrowed from the IC industry), pumps, sensors, 
relays, motors—just about any manufactured 
gizmo in our daily world—would be shrunk 
down to the micrometer scale, so that it might be 
hidden, worn, or implanted and in some cases be 
inexpensive enough for a disposable application. In 
those early years of MEMS (the early 1980s), when 
MEMS was almost 100% silicon-based, it was even 
projected that long before 2008, its market would 
be larger than that for ICs. This notion was based 
on the expectation of many more applications for 
MEMS and combinations of MEMS and ICs than 
for ICs alone. This market prediction has not been 
fulfilled yet: the 2006 worldwide IC market was 
$211.0 billion (see also Volume I, Appendix 1B); in 
contrast, the worldwide MEMS market for the same 
year was estimated between $6.3 and $16.5 billion 
(depending on which criteria one uses to define 
MEMS). In other words, after more than twenty 
years, one could claim a MEMS market of at most 
8% of the total IC market, taking into account that 
this was achieved only by changing the criteria about 
what qualified as MEMS [e.g., including nonsilicon 
devices, such as thin-film read-write (RW) heads]. 
The MEMS market in 2007 consisted principally 
of RW heads, ink-jet printer heads, digital light 
processing chips, pressure sensors, accelerometers, 
flow sensors, gyroscopes, microphones, oscillators, 
and radiofrequency (RF) switches, which, except 
for digital light processing (DLP) chips, all are 
becoming commodity products very swiftly and 

[Page 530]
530   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
are now more and more manufactured outside the 
United States (profit margins have become very thin 
on most of these products). Early market studies 
did overstate dramatically what impact Si-based 
MEMS had on the world economy and how fast that 
would happen. A realistic number for the market of 
Si-MEMS products today is less than 3% of the IC 
market (even the $6.3 billion MEMS sales in 2006, 
i.e., 3% of the $211 billion IC market for 2006, 
included nonsilicon devices). The main reason that 
MEMS sales continue to lag behind IC sales has been 
the relatively stable price-to-performance (p/p) ratio 
of sensors and actuators ever since 1960, which is 
in marked contrast to the p/p ratio of ICs, which 
has fallen enormously between 1960 and 2007 
and is now significantly below that for sensors and 
actuators. As a consequence of these changes, the cost 
of a measurement system is, in general, dominated 
first by the cost of the microactuator and second by 
the cost of the microsensor.
When including nonsilicon MEMS (which many 
market studies now do), and especially when 
also  counting non-lithography-based MEMS (e.g., 
precision-engineered products; see below) (which 
very few market studies do) MEMS might constitute 
10% of all current IC sales.
If some investors still cringe when they hear 
MEMS mentioned, they might be remembering the 
2001 technology bubble around “optical  MEMS 
switches” for telecommunications. Optical channel 
cross-connecting is a key function in most com-
munication systems. In a hybrid approach, one 
converts optical data streams into electronic data 
using electronic cross-connection technology. Then, 
the electronic data streams are converted back into 
optical signals. In electronic cross-connecting of 
N-by-N channels (N × N), N may be on the order of 
thousands. Using arrays of MEMS micromirrors, one 
can obviate the need for back-and-forth conversion 
of light to electrical signals. Cross-connecting optical 
channels directly in the photonic domain is known 
as all-optical switching. These all-optical path switches 
could, in theory, operate at any wavelength, at any 
speed, and using any kind of protocol. In 2007, the 
size of typical commercially available all-optical 
channel switches may switch between 80 or 128 
channels (N = 80 or 128) (see Figure 10.1). But in 
the late 1990s, all-optical channel cross-connecting 
switches with N = 1000 were already promised by an 
army of MOEMS start-up companies (150 worldwide). 
Unfortunately, the more than $10 billion investment 
by large telecommunication companies such as 
Corning, JDF Uniphase, and Nortel in 1999–2000 
for those very large arrays of micromirror devices 
became a textbook example of what former Federal 
Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan called “irrational 
exuberance.” The all-optical switch mania started 
in 2000 when Nortel bought up the start-up Xros 
Inc. for $3.25 billion. By the time Nortel killed off 
the company in 2002, the market had flooded with 
competitors, most of them with similar MEMS-based 
ideas for all-optical switches, and suddenly the 1000-
port mania was relegated to the oops file. There were 
not enough customers for that many start-ups, and 
FIGURE 10.1 Glimmerglass Intelligent Optical Switch offers optical to optical switching (http://www.glimmerglass.com/
technology.aspx). This switch from Glimmerglass couples light from an input fiber array of up to eighty or more inputs 
into an output array of the same scale. A microelectromechanical system mirror array directs light from any one input 
to any of the output fibers. (Images from Glimmerglass.)

[Page 531]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   531
the three largest investing companies pulled back, 
leaving a few individuals very rich, but with neither 
new jobs nor products to show for their time and 
with many scientists and engineers out of a job (or 
working as consultants—often synonymous with 
jobless in the United States). The rapid growth of the 
telecommunications industry initially brought great 
demand for MEMS optical switches. Unfortunately, 
the expected demand did not meet the actual 
demand. What was left of the all-optical switching 
market, in the period between 2002 and 2004, was 
littered with the broken shells of start-ups that often 
tried to survive by doing MEMS foundry work. Many 
of them had never got past the design stage, a few 
shipped products, and others had nothing to show 
for but PowerPoint presentations. Surprisingly, even 
some of the latter managed to cheat investors and 
large companies out of money as MBAs and scientists 
alike oversold the technology. The experience 
embittered many investors, and no wonder.
Today, some surviving MOEMS companies, 
building all-optical switches, are successfully targeting 
more modest switch applications; say for apartment 
buildings or university switchboards and for new 
emerging applications, such as semiconductor test 
equipment. Companies such as Glimmerglass claim 
to have solved the problems previously associated 
with the MOEMS switches and maintain that their 
optical switches are more reliable, less complicated, 
and more cost-effective. The Glimmerglass switch, 
shown in Figure 10.1, is an 80 × 80 (input × output 
fibers) switch with promising sales figures. A big 
challenge for this new generation of optical-switch 
vendors is overcoming the negative perceptions left 
over from the boom years.
Instead of switching signals among very large 
arrays of fiber optic cables for telecommunication 
switches, Texas Instruments (TI) targeted its digital 
light processing (DLP) technology to projectors and 
video displays. Because it focused on the right mass 
consumer application from the get-go, TI’s digital 
micromirror device (DMDTM) turned out to be a big-
scale MEMS success (see Example 10.1 below).
A similar case of “irrational exuberance,” although 
on a much smaller scale, played out with the early 
investments in microfluidics for high-through-
put analysis for new drug candidates [called high-
 throughput screening (HTS)] and for high-throughput 
analysis in diagnostics (Figure 10.2). Early invest-
ments for these application came mostly from cash-
rich drug companies and huge diagnostic firms, to 
help them with faster discovery of new drugs and 
faster diagnostics, respectively, but there was no 
market beyond some research equipment, and again, 
too many competitors chased too few customers.
Microfluidic applications in point-of-care (POC) 
diagnostics—a mass-market application—appear 
more promising. In diagnostics, one often deals 
Diagnostics
High Throughput Analysis
>800 blood tests per hour
>1000 microtiter plates per day
Drug discovery
FIGURE 10.2 High-throughput analysis in diagnostics and high-throughput screening in drug discovery.

[Page 532]
532   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
with disposable products of considerable size com-
pared with a typical IC, and one must compete with 
traditional products made in huge batches on paper 
or plastic substrates or even in roll-to-roll (R2R) con-
tinuous processes (say, glucose sensor paper strips 
and aspirin pills). This leaves little room for batch-
type Si technology, and as a consequence, most new 
biotechnology-related MEMS products are non-
silicon-based. Although it failed for HTS applica-
tions, nonsilicon microfluidics is poised to succeed 
in diagnostic applications. This parallels the case of 
micromirrors that failed for very large communica-
tion switches (expensive product/small market) but 
succeeded for portable projectors (less expensive 
product/huge market; see next section).
Example 10.1: Texas Instruments 
Digital Micromirror Devices
An example of a successful MOEMS application 
comes from the optical switching arena with 
the DLP chip from TI. DMDs, invented in 1987 by 
TI’s Larry Hornbeck, consist of an array of hun-
dreds of thousands (from 480,000 to >2,000,000) 
of electrically actuated micromirrors built as 
a superstructure over complementary metal-
oxide-silicon (CMOS) address circuitry. Two pix-
els are schematically illustrated in Volume II, 
Figure 7.98, together with the underlying Si chip 
and circuitry. Each pixel is made up of a reflec-
tive aluminum micromirror supported from a 
central post. The manufacture of this chip illus-
trates the integration of a nonsilicon MEMS 
with a CMOS SRAM 8-inch wafer process line. 
The surface micromachining process to fabricate 
DMDs on wafers incorporating SRAM CMOS 
electronic address and control circuitry is illus-
trated in Volume II, Figure 7.100. The aluminum 
alloy DMDs are used in consumer products such 
as projectors and digital television (Figure 10.3). 
For a picture of DMD chips, see the illustration 
in the heading of this chapter.
Millions of those DMDs have now been built 
into projectors (the first one came out in 1996 
from InFocus) and big-screen televisions (the first 
came out in 2002 from Samsung) (Figure 10.3). 
It  was projected that by 2009, MEMS displays 
would become the second largest MEMS market, 
after thin-film read-write (RW) heads (Nexus). 
A major advantage for TI is that DLP chips are 
an exception to the high-volume/low-price rule, 
typically for all ICs and most MEMS devices: the 
2004 asking price for a DLP chip was $400; it was 
estimated at $190 in 2009 (Nexus).1 There is little 
question that DMD is the most complex MEMS 
in the world, and some at TI are bragging that 
TI has more moving parts on one wafer than 
Analog Devices Inc. (ADI) builds accelerometers 
in a year (ADI ships 2 million units a week).
Mechanical and MOEMS devices have been around 
since the 1980s, and it appears that this market 
finally has achieved mass-market acceptance in IT 
peripherals. A primary reason is the demand for 
read-write heads, ink-jet heads, and microdisplays. 
Since about 2004–2005, these MEMS devices have 
been incorporated in consumer products. Read-write 
heads used to be mostly used in personal computers 
(PCs) (a market that has slowed down) but can now 
be found in mp3 players, smart phones, digital video 
cameras, set-top players, and DVD recorders. Ink-jet 
heads are migrating from regular printers to print-
ers of digital photos—especially photos from cell 
phone cameras—and microdisplays found their way 
Color filtering
prism
Optics
Light source
DMDs
3 Chip DLPTM projection
FIGURE 10.3 Texas Instruments DMDs. Digital light 
 processing replaces three conventional LCDs with one 
to three DMDs, one each for the red, green, and blue 
components of a video image. Each chip contains 
 approximately 750,000 or more microscopic mirrors or pix-
els. A single light source (bulb) drives all DMDs, the mono-
chromatic images are converged internally using a prism 
system, and the resulting full-color image is projected via 
a lens onto a screen. DLP projectors are lightweight, rela-
tively bright, and simple to set up and operate, and they 
provide a much better contrast range and higher resolu-
tion than LCD projectors. The DLP technology is more 
expensive at present than LCD.

[Page 533]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   533
from projectors and high-definition, large-screen 
televisions to microdisplays for mobile handsets 
[e.g., the iMoD (interferometric modulator display), 
developed at Qualcomm] (see also “MEMS in IT 
Peripherals and Telecommunications Markets”).
The automotive field, also, continues to be a strong 
market driver for MEMS, especially for security appli-
cations, with the demand for pressure sensors, accel-
erometers, and gyros. For example, the electronic 
stability program (ESP) and the tire pressure monitor-
ing systems (TPMS) are currently promoting world-
wide yet more use of MEMS in the car industry.
Recently, the market for accelerometers in con-
sumer electronics (CE) (computers, games, phones, 
etc.) has also started to explode. Consumer elec-
tronics have the potential to dwarf the automotive 
application, not only for accelerometers but also for 
pressure sensors and gyros. Consequently MEMS 
growth is expected by some to follow a hockey stick 
curve, with the value of products rising to $40 bil-
lion in 2015 and $200 billion in 2025!2 (see also an 
estimate by Dr. Marinis from Draper Laboratory: 
http://www.sem.org/PDF/s01p01.pdf). The problem 
now is one of profitability rather than the absence of 
real product opportunities: how to earn money on, 
say, $0.32 microphones or $1.35 triaxis accelerom-
eters for mobile handsets? Only by becoming more 
similar to the IC industry can MEMS devices achieve 
this goal, i.e., through more integration on larger 
(8-inch) Si wafers. In a sense, as far as mechanical 
and MOEMS are concerned, the IC industry has now 
swallowed the MEMS field.
Despite two important “bubble busts” in the 
MEMS market, we do expect that besides a booming 
MEMS business in consumer electronics, many new 
MEMS applications are yet to be realized and that 
MEMS will be essential in facilitating the handshake 
between the macro and nano worlds. Furthermore, 
this author speculates that it is in nanotechnology, 
especially when considering bottom-up manufac-
turing (nanochemistry), that a paradigm shift away 
from IC-type manufacturing will take shape, and 
that nanotechnology holds the potential for having 
a much larger impact on society than IC technology 
ever did. The IC industry will then become subser-
vient to this larger nano industry, just as MEMS is 
subservient to the IC industry today.
Non-Lithography-Based MEMS
In this book, we also cover non-lithography-based 
miniaturization techniques and their applications. 
Compared with lithography-based MEMS, this tech-
nology area is underreported, as results often are 
evolutionary rather than revolutionary. Less widely 
advertised than lithography-based MEMS advances, 
which are oversold in public relation hungry univer-
sities and government institutes, non-lithography 
micromachining, practiced mostly in highly com-
petitive private companies of the likes of Sankyo 
Seiki, Samsung, Philips, Olympus, etc., actually 
leads to more practical products faster than lithog-
raphy-based MEMS. Applications include com-
puter hard discs, photocopier drums, mold inserts 
for compact disc reader heads, high-definition TV 
projection lenses, and VCR scanning heads. Some 
examples of non-lithography MEMS products are 
shown in Figure 10.4. The United States is in a rather 
difficult position when it comes to non-lithography-
based MEMS [such as electrical discharge machining 
(EDM) and CNC]. Below, we discuss some reasons 
why the United States is losing out in this type of 
miniaturization.
Over the last twenty years, the United States’ 
MEMS efforts focused on exploiting silicon planar 
lithography as the core technology for microstruc-
ture fabrication, whereas in Japan and Europe, a 
much wider variety of miniaturization technologies 
were pursued, including several non-lithography-
based MEMS methods. A prominent example of 
this, reviewed in Volume II, Chapter 6, is the ten-
year Micromachine Technology Project [also called 
the Desk Top Factory (DTF)], initiated in Japan in 
1991 and focused on both a wide range of fabrica-
tion technologies and a wide range of materials, 
including extensions to more traditional machining 
processes (Figure 10.5). More recently, Korea and the 
European Community have started similar efforts. 
There are no such concentrated efforts going on in 
the United States3 at the moment.
In Japan, where MEMS was driven by mechani-
cal engineering, there was also more focus on 
the  fabrication and assembly of discrete prod-
ucts, whereas MEMS in the United States, being 
driven by the IC industry, viewed such work as 

[Page 534]
534   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
fundamentally violating the paradigm of batch fab-
rication.3 Assembly projects are only now gaining 
vigor in the United States as part of efforts in nano-
technology, embodied, for example, by the Zyvex 
Nanomanipulator, shown in Figure 10.6 (see also 
Chapter 4, this volume). The Zyvex Nanomanipulator 
is able to grab and position objects as small as 10 nm 
in diameter.
It is difficult to convince U.S. funding agencies to 
invest in evolutionary-type technology, such as devel-
oping better CNC machining tool bits (see Volume II, 
Chapter 6), but the miniaturization of devices asso-
ciated with a large number of application fields is 
today demanding the production of components 
with manufactured features in the range of a few 
microns to a few hundred microns, requiring those 
new tool bits. These fields include optics, electronics, 
medicine, biotechnology, communications, sensors, 
FIGURE 10.5 Example Desk Top Factory (DTF) at AIST 
(see http://www.dtf.ne.jp/en/achievements.html for other 
examples).
FIGURE 10.6 The S100 Nanomanipulator System from 
Zyvex is a manipulation and testing tool used with a 
scanning electron microscope for micro- and nanoscale 
research, development, and production applications 
(http://www.zyvex.com).
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(c)
Turbine blading
FIGURE 10.4 Examples of nonlithography microelectromechanical system products: products made with precision 
machining. (a) Electrochemical fabrication (EFAB) is a solid, free-form fabrication technology that can create complex, 
miniature three-dimensional metal structures that are impossible or impractical to make using other technologies, such 
as electrical discharge machining (EDM), laser machining, or silicon micromachining. (b) Laser marking and engraving. 
(c) Precision glass components produced through computer numerical control (CNC) machining, grounding, lapping, and 
polishing. (d) Electrical discharge-machined products. (e) Turbine blades made with electrochemical machining.

[Page 535]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   535
and avionics, to name just a few. Specific applications 
are medical implants, diagnostic and remediation 
devices, microscale batteries and fuel cells, fluidic 
microchemical reactors requiring microscale pumps, 
valves and mixing devices, microfluidic systems in 
general, microholes for fiber optics, micronozzles for 
high-temperature jets, micromolds and deep x-ray 
lithography masks, optical lenses, etc. Functional 
requirements for these applications demand tight tol-
erances and the use of a wide variety of engineering 
materials, e.g., steels, titanium, brass, aluminum, plat-
inum, iridium, ceramics, polymers, and composites.
The United States has lost dominance of the 
 tooling industry and the manufacturing skills in 
many of the precision machining areas needed for 
the  identified applications. The U.S. machine tool 
industry enjoyed a period of global dominance 
between the early 1900s and the late 1970s. In the 
final quarter of the last century, however, almost 
every major U.S. producer lost domestic market 
share as a result of import competition. By the early 
1990s, several segments of the U.S. machine tool 
industry appeared poised on the edge of market 
exit. In a 2007 World Technology Evaluation Center 
(WTEC) publication, we detailed our observation 
that countries not manufacturing high-technology 
goods today are increasingly at a loss, as they do 
not learn about the newest manufacturing needs 
from developing the next-generation products.3
In the short term, free market forces in a global 
economy will push mass-product manufacturing 
of highly accurate miniaturized devices, requiring 
quality control and multiple assembly steps, toward 
low-cost, low-wage countries, and the manufacture 
of small-lot, high-added-value products and items 
that require intense service assistance will remain in 
the more developed countries. But the real question 
is this one: can an advanced country, in the long run, 
survive without continued input on practical manu-
facturing, processes, and new materials know-how? 
The often quoted excuse for exporting manufactur-
ing jobs abroad, usually coming from higher man-
agement and MBAs (immune, at least for now, from 
losing their own jobs), is that the United States and 
other developed countries will still design, market, 
and sell those next-generation products. That argu-
ment will be rendered wishful thinking, though, 
when the new materials and processes that go into 
next-generation products are foreign owned.
MEMS lithography-based and non-lithography-
based micromachining will continue to enrich 
the nations that invest in it most heavily. To stem 
the hollowing out of the manufacturing base in 
developed nations, the governments of many 
countries have made considerable investments in 
the miniaturization of new products (MEMS and 
NEMS) and the miniaturization of manufactur-
ing tools (for example, the DTF, mentioned above 
and detailed in Volume II, Chapter 6). Based on 
the  state-of-the-art and current investment lev-
els  (private and  government), Europe (especially 
Germany and Switzerland), and Asia (particularly 
Japan and  Korea) will gain the most from devel-
opments in non-lithography-based machining, as 
they have a long tradition in it and have invested 
more heavily in this field. As pointed out above, the 
United States, over the last twenty years, has empha-
sized lithography-based MEMS with outstanding 
research results  and a dominant market position, 
but as many  MEMS products have become com-
modity products, Asian countries stand to reap more 
benefits from them. In more traditional microman-
ufacturing, the United States is now lagging behind 
Japan, Germany, Switzerland, and Korea, and as 
pointed out above, such a lag tends to get worse as 
time goes on as every new generation of products 
(from television sets to mobile phones) incorporates 
some new manufacturing and materials know-how.
 If the U.S. government continues to invest in 
nanotechnology, it will be the United States that will 
again reap the initial benefits, first in new materials 
and then in new devices. But to be able to manufac-
ture and gain from those investments in the longer 
term, it might be wise to start something on the scale 
of the Manhattan Project in advanced manufactur-
ing techniques; otherwise, the United States will not 
reap the benefits from its research and development 
investments itself, as it would no longer be able to 
implement what it invents.
MEMS Market Studies
As pointed out above, almost all MEMS market pro-
jections from before the year 2000 were too optimis-
tic (e.g., $6.3 billion realized vs. a projected more 

[Page 536]
536   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
than $200 billion in 2006!). MEMS market studies 
today have become more judicious, but this author 
believes that many are still misleading for one or 
more of the following reasons:
 
◾Many MEMS market studies do not specify 
whether their market numbers pertain to the 
MEMS structure alone or whether they include 
one or more higher system levels. A refresh-
ing change in this regard came from Nexus 
(http://www.nexus-mems.com) and Yole Dével-
oppement (http://www.yole.fr),  which distin-
guish in their latest market studies between the 
first-level packaged MEMS and the smallest com-
mercialized unit. This is illustrated for the case 
of an ink-jet cartridge in Figure 10.13 (see under 
Definitions). One cannot buy ink-jet heads 
alone, and from the point of view of the market 
(products sold and bought), the smallest com-
mercialized unit is the cartridge or printer head. 
This decreases the  total volume of the market 
(number of MEMS pieces) but provides a more 
realistic vision of component-based systems.
 
◾A few market projections still include both 
MEMS optical switches for telecommunica-
tions and MEMS-based microfluidics for high-
throughput screening (HTS), despite the fact 
that both applications have almost disappeared 
from the commercial scene.
 
◾Most market studies do not specify the machin-
ing method used to make the MEMS part. The 
product could be precision machined, silicon- or 
non-silicon-based, and involve lithography or 
not.
 
◾Looking back at the many market reports from 
the past, it is striking how the development 
time for a new MEMS product was underesti-
mated over and over again. Table 10.1, based 
on a report by Grace Associates (http://www.
rgrace.com), presents a sobering reality. On 
average, it still takes about 21 years to go from 
a new idea to a fully commercialized product. 
As MEMS products become more integrated 
and more IC-like, this development time will 
shrink dramatically.
The lack of more commercially successful applica-
tions for micromachines conflicts with the fact that 
in the evolution of electronic products, miniatur-
ization only follows as a very natural development 
initiated by a continuing market pull. With radio 
transceivers, optical pickup systems for compact 
disc players, hard disks, thin-film read-write (RW) 
heads, camcorders, etc., features or functions that 
take up too much space must be compressed; oth-
erwise, they do not survive. Outside the electronics 
area (such as in automotive sensors and biomedical 
devices), the market pull is similarly toward minia-
turization. So most probably, the real MEMS market 
has not yet materialized, and product offerings are 
not meeting the specifications of the market.
There are several reasons why the MEMS mar-
ket still lags behind the IC market by a factor of 10 
or more:
TABLE 10.1 From Concept to Full Commercialization
Product
Discovery
Product Development
Cost Reduction
Full 
Commercialization
Duration 
(Years)
Pressure sensors
1954–1961
1961–1975
(1961 first prototype 
at Kulite)
1975–1984
1984
23
Ink-jet printer nozzles
1977 (IBM)
1984–1990
1990–1996
1996
19
Accelerometers
1970 (Kulite 
piezoresistive)–1979 
(Stanford-capacitive)
1985–1990
1990–1995
1995
25
16
Microrelays
1977–1982
1982–1998
1998–2005
2005
28
Photonics/displays
1979 IBM
1986–1998
1998–2005
2001
22
Bio-/chemical sensors
1980–1994
1994–2000
2000–2005
2005
25
Gyros/rate sensors
1982–1990
1990–1996
1996–2004
2004
22
Radiofrequency
1994–1998
1998–2002
2002–2007
2007
13
Source: Grace Associates.

[Page 537]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   537
 
◾Micromachining is too often equated with 
microelectronics, specifically with application-
specific integrated circuit (ASIC) manufacture. 
In reality, MEMS lacks the high degree of 
generality characteristic of microelectronics. 
ICs can be grouped in a limited number of 
classes, within which design and production 
follow well-defined and common steps. As a 
consequence, the price/performance (p/p) ratio 
allows industry to make profits on complex ICs, 
and it makes ICs suited for mass production. 
Silicon-MEMS sensors and actuators, on the 
other hand, are very specific.*
 
◾Sensor applications also call for complicated, 
novel packaging schemes and MEMS packag-
ing experience is relatively new. MEMS often 
have to be in direct contact with their surround-
ings, and each environment imposes its own 
constraints. This makes packaging for MEMS 
relatively more important, in terms of cost 
and (often) size, than ICs, further illustrating 
our claim in the Packaging section in Chapter 
4, this volume that MEMS design should start 
from the packaging constraints and work its 
way to the miniature sensor inside rather than 
the other way around. Packaging and testing 
costs as much as 70% of total value MEMS 
product.
 
◾Successive “bubble busts” [illustrated above 
in terms of microfluidics for high-throughput 
screening (HTS) and large optical switch arrays 
for telecommunications] have scared investors 
and product planners.
 
◾The market is very fragmented.
 
◾Multidisciplinary knowledge is required.
 ◾There is a lack of capital formation opportunities.
 
◾There is a lack of well-defined direction from 
roadmaps, industry standards, and industry 
associations.
 
◾Perhaps equally important has been the lack 
of marketing skills in the early MEMS compa-
* To be fair, for micromachines, the economics dictating profitable IC 
manufacture do not always apply; a microinstrument—say, a micro-
gas chromatograph—may cost considerably more than a typical IC. 
Moreover, sensors and actuators, often using quite esoteric non-IC 
type materials, are produced in relatively low volumes and are so 
very application specific that, in principle, they may command a 
much higher price tag.
nies (and, as Regis McKenna says, “marketing 
is everything”). A survey suggests that 65% 
of MEMS gurus entered the field because the 
technology itself seemed compelling (“tech-
nology push”). So, obviously, there was a lack 
of technology/application matching. Micro-
machinists initially were too far removed from 
a detailed understanding of the applications. 
They were not alert enough to market demands 
and pushed micromachining technologies 
they controlled rather than solving industrial 
problems with the most suitable microma-
chining technology. In reality a MEMS solution 
based on a more mature precision engineering 
technology is as good a solution as one based 
on, say, surface micromachining.
Lessons Learned
One important MEMS market lesson from the 
last decade is that only MEMS applications geared 
toward mass consumption applications are succeed-
ing commercially. As an important consequence, 
silicon-based MEMS devices (e.g., TI’s DMDs, ADI’s 
surface-micromachined accelerometers, and all types 
of RF-MEMS) must be compatible with existing IC 
lines to reduce costs. The consumer market should 
be a strong driving force for the MEMS industry to 
develop more integrated devices and is pushing the 
MEMS industry to 8-inch wafer size manufacturing. 
The need to adhere closer to IC manufacturing rules 
has become even more urgent, as few U.S. MEMS 
foundries have survived. As we saw above, the emer-
gence of mass consumer MEMS applications has 
made MEMS very hot again, and the companies and 
MEMS foundries that did survive the MOEMS bubble 
can expect to thrive if they can scale up to compete 
with traditional IC fabs fast enough. In the author’s 
own experience, MEMS foundries are hard to make 
profitable in the United States, as they need to keep 
on accepting a wide variety of jobs to keep the expen-
sive clean-room operation going. In the process, 
they do not stay long enough on the learning curve 
of one new product to become world leaders for that 
particular product. Consequently, these laboratories 
are moving more and more to Asia, where large com-
panies seem to have more patience in keeping the 
doors open till the MEMS foundry turns profitable. 

[Page 538]
538   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Olympus, in Japan, for example, runs the largest 
MEMS foundry in the world.3 Similarly Bosch, in 
Germany, opened a MEMS foundry in 2005 (Bosch 
Sensortec). More traditional IC foundries have bet-
ter survival chances  in the United States, but it is 
worth pointing out that China will control 5% of 
the IC market by 2010 and the largest number of 
new 8-inch fabs are in Taiwan and Korea.3 Although 
Korea and Taiwan are leading in terms of added 
capacity in 2007, Japan still holds most of the world-
wide capacity, with about 24% followed by Taiwan, 
the Americas, and South Korea.
In case new non-IC materials and new processes 
need to be developed for a mass consumer MEMS 
product, as was the case for TI’s digital mirror device, 
long time commitments (5–10 years) and huge sums 
of money are required (even with initial government 
funding) to bring the product to market. Few com-
panies can afford such a large investment of time 
and money.
Definitions
Introduction
Micromachining marketing studies do not always 
clarify whether the quoted revenues apply to the 
micromachine alone or include the micromachine 
with some ancillary electronics and whether they 
comprise a higher-level subsystem or describe the 
whole system. Moreover, the precision machin-
ing technology employed often remains unspeci-
fied. A good market study should start from a clear 
definition of the products covered and should spec-
ify the manufacturing method.
MEMS
The terms micromachining, microfabrication, micro-
manufacturing, and MEMS describe the fabrication 
of devices with at least one of their dimensions in the 
micrometer range. The acronym MEMS originated 
in the United States4 (Figure 10.7) and originally applied 
exclusively to silicon-based mechanical applications. 
But just as the twentieth century eventually became 
the electronics century, the twenty-first century 
promises to become the age of biotechnology and 
information/communication technology. This shift 
has manifested itself so rapidly in miniaturization 
science that we now see bio-MEMS problems eagerly 
tackled by electrical and mechanical engineers. 
Twenty years ago, the MEMS field was dominated by 
mechanical applications; today, most new applica-
tions are either information/communication-related 
or chemical and biological in nature. As a conse-
quence, today MEMS refers to all subminiaturized 
systems, including silicon-based mechanical devices, 
chemical and biological sensors and actuators, and 
miniature nonsilicon structures (e.g., devices made 
from plastics or ceramics). The application of MEMS 
to medical and biotechnology problems is called bio-
MEMS (which includes microfluidic structures, drug 
delivery devices, immunosensors, and DNA arrays).
More specific terms, such as MOEMS (e.g., micro-
mirror arrays, fiber optic connectors), RF-MEMS (e.g. 
inductors, capacitors, antennas), commercial-off-
Micromachines
Used mainly in Japan. Background
in precision engineering
MST = micro system technology
Used mainly in Europe covers
both MEMS and micromachines
MEMS = micro
electro mechanical  
systems
Used
mainly in the
United States
(background
in IC technology)
FIGURE 10.7 Micromachining terms around the world.

[Page 539]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   539
the-shelf microelectromechanical systems (COTS-
MEMS), and high-aspect-ratio MEMS (HARMEMS) 
have also been introduced, and many more can be 
expected as many untenured professors want to have 
at least named something in the MEMS field.
Microsystems Technology
In Europe, the term microsystems technology (MST) 
is more prevalent than MEMS (Figure 10.7). One 
European definition of MST reads: “A microsys-
tem is an intelligent miniaturized system compris-
ing sensing, processing and/or actuating functions. 
Normally these would combine two or more of the 
following: electrical, mechanical, optical, chemical, 
biological, magnetic or other properties, integrated 
onto a single multichip hybrid.” Alternatively, “A 
microsystem or microinstrument integrates sensors, 
actuators, and electronic components on a small 
footprint, collects and interprets data, makes deci-
sions, and enforces actions upon its environment.”5
As microsystems are combinations of sensors, 
actuators, and processing units, they are very applica-
tion specific. They should be distinguished though 
from application-specific ICs (ASICs), which  can 
be grouped into a much more limited number of 
classes within which design and production follow 
well-defined and common steps.6
Micrototal Analysis Systems/Lab-on-a-Chip
Micrototal analysis (µ-TAS) constitutes MST with 
an analytical function. An alternative term often 
used is lab-on-a-chip (LOC). In most of the litera-
ture today, little distinction is made among MST, 
µ-TAS, and LOC. Examples of commercial products 
in this general category are Nanogen’s NanoChipTM 
molecular biology workstation (http://www.nanogen.
com) (see Volume II, Example 8.2), TI’s Spreeta and 
handheld  reader (http://www.sensata.com/sensors/
spreeta- analytical-sensor-highlights.htm) (see Figure 
10.47), Caliper’s microfluidic LabChip systems (http://
www.calipertech.com), RotaPrep’s sample prepa-
ration stage (Figure 10.51), and Agilent’s MicroGC 
(Figure 10.8). It is important to note that most µ-TAS 
today still involve sizable instruments. Only some 
of the components have been miniaturized. Micro-
systems of this type still carry a price tag similar to 
that of large instruments ($2,000 to $120,000). The 
miniaturized components enable some improved 
Rechargeable battery
pack. Lasts 8 hours for
one full day of portable
operation.
Rechargeable carrier gas
tank. Lasts 40 hours for
one full week of portable
operation.
Hand carry the brief-
case-sized P200 to
even the most remote
locations.
Sample inlet. Heat to 110°C
to analyze a wider range of
compounds, alleviate
sample carryover and pre-
vent water condensation.
Or add a second inlet
to take full advantage of
a second micro GC module.
Second micro GC
module. Added to
conﬁrm peak identiﬁcation,
increase analysis speed,
and/or analyze more compounds.
Rugged design. Critical
components are encapsulated
in shock-resistant insulation
to withstand the rigors of
ﬁeld use.
High-speed micro GC
modules. Te building
block of MTI’s high-speed
solution. Complete gas
analysis in 2 minutes or
less. Module includes
injector, detector, column
and column heater (30°C
to 180°C, isothermal).
Internal sample pump. Pulls
gas sample from tedlar bags,
syringes, gas cylinders and
sample vials (headspace), etc.
FIGURE 10.8 Agilent’s MicroGC (formerly MTI).

[Page 540]
540   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
functionality, but not yet a lower cost or a smaller, 
perhaps handheld, instrument. Some of the notable 
exceptions are the portable surface plasmon reso-
nance sensor (Spreeta) shown in Figure 10.47 (with 
an instrument of $250 and disposable component 
of $30) and Johnson & Johnson i-STAT handheld 
automated blood analyzer, shown in Figure 10.42. 
The same instrument shown in Figure 10.8, but in a 
handheld format, would command a price tag some-
where between that of large instruments ($2,000 to 
$120,000) and sensors ($0.50 to $100), i.e., $200 to 
$500. To develop more handheld analytical equip-
ment like the Spreeta is one of the µ-TAS challenges 
that lie ahead. Through the widening of MEMS 
applications, the word MEMS in the United States is 
more broadly interpreted now, and MST and MEMS 
have become more or less synonyms.
Micromechatronics
A mechatronics product is defined as a smart device 
that involves mechanical and electrical principles 
in design and performs hybrid mechanical and 
electrical functions. In Japan, the focus has been 
on micromechatronics or micromachines, defined 
as follows: “Micromechatronics is the technology 
that involves the design and manufacture of 
mechatronics products with dimensions in the range 
of 1 µm to 1  mm  and are capable of performing 
complex microscopic tasks.”5 (For an example, see 
Figure 10.9.) In addition to the difference in sizes 
between mechatronics and micromechanotronics, 
major differences are in design methodologies, 
fabrication techniques, and packaging and testing. 
In micromechatronics, structural components are 
designed on the base of scaling laws and electromag-
netic actuators often are replaced by thermal, 
piezoelectric, and electrostatic microactuators. Com - 
ponents more often are fabricated by chemical-
physical processes than by machine tools. Assembly, 
packaging, and testing are also different from those 
in macroscale mechatronics. Whereas MEMS and 
MST definitions have grown closer together, this 
Japanese term retains its separate meaning.
Microsensors
A sensor element is a device that converts one form of 
energy into another (e.g., ZnO, a piezoelectric mate-
rial, which converts mechanical energy into elec-
tricity) and provides the user with a usable energy 
output in response to a specific measurable input. 
Measurands may belong to the radiation, thermal, 
electrical, chemical, mechanical, or magnetic field 
domains. The sensor element may be built from 
plastics, semiconductors, metals, ceramics, etc. To 
qualify as a microsensor, it must have at least one 
dimension in the micrometer range. Since the early 
1980s, the term sensor element often invoked the 
notion of a silicon-built device, but there are many 
non-silicon-based microsensors.
A sensor includes a sensor element or an array of 
sensor elements with physical packaging and exter-
nal electrical or optical connections. Synonyms for 
“sensor” are transducer and detector. A sensor system 
includes the sensor and its assorted signal processing 
hardware (analog or digital). Transducer sometimes 
refers to a sensor system, especially in the process 
control industry.
In the case of silicon-based sensors, some addi-
tional jargon has developed. A Si sensor element is 
called a sensor die, which refers to a micromachined 
Si chip. It typically sells for $0.10 to $2 as a com-
modity product, although the price tag can rise to 
$50 or more for a high-performance structure sold 
in smaller  quantities. A silicon sensor alludes to a 
first-level, packaged Si die or sensor element with or 
without basic electronic circuitry. An integrated  silicon 
sensor is a monolithic device comprising the sen-
sor and one or more electronic components, which 
amplify and condition (stan dardize) the sensor out-
put signal. The standardization of the sensor signal 
FIGURE 10.9 The world’s smallest and lightest micro-
 flying robot. Epson pioneered the micro-flying robot, 
based on micromechatronics technology—the world’s 
lightest and most advanced microrobot, which also fea-
tures Bluetooth wireless control and independent flight.

[Page 541]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   541
makes the device bus compatible, enabling efficient 
communication between the central processor and 
the sensor. Typical selling prices range from $2.50 
for quantities of a million units per year to over 
$100 for complex sensors in smaller unit quantities. 
At yet a higher level is a smart silicon  sensor, which is 
a packaged integrated sensor containing some part 
of the signal- processing unit to provide performance 
enhancement for the user. Signal processing might 
include autocalibration, interference reduction, 
compensation for parasitic effects, offset correction, 
and self-test. The various silicon-based parts defined 
above are represented schematically in Figure 10.10.
Microactuators
The definition of a sensor element as a device that 
converts energy from one form into another also 
applies to an actuator. In the case of an actuator, one 
is interested in the ensuing action, whereas in the 
case of a sensor, our interest is in the information 
garnered. In other words, if the intent is to measure 
a change, one will refer to a sensor; if the intent is 
change or action itself, one defines an actuator. The 
appropriate use of sensor or actuator is not based 
on the physics involved but on the intent of the 
application.7
Actuators are components that convert energy 
into an appropriate action, often dictated by a sen-
sor control unit. They facilitate a function such as 
opening a valve, positioning a mirror, moving a plug 
of liquid, etc. Microactuators are actuators with at 
least some dimension in the micrometer range. Since 
an actuator “acts,” some power is usually needed. 
Miniaturization of actuators is consequently less 
obvious than that of sensors, as power does not scale 
advantageously in the microdomain (power is pro-
portional to the volume, i.e., l3; see Chapter 8, this 
volume). To induce micron-scale motion, actuators 
do not need to be micron-scale themselves. Busch-
Vishniac suggests we call the latter microactuators 
in contrast with microfabricated actuators, which are 
micromachined actuators.8 
The selling price for Si-based actuators in large 
quantities may range from $5 to $200. A few Si 
 micromachined actuators have reached the com-
mercial 
market. 
Examples 
include 
Redwood 
Micro systems’ (company now defunct) thermopne-
umatic valve  (Figure 10.11a),9 TiNi’s shape mem-
ory alloy microvalve (http://www.sma-mems.com) 
(Figure  10.11b), and ADI’s  surface-micromachined 
accelerometer qualifies (Volume II, Figure 7.92). The 
latter involves a sensor/actuator combination with a 
self-test involving electrostatically actuated interdig-
itated polysilicon fingers (Volume II, Figure 7.93).
Microstructures or Microcomponents
A microstructure or microcomponent refers to a 
precision machined part that has at least one of its 
dimensions in the micrometer range but is not a sen-
sor, actuator, or microsystem. Rather, it concerns an 
item such as a microlens, micromirror, micronoz-
zle, microneedle, etc., that acquires a useful func-
tion only when combined with other components. 
Selling prices of such Si microstructures in large 
Si sensor die
Sensor
Sensor element
Sensor element
Sensor element
Si integrated sensor
Smart Si sensor
Input energy
form
Bus
Output
Data
conversion
Modulating
device
Calibration
device
Calibration energy form
Data
transmission
FIGURE 10.10 Definition of a silicon sensor die, a silicon sensor, a silicon integrated sensor, and a smart silicon sensor. 
(After National Research Council, 1995.)

[Page 542]
542   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
volumes may range from $0.25 to $100.10 The lat-
ter numbers are hard to confirm, since most micro-
structures are delivered to clients as part of large 
development contracts.
An example of a Si microstructure built by the 
author and his team is the scanning tunneling 
microscope (STM) cantilever with integrated sharp Si 
tip shown in Figure 10.12.11,12 The silicon tip is sharp-
ened by consecutive oxidation sharpening, a process 
developed by Ravi and Marcus11 (see also Volume 
I, Chapter 4, “Orientation and Dopant Dependence 
of Oxidation Kinetics”). While we delivered the first 
STM tips to a client company under a best effort-
type research and development contract, eventually, 
these components were sold at a fixed price. Since an 
STM tip determines the quality of an STM picture, 
this product is an example of how a small micro-
machined component might provide a competitive 
edge to an STM instrument (~$20K to $60K) manu-
facturer. In this case, it is important that the instru-
ment manufacturer controls the micromachining 
technology of the crucial microcomponent or,  better 
yet, has it in-house.
First-Level Packaged MEMS and 
Smallest Commercialized Units
Nexus, a consulting firm on MEMS, makes an impor-
tant distinction between the first-level packaged 
MEMS/MST and the smallest commercialized unit.1 
This is illustrated in the case of an ink-jet cartridge 
FIGURE 10.12 Example of microcomponent made with silicon micromachining: single-crystal scanning tunneling micro-
scope tip on single-crystal cantilever beam. (a) High-aspect-ratio silicon tip. Photograph taken from a 45° angle. (b) Tip is 
actually 40% taller than it appears. (From Ravi, T. S., and R. B. Marcus. 1991. Oxidation sharpening of silicon tips. J Vac Sci 
Technol B 9:2733–37; Editorial. 1991. Menlo Park, CA: TSDC [Teknekron]. With permission.)
(b)
Dimensions = 8 mm × 6 mm × 2 mm
Inlet
Inlet
Silicon cantilever
attached to membrane
(a)
Outlet
Outlet
Pyrex
Anodic bond
silicon
Fusion bond
silicon
Chermaz valve seat to provide
1 × 10–9  atm·cc/sec helium leak rate
Power oﬀ
Power on
FIGURE 10.11 Examples of commercially available actuators. (a) Thermopneumatic valves by Redwood Microsystems 
(Fluistor™). Normally closed shut-off microvalve featuring a liquid-filled cavity, which flexes a silicon diaphragm when 
heated, forcing the valve cover to lift off the valve seat. (After Zdeblick, M. J., R. Anderson, J. Jankowski, B. Kline-Schoder, L. 
Christel, R. Miles, and W. Weber. 1994. In Technical Digest: 1994 Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, 251–55. Hilton 
Head Island, SC.) (b) TiNi Alloy Company’s shape memory alloy valve ($190/valve in small quantities). This is a normally closed 
microvalve. A current through the NiTi die lifts it from the orifice die. (Courtesy of Dr. D. Johnson, TiNi Alloy Company.) 

[Page 543]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   543
in Figure 10.13. One cannot buy ink-jet heads alone, 
and from the point of view of the market (products 
sold and bought), the smallest commercialized unit 
is the cartridge or printer head. The MEMS/MST in 
the cartridge/printer (~$1.7) is worth much less than 
the total value of the cartridge/printer (~$22.5).
This simple clarification is very relevant for Si 
 foundries interested in manufacturing the Si die only.
Overall Market for Micromachines
Introduction
Richard Feynman presented two lectures on micro-
machining: “There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom,” 
at Caltech on December 16, 1959, and “Infinitesimal 
Machinery,” at the Jet Propulsion Labs on February 
23, 1983.13,14 In these now famous lectures, he spec-
ulated on the use of micromachining for some eso-
teric devices such as microfabricated light shutters, 
probing devices for electronic circuits, and adjust-
able masks, the first two of which have been real-
ized. He was also convinced of the future of truly 
three-dimensional circuitry in computers. In gen-
eral, he doubted the wide applicability of the tech-
nology, though. Feynman could not suggest many 
uses for micromachinery, but he was not worried. 
He said, “I’m fascinated but I don’t know why.”
In this section, we investigate applications and 
overall markets for MEMS and show that the field 
has matured, with MEMS products now entering 
consumer electronics so that the market is poised 
for a major take-off. We conclude with a very posi-
tive outlook for MEMS, with the understanding that 
micromachining be defined as broadly as we have 
in this book—beyond silicon-based technology and 
perhaps even beyond batch methods; that is, includ-
ing continuous manufacturing methods.
Overall MEMS Market Size
The numbers for the overall market size and mar-
ket projections for miniaturization technology pre-
sented here principally are culled from marketing 
studies and insights by Nexus (http://www.nexus-
mems.com), Yole Développement (http://www.yole.
fr), Bosch Sensortec (http://www.bosch-sensortec.
com), SEMI (http://www.semi.org), Frost & Sullivan 
(http://www.frost.com), Draper Labs (http://www.
draper.com), Wicht Technologie Consulting (WTC) 
(http://www.wtc-consult.de), Janusz Bryzek (janusz@
bryzek.com), and Roger Grace Associates (http://
www.rgrace.com).
According to the Nexus Market Analysis for MEMS 
and Microsystems III 2005–2009,1 the MEMS/MST 
market volume was worth $12 billion in 2004 and 
was expected to reach $25 billion in 2009. The growth 
was projected to be rapid, with a 16% compound 
annual growth rate (CAGR) in value in the period 
2004–2009 (Figure 10.14). We like to point out that 
the 1998 Nexus Task Force5 projected a MEMS/MST 
market for 2002 of $38 billion already. Obviously, 
a more detailed analysis about the real MEMS/MST 
contribution has made for a more careful forecast in 
this latest report. Considering the traditional Nexus 
definition used in earlier reports—the market for the 
smallest unit, incorporating MST component(s), that 
is commercially available—the market was expected 
to increase from $36 billion in 2004 to $52 billion 
in 2009 (Figure 10.14).
In 2005, according to Yole (http://www.yole.fr/), 
more than half of Si-based MEMS by value, which 
this consulting firm estimates at $2.6 billion, were 
produced in North America. Japan was the next 
largest MEMS producing region, accounting for one-
fifth of the total 2005 MEMS revenues ($1.1 billion). 
About 16% of MEMS sales, over $815 million, origi-
nated from European production. Singapore was 
also a significant manufacturing location for MEMS 
Inkjet
head
~$1.7
~$22.5
Ink, hull,
assembly
Value of 1st
level packaged
MEMS
Value of non
MEMS parts
Price of smallest unit commercialized
FIGURE 10.13 Example of an ink-jet printer head. First-
level packaged MEMS and smallest commercialized unit. 
(From Nexus. 2006. Nexus market analysis for MEMS and 
microsystems III, 2005–2009.)

[Page 544]
544   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
manufacturers (e.g., STMicroelectronics with ink-jet 
heads), with 11% of MEMS device revenues attrib-
uted to Singapore fabs. The MEMS industry is highly 
fragmented with a large number of device manu-
facturers worldwide in a wide variety of application 
fields. Many start-ups and small and medium-sized 
companies participate in the industry. In 2004, there 
were 230 manufacturers of MEMS products. Most of 
these were developing new products, some of which 
are just starting to significantly affect the market. The 
top thirty MEMS device manufacturers accounted for 
about 84% of MEMS device sales in 2005. No single 
device manufacturer has reached the billion-dollar 
sales mark as of yet: the average revenue for a top 
thirty manufacturer is about $147  million (http://
www.yole.fr/pagesAn/products/semi.asp).
In Table 10.2 we list 2005 MEMS sales of some 
important MEMS companies. The top three MEMS 
companies today are TI, Hewlett-Packard, and Bosch.
In Figure 10.15 we show the Nexus market 
breakout for sixteen types of first-level pack-
aged MEMS/MST (a seventeenth category, “other,” 
 in cludes microreactors, chip cooler, inclinometers, 
memories, fingerprints, liquid lenses, microspec-
trometer, wafer probes, micromirrors for optical 
processing,* micropumps, micromotors, and chemi-
cal analysis systems).1 According to this breakout, 
the MEMS/MST market in 2009 was still 70% made 
up of only three products: read-write (RW) heads, 
ink-jet heads, and microdisplays. RW heads still rep-
resented around 51% of the market in 2009: while 
traditional application of RW heads in PCs would 
grow only moderately, the RW market was experi-
encing a renaissance in consumer electronics, as hard 
discs were entering music players (e.g., in many iPod 
models) and smart phones [Samsung introduced 
the first cell phone with a hard disc drive (HDD) 
in 2004], as well as digital video cameras, set-top 
players, and DVD recorders. It is important to note 
that MEMS will lose a very important market when 
HDDs are replaced by solid state disc (SSD) memory 
(a flash drive), as both RW heads and accelerometers 
will fall away. There are a lot of arguments to suggest 
that SSDs will replace HDDs in many applications. 
The SSD market is growing fast, approximately dou-
bling in revenue every year for the foreseeable future. 
In the long term (5–10 years) the trusted HDD will 
eventually retire, to be replaced by the flash drive.
Ink-jet heads continued to be one of the most 
profitable markets for MEMS. MEMS microdisplays 
are the new MEMS blockbuster, and their revenues 
were expected to overtake ink-jet heads in 2009. TI 
was forging ahead with the digital light processing 
(DLP) chip for projectors and for front projection 
* In Figure 10.15, Nexus somehow has digital micromirrors catego-
rized under both other and microdisplays.
TABLE 10.2 Sales (in 2005) of Microelectromechanical 
System Products by Some of the Largest Players
Company
Sales ($, in Millions)
Texas Instruments
788
Hewlett-Packard
750
Bosch
325
Lexmark
230
ST Microelectronics
200
Seiko
199
Cannon
184
Freescale
182
Market of 1st level
packaged MEMS/MST
Market of smallest commercialized
units with MEMS/MST
$ 36 bn
$ 12 billions
$ 25 billions
$ 52 bn
+16% compound annual growth
2004
2009
FIGURE 10.14 Total market for microelectromechanical system/microsystems technology in 2004 and projections for 
2009. (From Nexus. 2006. Nexus market analysis for MEMS and microsystems III, 2005–2009.)

[Page 545]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   545
and rear projection TVs (home theater). Three other 
products that, according to Nexus, would make each 
over $1 billion in sales in 2009 are pressure sensors, 
RF MEMS, and inertial sensors.1 Other fast-growing 
markets were microphones and tire pressure moni-
tors, next to established pressure and motion sensors, 
which were increasingly being driven by consumer 
electronics.
The relative contributions to various application 
fields of these MEMS/MST for the years 2004 and 
2009 are illustrated with two pie charts in Figure 
10.16. The three dominant application fields were IT 
25
20
15
10
5
0
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Others*
Micro energy sources
Inclinometer
Optical MEMS for telecom
Drug delivery systems
Mems ﬁngerprint sensors
Flow sensors
Microphones
Accelerometers
Gyroscopes
Microﬂuidics chips
Microdisplays
RW heads
Inkjet
Pressure sensors
RF mems
IR sensors
* Others: Microreaction, chip cooler, inclinometers, MEMS memories, MEMS
ﬁngerprints, liquid lenses, microspectrometer, wafer probes, micro-mirrors for
optical processing, micro-pumps, micromotors, chemical analysis systems
Billion $
FIGURE 10.15 Nexus market breakout for first-level packaged microelectromechanical system/microsystems technology 
devices.1
2004
2009
Industrial & process
control
Aerospace, defense
Homeland security
Aerospace, defense
Homeland security
Household
Household
Industrial & process
control
Telecom
Telecom
Medical &
life sciences
Medical &
life sciences
Automotive
Automotive
Consumer
electronics
Consumer
electronics
5%
2%
1%
1%
22%
6%
3%
4%
1%
1%
1% Others
11%
6%
5%
68%
IT peripherals
8%
IT peripherals
54%
(Total $12 billions)
(Total $25 billions)
FIGURE 10.16 The relative contributions to various application fields for microelectromechanical system/microsystems 
technology products for 2004 and projections for 2009. (From Nexus. 2006. Nexus market analysis for MEMS and micro-
systems III, 2005–2009.)

[Page 546]
546   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
peripherals, automotive, and consumer electronics. 
IT peripherals were expected to remain by far the 
first application field of MEMS and MST in 2009, 
mainly with RW heads and ink-jet heads. However, 
the share of IT peripherals was expected to decrease 
from 69% to 54%. The biggest predicted change was 
in the area of MEMS in consumer electronics (CE) 
that was predicted to grow from less than 2% of the 
MEMS/MST market in 2000 to 22% in 2009 (Figure 
10.17). Consumer electronics were expected to drive 
the MEMS market growth for the remainder of this 
decade. The three drivers for MEMS in consumer 
electronics were 1) large-screen  high-definition tele-
vision for everybody (rear projection and front pro-
jection home theater TVs), 2) more storage in digital 
equipment (with HDDs that enter digital video cam-
eras, music players, smart phones, set-top players, 
and DVD recorders), and 3) mobile handsets (with 
accelerometers today, and tomorrow gyros, micro-
displays, micro fuel cells, fingerprint sensors, zoom 
sensors, gas sensors, weather stations, projection 
displays, etc.).
Automotive applications were expected to remain 
a major MEMS field, with several killer application 
fields, such as airbags and tire pressure monitoring sys-
tem (TPMS). The numbers of MEMS for this application 
would still grow at a rapid pace; however, the growth 
in revenue was expected to be moderate due to a con-
tinuous pressure on prices (e.g., gyroscopes increasing 
15% per year in units but only 8% in revenue).
Yole analyzes the overall MEMS market structure 
a bit differently. It introduces a MEMS supply chain, 
as shown in Figure 10.18, and distinguishes among 
MEMS-based systems, MEMS alone, front-end 
equipment, and materials and chemicals.15 Also, the 
Yole MEMS numbers refer to Si technology only, so 
they do not include, for example, RW heads, which 
are not silicon-based.
According to Yole, the worldwide MEMS systems 
market reached $40 billion in 2006 and was expected 
2000 (*)
Consumer
2%
6%
22%
Consumer
Consumer
(% in market value of 1st level packaged MEMS/MST)
(*): extrapolated from NEXUS II
2004
2009
FIGURE 10.17 MEMS in consumer products will have gone from less than 2% of the MEMS/microsystems technology mar-
ket in 2000 to 22% in 2009. (From Nexus. 2006. Nexus market analysis for MEMS and microsystems III, 2005–2009.)
Materials &
chemicals
MEMS systems
Year 2006 
$ 40 B
$ 56 B
$ 72 B
Substrates
Mat & chem
MEMS systems
MEMS devices
MEMS devices
Equipment
Equipment
Materials &
chemicals
$ 10.8 B
$ 5.9 B
$ 8.4 B
$ 998 M
$ 646 M
$ 837 M
2009
2011
$ 292 M
$ 447 M
$ 556 M
$ 141 M
$ 200 M
$ 251 M
FIGURE 10.18 Yole’s microelectromechanical system (MEMS supply chain from 2006 to 2009 to 2011. (From Yole. 2007. 
Evolution of the MEMS markets and evolution of the MEMS foundry business. Transducers.)

[Page 547]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   547
to rise to $56 billion by 2009 and $72 billion by 
2011, for a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) 
of about 15% over the five-year period.15 Globally, 
the MEMS market was $5.9 billion in 2006 and 
was forecast to grow to $8.4 billion in 2009 and to 
$10.8 billion in 2011, with a 13% CAGR. The MEMS 
equipment market was $646 million worldwide in 
2006 and was expected to expand to $837 million 
in 2009 and to $998 million in 2011. The five-year 
CAGR forecast for MEMS equipment was 6%. MEMS 
materials can be divided into substrates and chemi-
cals and  other  materials. Together these markets 
totaled $433 million in 2006 and were forecast to be 
$807 million in 2011. MEMS materials are expected 
to grow at a five-year CAGR of 15% through 2011.15
The global MEMS market for ten different prod-
ucts and one category called emerging MEMS, over 
the period 2006–2011, according to Yole, is illus-
trated in Figure 10.19.15 These numbers are only 1/3 
of the Nexus numbers, mostly because Yole does 
not include RW heads (which are not based on Si 
technology; Yole’s market study is Si-centric) and 
because under its Emerging MEMS category, Yole is 
considering some other MEMS products than Nexus 
lists in its Others category.
Yole puts the ink-jet head market at $1.8 billion 
in 2006 and expects it to grow to $2 billion in 2011. 
Although digital imaging is a strong driver for this 
relatively mature market, Yole expects that the over-
all trend toward nondisposable ink-jet heads will 
dampen volume growth for this application.
As in the Nexus report, Yole sees a big change in 
the MEMS market today in that an important part is 
now driven by the growth of consumer electronics, 
which is new in MEMS industry. The period from 
2007 to 2011, Yole claims, will certainly see the dom-
inant growth of consumer applications compared 
with automotive, industrial, and/or medical busi-
ness. This move toward the consumer applications 
also is pushing the MEMS industry to 8-inch wafer 
size manufacturing, and this means more involve-
ment of IC foundries in MEMS business. This switch 
to 8-inch wafer has a lot to do with the increase of 
ink-jet head die size and the transition to 8-inch by 
TI for digital mirror production.
Fast-Changing MEMS Market Characteristics
The very large projected markets for MEMS in mar-
ket studies published before 2000 are realistic only 
if nonsilicon approaches are included (e.g., thin-
film RW heads) or a first-level system in which the 
MEMS technology is embedded is counted as well. 
After the 2001 optical and fluidic MEMS bubbles, 
major changes in the markets for mechanical and 
MOEMS devices (RW heads, ink-jet heads, pressure 
sensors, accelerometers, gyros, digital micromir-
ror arrays, microphones, etc.), are causing upward 
revisions of MEMS market projections again. These 
types of MEMS are now experiencing a growth spurt 
because of their incorporation in consumer prod-
ucts (cars, mobile phones, games, PCs, cameras, 
etc.). Mechanical and MOEMS largely are made 
12000
10000
8000
6000
Market in $M
4000
2000
0
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Silicon microphones
Pressure sensors
Inkjet head
Emerging MEMS
Microﬂuidics
MEMS
displays
MOEMS
RF MEMS
-fuel cells
Gyroscopes
Accelerometers
 
FIGURE 10.19 Global microelectromechanical system market for 2006–2011, according to Yole.

[Page 548]
548   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
with IC-based techniques, and the cost of ICs can be 
lowered only when the quantity of parts numbers 
in the millions per year. Consequently for silicon-
based sensors to succeed on the same scale as ICs, 
the current manufacturing environment dictates 
that one must concentrate on mass consumption 
products such as cars, PCs, air conditioners, TVs, 
cell phones, vacuum cleaners, toys, printers, and 
dishwashers. This transition to consumer products 
has finally happened for optical and mechanical 
MEMS, and for these products the market dynamics 
have now become similar to those of the IC market. 
Consequently MEMS growth is expected to follow 
a hockey stick growth curve, with the total value of 
MEMS rising, according to one market report, to $40 
billion in 2015 and $200 billion in 2025 (Dr. Marinis 
from Draper Laboratory: http://www.sem.org/PDF/
s01p01.pdf). The problem now is more one of prof-
itability rather than the absence of real product 
opportunities, i.e., sensors will become smaller and 
smaller, more and more integrated and manufac-
tured on larger (8-inch) Si wafers. In a sense, one 
might say that the IC industry has swallowed the 
mechanical and MOEMS field. The more established 
MEMS such as accelerometers (ADI), ink-jet heads 
(TI), and RW heads (IBM, Hitachi) are exploited 
now mostly by large companies. The involvement of 
MEMS and IC foundries is on the rise as well, and 
the tremendous cost pressure is driving more and 
more MEMS manufacturing overseas.
However, one must still make a distinction 
between ICs and MEMS. There are about 50,000 
types of sensors to measure 100 different physical and 
chemical parameters,16 so often only 1,000 to 10,000 
are needed a year. We can conclude that fragmentation 
remains the outstanding characteris tic in the sensor 
market. This often excludes integrated semiconductor 
solutions, even  though they might be technically 
superior. Cost/perfor mance improvement does not 
always justify the application of IC technology, and 
hybrid approach es remain an important option 
especially in microinstrumentation and for chemical 
sensors. The dynamics of the market for MEMS-based 
microinstrumentation is, furthermore, different 
from that of ICs in that MEMS instrumentation 
can command considerably higher price tags (say, 
hundreds of dollars rather than $10 or less). In the 
latter case, smaller numbers of parts may be offset 
by a higher profit margin. The situation has been 
compared to that of application-specific integrated 
circuit (ASIC) manufacture, leading to the acronym 
ASIS (application-specific integrated system). Hybrid 
technology will be employed in this case not 
solely out of cost considerations but because one 
monolithic manufacturing technique is unlikely to 
deliver the bandwidth in feature sizes and material 
types necessary to cover the various needs common 
in small instrumentation.
The situation for disposable biosensors (e.g., glu-
cose sensors) applied to diagnostics is very differ-
ent again. In this nascent field one competes with 
industrial giants and with very efficient established 
manufacturing processes. In the bio-MEMS field, to 
succeed similarly to the mechanical and MOEMS 
TABLE 10.3 New MEMS Companies and Products
Company
Product
Where
Silmach
Silicon-based micromotors for the watch industry
France
Perpetuum
Energy harvesting systems using MEMS as building blocks
United Kingdom
Rhevision
Varioptic
Siimpel (United States)
Liquid lenses for consumer applications
United States
France
United States
Lilliputian Systems
MEMS-based micro-fuel cells
United States
Qualcomm
Liquavista
Innovative microdisplays
United States
Netherlands
SiTime
Discera
Silicon Clocks
VTI Technologies
MEMS-based oscillator
United States
United States
United States
Finland
Microvision
Philips
New optical microelectromechanical system applications
United States
Netherlands

[Page 549]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   549
area, one will need to develop mass manufacturing 
techniques based on very large batches or roll-to-roll 
manufacturing on paper on plastic substrates.
Most of the risk taking in innovative MEMS con-
cepts is still by U.S. entrepreneurs, although activity 
in Europe and Asia has picked up, as is clear from 
the list of new MEMS companies in Table 10.3. 
There remains about a three- to five-year delay in 
time between start-up activity in the United States 
and Europe on a specific subject (e.g., U.S.-based 
Affymetrix, created in 1992, versus the European 
OMM in 1996). So far, even successful MEMS start-up 
companies remain two orders of magnitude smaller 
than companies in the mainstream IC market.
MEMS Market Segments
Introduction
We consider four MEMS market categories: MEMS 
in the automotive market; MEMS in medical and 
biotechnology markets (bio-MEMS); MEMS in indus -
trial automation, including environmental moni-
toring markets; and MEMS in IT peripherals and 
telecommunications markets.
MEMS in the Automotive Market
Introduction
Nexus did forecast the number of passenger vehi-
cles, sport-utility vehicles, and light trucks produced 
globally to reach an estimated 68 million per year 
by 2009 (add another 15 million for other vehicles, 
such as buses, trucks, the Popemobile (smile, please), 
etc.).1 In a complex electronic/electromechanical sys-
tem such as the modern car, the need for effective, 
accurate, reliable, and low-cost electronics and sen-
sors is pressing. While in 1980 electronics accounted 
for merely 2% of the total cost of a car, today it has 
reached almost 20%, and it was estimated that by 
2010, electronics and software would account for 
up to 40% of the value of a car (see Figure 10.20). 
MEMS are making for a larger and larger contribu-
tion to this electronic content.
New vehicles feature increasingly sophisticated 
engine management and safety systems, while a 
larger number of sensor systems are making their 
way into lower-priced cars, fueling the overall growth 
of MEMS in the automotive sensor market. Today, 
typical mid-sized vehicles contain more than 50 
sensors and luxury-class cars more than 100. About 
one-third of these sensors are MEMS-based, includ-
ing frontal impact airbags, tire pressure monitoring 
systems (TPMS), and engine monitors to improve 
fuel efficiency and lower toxic emissions. This trend 
will continue as governmental regulations and the 
needs of the consumer drive auto manufacturers 
to provide improved safety, quality, and comfort in 
vehicles. The total market for silicon-based MEMS 
in safety systems, vehicle navigation, engine man-
agement, and cabin comfort, according to a Nexus 
market report, was $1.29 billion in 2004, and was 
expected to grow at 9% CAGR to reach nearly $2 bil-
lion in 2009, as illustrated in Figure 10.21.1 Between 
2000 and 2004, the largest growth in MEMS appli-
cations occurred in the automotive market, with 
applications expanding to the point that a typi-
cal automobile contains twenty-five silicon MEMS 
devices. Pressure, acceleration, and gyros dominate 
the present Si MEMS automotive market. The tech-
nologies involved are mostly Si bulk micromachin-
ing and polysilicon surface micromachining.
Even though the quantity of MEMS devices sold 
into the automotive market is expected to continue 
climbing steadily, the automotive percentage of the 
total MEMS market is actually expected to decline, 
as the consumer electronics category expands.
When considering all automotive sensors (not 
only MEMS), the worldwide market was more than 
$10 billion in 2005, and it was expected to continue 
to increase at an average annual growth rate of 6% to 
$14.2 billion in 2010. From automotive sensors, speed 
and position (38%) and oxygen (20%) sensors would 
30%
20%
10%
1980
Semiconductor content in cars
(% of end product value)
1990
2000
2010
Nano
Micro
2020
FIGURE 10.20 Semiconductors underpin all business sec-
tors. It was estimated that by 2010, electronics and soft-
ware would account for up to 40% of the value of a car.

[Page 550]
550   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
remain the largest market segment, rising from $6.2 
billion in 2005 to $8.6 billion in 2010 (58%) [Auto-
motive Sensors, November 2005 (http://www.the-
infoshop.com/study/bc34281-automotive-sensors. 
html), and Automotive Sensors Market Emerg-
ing & Current Sensors Update Now and Future, 
September 2005 (http://www.researchandmarkets.
com/reportinfo.asp?report_id=307920)].
A most important automotive chemical sensor is 
the so-called lambda probe, a solid state oxygen sen-
sor (all new European cars are fitted with a mini-
mum of two lambda sensors). The lambda probe 
involves traditional ceramics manufacturing, but 
planar, micromachined oxygen sensors are gaining 
ground (see Volume II, Figure 9.24).
Many other opportunities for micromachining in 
automotive sensing exist; a list of sensor needs (met 
and unmet) in the automotive and transportation 
industry in general is presented in Table 10.4. There 
is a continuing migration in the automotive indus-
try from larger electromechanical automotive com-
ponents to MEMS. In Table 10.5 we summarize this 
trend. The newest automotive applications for MEMS 
include better exhaust monitoring devices, wireless 
sensors for engine management systems, and energy 
scavengers that harness the energy generated from 
rotational or vibratory movements within the vehi-
cle as a future power source for TPMS.
Figure 10.22 shows where some of these sensors 
are positioned in a car. Component cost is a signifi-
cant factor in the selection criteria of automotive sys-
tems designers. Getting your MEMS sensor into a car 
might take anywhere from seven to ten years. The 
cost of a MEMS device itself constitutes one-third or 
less of the total delivered component cost (often $10 
or less!). Over 50% of the cost of a typical sensor 
is in calibration and testing, highlighting the need 
for innovation. Therefore, a significant challenge to 
achieve highly efficient design for manufacturability 
and testing is imposed on all suppliers who wish to 
be successful in the automotive sector. As a conse-
quence, the use of IC-compatible process lines for 
MEMS production is growing. There clearly are impor-
tant benefits in using CMOS or BiCMOS-compatible 
manufacturing lines to target high- volume MEMS 
markets, such as the automotive market, and toward 
adoption of more integrated solutions.
Pressure
Introduction and Market Perspectives
Pressure measurements are absolute, relative, or 
differential. For most pressure sensors, the com-
mon design element is made from a thin, flexible 
diaphragm that deforms elastically in response to 
an applied force. Diaphragm thicknesses in these 
sensors typically range from 20 µm to several mil-
limeters and employ steel, ceramic, or silicon. The 
ceramic capacitive pressure sensor has a diaphragm 
cut from relatively thick “cast” sheets of ceramic (e.g., 
from Kavlico). According to an analysis by Frost & 
Sullivan (http://www.sensors.frost.com), pressure 
sensors represent one of the most broad, mature, 
but very fragmented sensor markets (similar to tem-
perature sensors). In the study “Pressure Sensors 
and Transmitters Market,” the company reveals that 
the market for all pressure sensors earned revenue 
of $4 billion in 2004 and projects that this market 
Gyro 27%
Accelerometer
21%
Flow 14%
Pressure
32%
Inclinometer
    6%
2004:$1.29 Billion
Gyro 26%
Accelerometer
15%
Flow 15%
Pressure
35%
IR Sensor
2%
Others 3%
Inclinometer
    6%
2009:$1.97 Billion
FIGURE 10.21 Various silicon microelectromechanical system sensors in passenger vehicles. (From Nexus. 2006. Nexus 
market analysis for MEMS and microsystems III, 2005–2009.)

[Page 551]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   551
will reach $5.6 billion in 2011. The major industry 
sectors for pressure sensors are automotive, medi-
cal, industrial and process control, aerospace, and 
military. Household items and consumer products 
represent upcoming market opportunities.
According to Nexus, narrowing the survey down 
to silicon-MEMS pressure sensors, sales for first level 
packaged devices in 2004 were $1.084 billion, and 
they were expected to grow at a 7% CAGR, result-
ing in a $1.696 billion market in 2009.1 Narrowing 
the scope of the survey even further, the automo-
tive Si pressure sensor market was $408 million 
in 2004, and revenues for 2009 were expected to 
amount to $677 million (a 10% growth rate). Silicon 
TABLE 10.4 Examples of Sensors and Other Micromachined Components in Use or Needed in Transportation 
Context
Micromachine
Application
Status
Accelerometers
Airbag release, vehicle dynamics control, antilock braking 
systems, antitheft systems, active suspension control, 
headlight leveling
Micromachined products are 
on the market replacing the 
old “ball and tube” approach
Air flow sensor
Air/fuel ratio control
On the market but expensive 
Alcohol sensor
Detection of alcohol level in blood
No reliable products available
Angle and position sensor
Throttle valve angle, pedal angle or position, and 
steering angle
All are available
Angular rate sensor
Vehicle dynamics control, navigation, and rollover 
systems
Available
Azide sensor
Airbag propellant
Does not exist
Battery sensor charge/
density
Charge/density of electrolyte
Research 
Contraband detector
Customs
No good solutions
Driver identification
Theft prevention
Some solutions available
Head-up display
Information on window
Not affordable yet
Humidity sensor
Cabin climate
Unsatisfying products available
Level sensor
Oil and gas level
Available
Light sensor
Turn on the lights 
Available
Micronozzle system
Fuel injection
Available
NOX sensor
Pollution control
Not available
Oil quality monitor
Engine protection
Not available
Oxygen sensor
(two are required in all new 
cars in Europe)
Air/gas ratio
Available, but new technology 
is needed for more 
demanding applications
Pressure sensors
Air intake control (manifold absolute pressure), 
turbocharger pressure, oil pressure, atmospheric 
pressure, fuel-tank pressure, brake pressure, climate 
control, fuel pressure, tire pressure (by September 2007, 
100% of the vehicles sold on the United States markets 
were required to have a tire pressure monitoring system)
Micromachined sensors exist 
and are on the market and 
replacing LVDT technology
Parking sensors
Collision avoidance
Acoustic technology available
Rain sensors
Automatic
Technology available
Road/bridge condition sensors
Preventive road maintenance
Not available
Road sensors
Roughness, ice, rain
Not available at cost
Rotational speed and phase 
sensors
Wheel speed for antilock braking system, engine speed, 
camshaft, and crankshaft phase for motor control, gear 
shaft speed for transmission control
Available
Smart windows
Defog, clear view
Not available at low cost
Solid state cameras
Looking behind truck or car
Available
Spill detector
Clearing of truck accidents
No good solutions available
Temperature sensors
Inside and outside vehicle
Available
Torque sensors
Work
Under development

[Page 552]
552   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
MEMS costs for pressure sensors have come down 
from $1000 in the 1960s to $10 in the mid-1980s 
and, in some cases, less than $0.50 today (varies 
with application-mostly determined by the required 
packaging and testing). Pressure sensor applications 
in the automotive industry are listed in Table 10.4 
as manifold absolute pressure (MAP), turbocharger 
pressure, oil pressure, barometric air pressure (BAP) 
sensor, fuel-tank vapor pressure, brake pressure, cli-
mate control, and tire pressure. According to the pie 
TABLE 10.5 Migration Status of Automotive Sensors from Large Electromechanical to MEMS
Application
Previous Approach
MEMS Approach
Status
Coolant pressure
Ceramic capacitive
Bonded silicon strain gage
Available (e.g., Keller, SSI Technologies, 
Fasco)
Exhaust gas recircu-
lation pressure
Ceramic capacitive
Bulk-micromachined silicon
Available (e.g., Ford, Chrysler)
MAP
LVDT
Bulk-micromachined silicon
Mature (e.g., Delco, Nippondenso, Bosch) 
and more and more replaced by MAF
Airbag 
accelerometer
Breed “ball and tube”
TRW Teknar “rollamite”
Surface and bulk-
micromachined silicon
Mature (Analog Devices, Motorola, 
SensoNor, Delco, and Nippondenso)
Rate sensor
Piezoelectric
Surface and bulk-
micromachined silicon
Available (Daimler Benz, Delco, Bosch)
MAF sensor
Hot wire anemometer
Surface-micromachined silicon
Available (Bosch)
Tire pressure
Not applicable
Bulk-micromachined silicon
Available (Sensonor, Motorola, TRW 
NovaSensor)
Oxygen sensor
Ceramic casting of YSZ
Green tape laminated planar 
zirconia sensors
Available but expensive (e.g., NGK’s 
UEGO sensor)
Source: Expanded and updated from http://www.rgrace.com/Papers/auto2.htm.
Drive train
Torque sensor
Engine timing
Position sensor
Antilock brakes
Accelerometer
position sensor
Engine management
system (EMS)
Mass air ﬂow sensor
Temperature sensors
Position sensors 
Automatic headlight
control
Sun/light sensor
Air bag system
Accelerometer
Seat control
Temperature sensor
Load/force sensor
Emissions control
Oxygen sensor
Transmission
Position sensor
Air conditioning
Temperature
Humidity
Sun/light
Active suspension
Accelerometer
Position/speed
Pressure sensor
Load/force sensor
FIGURE 10.22 Automotive sensors.

[Page 553]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   553
chart in Figure 10.21, pressure sensors will make 
for 35% of the automotive silicon sensors in 2009 
(http://www.wtc-consult.com/cms/cms/upload/
PDF/Nexus_Sample_PressureSensors.pdf).
Two main varieties of Si pressure sensors used in 
cars are piezoresistive and capacitive. In a capacitive 
design, a thin diaphragm forms one plate of a two-
plate device that detects capacitance changes when 
the diaphragm deflects. In a piezoresistive approach, 
deflection is measured by the change in the resis-
tance of the silicon strain elements on the dia-
phragm, or directly in the diaphragm with resistors 
implanted into the silicon diaphragm. These pressure 
sensor approaches are compared with a more tradi-
tional piezoelectric sensor approach in Table 10.6. 
A fourth approach is based on resonant structures, 
as discussed below (see “Resonant Beam Sensors”) 
and compared with piezoresistive and capacitive in 
Table 10.7. Also, two major manufacturing options 
are employed for capacitive and piezoresistive pres-
sure sensors: bulk micromachining in single-crystal 
Si (SCS) and surface micromachining in polysilicon. 
Recently, Bosch has developed a third pressure sen-
sor manufacturing technology: advanced porous 
silicon membrane (APSM). This technology makes 
use of porous silicon to form a cavity underneath 
the surface of the monocrystalline silicon, which 
helps to make the wafer manufacturing process fully 
CMOS compatible and turns the traditional bulk-
micromachining process into a surface technology 
(see Volume II, Figure 4.78). Silicon pressure sensors 
cover a range spanning vacuum, low pressure (0.02 
to 0.1 bar), medium pressure (0.25 to 10 bar), and 
high pressure (60 to more than 1000 bar).
A capacitive pressure sensor is more sensitive, is 
less temperature dependent, and holds up better in 
harsh environments than a piezoresistive one. If one 
relies on bulk micromachining for the manufacture 
of a capacitive pressure sensor, it must be carved out 
of a larger piece of Si to attain the same sensitivity 
as a piezoresistive sensor, making it more expen-
sive. The electronics for a capacitive pressure sensor 
are more complicated and expensive. Most of all, 
in the case of a capacitive sensor, the small signals 
necessitate integration of sensor and electronics on 
the same chip. Thus, piezoresistive devices provide 
higher output signals and are smaller than capaci-
tive sensors, but they require temperature compen-
sation that may be integrated within the same silicon 
substrate.
The major suppliers of pressure sensors include 
Honeywell (United States), Bosch (Germany), 
Infineon (Germany), Freescale (United States), Denso 
(Japan), Delphi-Delco (United States), All Sensors 
(United States), Melexis (United States), Integrated 
TABLE 10.6 Comparison of Pressure Sensor 
Technology
Parameter
Piezoelectric
Piezoresistive
Capacitive
Self-
generating
Yes
No 
No
Impedance
High
Low
High
Signal level
High
Low
Moderate
High 
temperature
Yes
No
No
Accuracy 
(full scale)
±1%
±1%
± 0.2%
Static 
calibration
No
Yes
Yes
Rugged, high 
sensitivity
Yes
No
Yes
Damped 
designs
No
Yes
Yes
Cost
High
Low
High
Electronics 
required
Yes
No
Yes
(For resonant techniques, see Table 10.7.)
TABLE 10.7 Performance Features of Resonant, Piezoresistive, and Capacitive 
Sensing
Feature
Resonant
Piezoresistive
Capacitive
Output form
Frequency
Voltage
Voltage
Resolution
1 part in 108
1 part in 105
1 part in 104–105
Accuracy
100–1,000 ppm
500–10,000 ppm
100–100,000 ppm
Power consumption
0.1–10 mW
≈10 mW
<0.1 mW
Temperature cross-sensitivity
–30 × 10–6/°C
–1,600 × 10–6/°C
4 × 10–6/°C
Source: Greenwood, J. C. 1988. Silicon in mechanical sensors. J Phys E Sci Instrum 21:1114–28.

[Page 554]
554   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Sensing Systems, Inc. (United States), Silicon 
Microstructures, Inc. (United States), Kavlico (United 
States), Dalsa (United States), Merit Sensors (United 
States), Measurement Specialties, Inc. (United States), 
GE Nova Sensor (United States), Thales Avionics 
(France), MEMSCAP AS (Norway), Endevco (United 
States), and GE Druck (United Kingdom).
Automotive Pressure Sensor Examples
Introduction
Historically, pressure sensors in the automotive 
industry were used predominantly in engine man-
agement, e.g., for the measurement of manifold air 
pressure (MAP) at up to 5 bar. Silicon MEMS pressure 
sensors have been used in the automotive industry 
for many years; Bosch, for example, introduced its 
first Si pressure sensor for the automotive market in 
1993. A MAP sensor determines air intake pressure 
to provide feedback on the correct air-fuel mixture 
for pollution control and fuel efficiency. Barometric 
atmospheric pressure (BAP) sensors compensate the 
air-fuel mix according to altitude. Fuel vapor pres-
sure monitoring is a mandatory requirement on new 
U.S. vehicles (since 2006). Oil pressure sensors can 
be either ceramic capacitive, silicon strain gauges 
(bonded and fused to membranes), or piezoresistive, 
with silicon chips in silicone oil-filled reservoirs and 
capped by stainless steel diaphragms. Also, pressure 
sensors are used in high-pressure fuel injection sys-
tems, coolants, braking, and so forth.
A new market opportunity for Si pressure sensors 
is the direct tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS), 
a mandatory requirement on new U.S. vehicles (see 
below). Side airbags and passenger occupation detec-
tion are two additional required applications. The 
pressure sensor competes against accelerometers in 
the first case and with an infrared low-resolution 
imaging array in the latter. Other solutions for pas-
senger detection include iBOLT from Bosch, which 
uses Hall-effect sensors. Pressure sensors react faster 
in the event of a side impact and are available on the 
BMW 5 series cars.
Automotive pressure sensor sales are projected to 
grow at 10% as a result of increased deployment in 
engine management applications such as BAP and 
TPMS. Side airbags and occupancy detection systems, 
where several different solutions are expected, will 
also help spur sales of automotive sensors. TPMS 
is driven by legislation and was expected to exceed 
$200 million in 2009.
Manifold Absolute Pressure Sensor
A prime example of a Si pressure sensor in the 
automotive application is the MAP sensor, used to 
control the air-fuel ratio in the engine’s management 
system. Prices, in 2004, varied from about $3 to 
$5 in volume. Although MAP feeds into a major 
market, the application is on the decline. Because of 
a desire for a more direct and accurate measurement 
technique, MAP sensors are being replaced by mass 
air flow (MAF) sensors, which provide a more direct 
control of the engine. The major drawback to MAF 
sensors at this point is their high cost (e.g., about 
$30 for the hot wire anemometer from Hitachi), 
a significantly higher price than for MAP sensors 
(<$5). Several micromachining options are being 
considered in an attempt to reduce the cost of an 
MAF  sensor, but none has yet led to a promising 
approach. Bosch introduced a thin-film equivalent 
to  a hot wire anemometer in 1995. Several orga-
nizations are searching for a MEMS version of such 
a thin-film anemometer. In MAF-based systems, the 
MAF sensor replaces the MAP sensor in conjunction 
with a BAP sensor needed to correct for altitude. 
These BAP sensors are often identical to MAP sensors. 
Obviously, losing the MAP sensor application does 
not mean losing all the pressure sensor applications 
in engine control. In Figure 10.23, we illustrate the 
Bosch BAP sensor mounted in a premold housing.
FIGURE 10.23 A barometric air pressure sensor in a 
 premold housing by Bosch Sensortec.

[Page 555]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   555
Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems
One of the fastest growing new applications 
of MEMS pressure sensors is in Tire Pressure 
Monitoring Systems (TPMS). The U.S. Department 
of Transportation’s National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration  (NHTSA) has mandated a new safety 
standard to warn the driver when a tire is signifi-
cantly underinflated. The mandate required manu-
facturers to install a four-tire TPMS that is capable 
of detecting when a tire is more than 25% underin-
flated and warning the driver (mandated compliance 
of 100% for passenger cars was in September 2007). 
This mandate had its origin in 2001, with a series 
of tire problems experienced by Firestone/Ford (100 
accidents). Two TPMS types are available. The first 
is based on an indirect measurement: slight changes 
in wheel diameter in response to pressure loss are 
detected and computed by the changes based on 
wheel speed measurements provided by the antilock 
braking system (ABS). The second type of system is 
based on direct measurement with a pressure sensor, 
motion switch, and wireless transmitter installed in 
the tire’s valve stem or wheel to make the measure-
ment (Figure 10.24). The sensor sends information on 
inflation pressure levels by radio signals to a receiv-
ing unit inside the vehicle and a dashboard indica-
tor alerts the driver. The direct method is considered 
to be more accurate than the indirect approach, but 
the advantage of greater accuracy is offset by a cost 
of $65 to $80 per vehicle, since a market-friendly 
price for a system consisting of a pressure sensor, 
electronics, and a wireless transmitter is $12–$15 per 
wheel. High-volume manufacturing should reduced 
the price to below $10. Sixty million TPMS units 
were expected in 2008 for the U.S. market alone. 
Whereas the TPMS technology today involves a 
unit mounted in the wheel powered by a battery, in 
the near future we will see the arrival of the intelli-
gent tire. In this case the TPMS unit will be mounted 
in the tire itself instead of on the wheel. This will rep-
resent a tremendous market opportunity: from 2010 
onward, 200 million tires per year were expected on 
new cars and a 1 billion per year replacement tire 
market (two or three sets in lifetime). By that time, 
it was anticipated tires would feature an embedded 
battery-less pressure sensor/wire antenna for contin-
uous monitoring, and additional data on wear and 
traction [feed data for the electronic stability pro-
gram (ESP)] will be available. Interestingly, in this 
scenario the responsibility for safety of the passen-
ger will shift from car to tire manufacturer.
WTC estimated that the market for TPMS systems 
would grow at 50% in 2008 due to the U.S. mandate 
described above before leveling off in 2009–2010 to 
a growth rate of under 10%. Technology options are 
resistive and capacitive pressure sensors and SAW 
devices. Infineon/Sensonor and GE Novasensor are 
the traditional leading MEMS sensor manufactur-
ers for this application. Whereas two companies 
were competing in this market in 2005 (Infineon/
Sensonor and GE Novasensor), as of 2008, fifteen 
companies had products available. Other players are 
Electronic control unit
Display
Sensor
Initiator
FIGURE 10.24 Microelectromechanical system pressure sensor with wireless data transfer in rim of tire.

[Page 556]
556   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TI, Freescale, Bosch, Melexis. Kavlico, Continental, 
Schraeder, Siemens VDO, and Philips (not the sen-
sor chip). Many other companies have products 
under development (e.g., at LVsensors, http://www.
lvsensors.com).
Important future automotive pressure sensor devel -
opments include high-pressure sensors, such  as 
those required for cylinder pressure sensors (one 
per cylinder). The latter will be required for direct 
pressure determination inside the combus tion 
chamber, starting with diesel engines. Lower emis-
sions and improved fuel economy are expected to 
justify the higher cost. The extreme pressure rules 
out silicon, and in-cylinder sensors may alleviate 
the need for MAP and air intake MAF devices alto-
gether. Honeywell has licensed fiber-optic pressure 
sensing technology for this demanding application.
Comparison of Manufacturing 
Approaches for Pressure Sensing
The majority of Si MEMS pressure sensor processes 
today are CMOS-compatible. About 55% of pro-
duction is on 6-inch wafers, and this is expected to 
increase to 80% in 2010.15 Manufacturing on 8-inch 
wafers is becoming more and more popular. It is 
expected that by 2011, 29% of MEMS manufactur ing 
will be on 8-inch wafers. In 2007, Omron, Freescale, 
Silex, and DNP all announced new investments in 
8-inch manufacturing. The pressure sensors market 
in the automotive world is under tremendous pres-
sure to reduce cost. Several manufacturers have set 
up their production centers in Asia Pacific regions 
because of the lower production and labor costs.
The manufacturing approach for pressure sensing 
and, to some extent, for all Si micromachined sen-
sors for large industrial market applications where 
cost is the main issue must incorporate as many of 
the following attributes as possible:
 
◾CMOS compatibility because of the increasing 
demand for digital-compatible (see also reso-
nant beam approach, described below), highly 
integrated Si smart sensors
 
◾Six-inch compatible because of IC trend/ 
availability (and 8-inch silicon MEMS is com-
ing up fast)
 
◾As little fixturing as possible
 
◾Al- (in the future, this might become Cu 
instead) and IC-line-compatible etchants
 
◾Generic, making it easy to implement a differ-
ent sensing range or different package or even a 
different sensor type
 
◾Highest accuracy potential (favors capacitive 
and resonant devices; see below)
 
◾Wafer-level isolation of electrical connections, 
making it easier to use in harsh media (remov-
ing sensor metallization from the media 
themselves)
 
◾Dry etching whenever possible
 
◾Single-sided processing if feasible
Polysilicon now holds the cost advantage over a 
silicon-on-insulator (SOI) approach, but polysilicon 
will not readily lead to a high accuracy method. 
Like SOI, bulk micromachining constitutes a more 
secure  option to meet the accuracy demands  of 
future pressure sensor generations but often involves 
too many glass and/or Si wafers stacked up in one 
device to allow for an economic solution. Moreover, 
bulk micromachining is a more expensive tech-
nology and up to recently less CMOS compatible 
than polysilicon. We say up to recently, since 
Bosch succeeded in making bulk micromachining 
more CMOS compatible [see the Bosch advanced 
porous silicon membrane (APSM) process in 
Volume II, Chapter 4, (Figure 4.77)]. SOI might be 
able to compete better with polysilicon, as clever 
designs could obviate the complicated multiple 
wafer solutions that characterize today’s bulk 
micromachining stacks for pressure, acceleration, 
and gyros (a three- to five-wafer stack design is not 
uncommon). SOI technology will also become more 
and more available and less expensive as it becomes 
more commonly used in the IC industry. We believe 
that the SOI approach will become a competitive 
technology for low-cost, high-accuracy sensors 
without the reproducibility and long-term stability 
issues of the polysilicon material.
SOI wafers are finding increasing applications 
for pressure sensor devices, especially for industrial 
applications. Most pressure sensors still are bulk 
micromachined, so wet etching remains a key pro-
cess. Packaging is a large part of the component cost, 
and wafer bonding for wafer-level packaging (WLP) 

[Page 557]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   557
is a growing trend (see Chapter 4, this volume, on 
packaging, assembly, and self-assembly).
We can summarize that, for now, an inexpen-
sive solution for a pressure sensor with moderate 
accuracy is based on polysilicon. In the long run, a 
single-crystal approach based on the Bosch APSM 
process or an SOI approach, perhaps with a resonant 
design (see next), is more suited for a generic strat-
egy to produce higher accuracy devices.
Piezoresistive, Capacitive, Resonant 
Beam, and Other Sensor Approaches
Introduction
The arguments we present in this section about what 
sensor mechanism to choose for a given pressure 
sensor application pertain equally well to acceler-
ometers and angular rate sensors. The impetus for 
obtaining higher accuracy and sensitivity in automo-
tive sensors usually hinges on energy efficiency and/
or regulatory mandates. This may require a review 
of the transducing methods, currently still domi-
nated by piezoresistivity. Examples of alternatives 
include optical techniques such as Honeywell’s in-
cylinder fiber-optic pressure sensor, the significantly 
higher sensitivity of both capacitive and resonant 
approaches, piezoelectric sensing (mainly for high 
frequency applications), and tunneling current sens-
ing (very sensitive but increased complexity). The 
inherent digital compatibility of resonant beams may 
propel them to the foreground for high accuracy and 
very low-signal sensor applications. Because of the 
promise held by the resonant sensing application, 
we detail this technology a bit further here.
Resonant Beam Sensors
Electrical readout in a pressure sensor, an accelerom-
eter, or angular rate sensor may be performed using 
piezoresistors located in a flexure area, by measuring 
the change in capacitance of the moving members 
with respect to the fixed member(s), or by the mea-
surement of frequency change of a small resonant 
structure. A resonator is a mechanical structure fab-
ricated to vibrate at a particular resonant frequency. 
The resonant frequencies of such microresonators 
can be made extremely stable, so they are used as 
a time base (the quartz tuning fork in watches, for 
example) or as the sensing element of a resonant 
sensor. The performance benefits of a well-designed 
resonant sensor are compared with piezoresistive 
and capacitive techniques in Table 10.7.17 A com-
mon advantage of resonant beam and piezoresistive 
is that they do not depend on measurements rela-
tive to “fixed” members, as the capacitive approach 
does. The small signal magnitude (small capacitance 
change ΔC) of a capacitive sensor means that on-
chip electronics are mandatory to avoid errors due 
to stray capacitance variations. Piezoresistive and 
capacitive sensing elements must be used with high-
precision amplifiers and trimmed analog circuits 
to accurately sense and condition small changes in 
the value of the electronic components. These sen-
sitive circuits and small signals can be highly sus-
ceptible to fluctuations in temperature, electrical 
noise, mechanical and electrical drift, temperature 
and pressure cycling hysteresis, ionizing radiation, 
and magnetic fields. These factors and others result 
in measurement inaccuracies, effectively degrading 
overall precision and resolution. As a result, best-
case production performance of solid-state sensors 
generally has been limited to a long-term accuracy 
of about 0.1%, or 1000 ppm.
Resonating devices, on the other hand, are affected 
primarily by the mechanical characteristics of the 
structure, not by its electrical behavior. In addition, 
since the system itself measures only frequency, the 
interface to a digital system vastly is simplified. In 
practice, resonant sensors can attain measurement 
accuracies at least 10 times higher than conventional 
sensing methods. The fabrication of resonant struc-
tures, however, is more complex, and the require-
ment for packaging such devices more demanding 
than for piezoresistive or capacitive sensors.
The basic building blocks for a resonant beam 
structure embedded in a pressure-sensitive mem-
brane are shown in Figure 10.25.18
The specific structure shown here is one by the 
Yokogawa Corporation. To operate as a differential 
pressure sensing device, this chip incorporates two 
H-shaped bridges, located in the Si substrate and 
operating at the same identical frequency (90 kHz). 
Both bridges (resonators) are located at the same 
strain-free plane (depth) from the chip’s surface, but 
in different locations. A resonant sensor is designed 

[Page 558]
558   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
such that the resonator’s natural frequency is a func-
tion of the measurand (pressure in this case), and 
typically the measurand alters the stiffness, mass, or 
shape of the resonator, hence causing a change in its 
resonant frequency. In the current case, when pres-
sure is applied, because of their position and exact 
depth in the substrate, one bridge goes into tension 
and the other into compression. The other impor-
tant features of a resonant sensor are the vibration 
drive and detection mechanisms. The Yokogawa 
chip incorporates an electromagnetically driven 
resonant beam sealed in a vacuum shell, integrated 
onto a standard silicon pressure sensor diaphragm 
(an SOI approach is used). The drive mechanism 
excites the vibrations in the structure while the 
detection mechanism senses these vibrations. The 
frequency of the detected vibration forms the out-
put of the   resonant  device. As pressure is applied 
the compression bridge changes from 90 to 110 kHz 
and the tension bridge from 90 to 70 kHz. To obtain 
a differential output the microprocessor simply 
counts the change in bridge frequencies (Δ40 kHz). 
In the case of gauge pressure measurement, both 
bridges are used. One bridge measures the reference 
pressure (atmospheric or head pressure), and the 
other one measures the applied pressure (gauge).
With the digital pressure sensor pictured in 
Figure 10.26, it was demonstrated that an accuracy 
of 0.01%, or 100 ppm, is attainable. The device also 
offers wide dynamic range, high sensitivity, and 
high stability, along with a frequency output for easy 
interface to digital compensation circuitry. The chip 
fabrication is challenging though, comprising four 
sequential selective epitaxial growth and critical 
selective etching steps, and the sensor package 
is extremely complex and therefore expensive to 
produce. It is, nonetheless, an excellent example of 
the power of silicon microfabrication technology 
Compression bridge
Tension bridge
Freq. (kHZ)
n  natural
resonant 
frequency
fc
fr
40 KHz
Pressure
Pressure (in H20)
depth
FIGURE 10.26 Operating principle of the digital pressure sensor. The first bridge is located directly in the center of the 
chip and the other nearer the edge. As pressure is applied, the center bridge will be in a state of “compression” and 
the outer bridge in a state of “tension.” As a result, the natural frequency of the two bridges changes. The compres-
sion bridge frequency increases and the tension bridge frequency decreases, thereby effectively creating a differential 
frequency. The two frequencies are easily managed by a CPU as a time-based calculation directly proportional to the 
applied differential pressure. (From Yokogawa Corporation of America.)
Compression
Electric
terminal
Silicon
diaphragm
Magnetic
ﬁeld
(A)
Tension
Pressure
<100 µm>
<100 µm>
<100 µm>
10
Magnetic field Electric terminal
Pressure
Diaphragm
µm
(a)
(b)
(B)
Cavity
Resonator
FIGURE 10.25 (A) Digital sensor technology by Yokogawa Corporation. (B) Construction of the sensor (a) and cross-
 sectional scanning electron microscope photograph of the resonator (b).18

[Page 559]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   559
and represents a major technical achievement. 
Morover, Yokogawa’s application represents the 
industrial sensing and control business, which is 
aimed at high-performance sensors that can sell for 
higher prices in modest volumes.
GE Druck also developed and incorporated a 
resonant silicon sensor in its pressure transducers 
(http://www.gesensing.com/druckproducts), 
as well as GE NovaSensor.19 Zook et al.20 fabricated 
clamped-clamped beams in a polysilicon surface 
micromachining process and, by locating the poly-
silicon beam in a high-vacuum polysilicon shell, 
avoided damping. Surface micromaching simplified 
the manufacturing process over previous attempts 
in SOI by Ikeda et al. shown in Figures 10.25 and 
10.2621 and may be able to produce cost-effective 
resonators as replacements for piezoresistors. The 
sensitivity to applied axial loads of the beam exceeds 
the gage factor of single-crystal piezoresistors easily 
by a factor of 10–100. Devices with sensitivities as 
high as 700 Hz/g have been reported.22
Today, the resonant beam approach remains the 
least-developed sensing mode, despite the fact that 
the resonant beam method showed very good 
potential in the past (although expensive and dif-
ficult to implement). So it is interesting that there is 
not more commercial activity to validate this sens-
ing approach further and making these resonant 
sensing devices less expensive. It could be that one 
of the main reasons why direct frequency sensing 
is not investigated more is the fabulous resolution 
ADI achieved with its capacitive sensing scheme. 
Because the signal conditioning is so tightly coupled 
to the sensing element, the integrated ADI sensors 
can measure extremely small changes in differential 
capacitance. As an example, the capacitance resolu-
tion of their inexpensive ADXL202E, a surface- micro-
machined  50-mm3 accelerometer, is as low as  20 
zeptofarads (20 × 10–21 F) (see next section).
Accelerometers
Introduction and Market 
Perspectives: Victim of Success
WTC estimated that in 2006, the silicon-MEMS mar-
ket in the automotive sector was $1.6 billion (this firm 
only counted flow, pressure, acceleration, and rate), 
making this the second biggest MEMS opportunity 
after RW-heads and ink-jet print heads. By 2011, the 
same market was pegged at $2.2 billion, with a CAGR 
of around 7%. The main applications in revenue terms 
were, in order, pressure sensors, gyroscopes, acceler-
ometers, and flow sensors, as shown in Figure 10.27.
The total number of Si sensors WTC claimed 
would grow from over 430 million units in 2006 to 
780 million in 2011, an annual growth of 13% (for 
a reference point, consider that by 2006, Bosch had 
produced 600 million sensors, 130 million units in 
2006 alone). This outstrips the dollar growth because 
of price erosion, running at 4–5% per year.
Yole estimated the 2005 worldwide accelerom-
eter market at $393 million, representing about 8% 
of the overall silicon-MEMS market. By 2010, they 
expected the accelerometer market to be $869 mil-
lion, for a five-year CAGR of 17%.
Major players in this space include Bosch, Infi-
neon, ADI, Denso, and Delphi. Since the early 2000s, 
manufacturers have been putting accelerometers in 
consumer electronics such as laptops [it started when 
IBM (now Lenovo) put a dual-axis accelerometer in its 
notebook in 2004], cameras, and cell phones. WTC 
fears that in coming years the accelerometer market 
will suffer from price pressures  reminiscent of that in 
consumer electronics (10% per year). Accelerometers 
might become  victims of their success!
Accelerometers signified the next big Si micro-
machining entry in the commercial world after the 
Si pressure sensor. Today, polysilicon surface-mi-
cromachined capacitive and single-crystal Si bulk-
micromachined accelerometers have taking over a 
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
US$ million
0
2006
Markets for automotive MEMS sensors
2006 – 2011 (CAGR = 7%)
2011
Pressure sensors
Gyroscopes
Accelerometers
Flow sensors
CAGR 6%
CAGR 10%
CAGR 6%
FIGURE 10.27 Markets for automotive microelectro-
mechanical system sensors, according to WTC.

[Page 560]
560   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
large share of the automotive acceleration market. 
Manufacturing volumes of tens of millions a year 
have brought down the price to less than $2 per sen-
sor. A company such as ADI makes 2 million sur-
face-micromachined accelerometers a week.
A major difference between accelerometers and 
pressure sensors in cars is that less diverse types of 
accelerometers are needed. Pressure sensors require 
various ranges and many different packages to 
accommodate the sensors in their unique environ-
ments. Accelerometers, on the other hand, require 
little difference in packaging; two main types (i.e., 
high g and low g) cover all needs. This explains why 
the first surface-micromachined commercial Si sensor 
was an accelerometer rather than a pressure sensor.
The first demonstration of a capacitive Si microma-
chined accelerometer took place in 1979 at Stanford 
University.4 Over the years, a variety of accelerometers 
based on different physical detection schemes, such 
as piezoelectric, piezoresistive (thin- and thick-film), 
capacitive, tunneling, and resonant members, have 
been attempted in a wide variety of manufacturing 
schemes. As listed in Table 10.4, in cars, accelerometers 
are used as crash detection sensors both in the elec-
tronic control unit (ECU) and in peripheral sensors 
such as upfront sensors (UFS) or pedestrian contact 
sensors close to the bumper, peripheral acceleration 
sensors (PAS) in the doors, and rear crash sensors.
Automotive Accelerometer Examples
Airbag Accelerometer
The principal mass market for Si acceleration sensors 
in the automotive industry is in crash detection and 
airbag release systems. A MEMS-based accelerometer 
detects with great precision the sudden slowing of a 
vehicle and fires the airbag when needed. Now pro-
duced in the millions per year, these devices have 
gotten smaller, cheaper, and more capable, riding 
the learning curve originally promised by MEMS 
proponents. This learning experience by Bosch-
Sensortec is illustrated in Figure 10.28 as a sequence 
of product generations for automobile airbag sys-
tems introduced over time. The MEMS elements are 
not only getting much smaller than the formerly 
used fine-mechanical piezoelectric device (shown in 
Fig. 10.28a) but also much more cost efficient, and 
yet they include an increasing number of functions 
(such as self-tests and accuracy check routines).
In 1991, the Intermodal Surface Transportation 
Efficiency Act (ISTEA) was signed into law. ISTEA 
airbag requirements ensured that by 1998, 100% of 
the new U.S. vehicle fleet be equipped with airbags. 
System integrators like Autoliv expect airbag acceler-
ometer penetration to increase from 40 to 60 million 
vehicles over the five-year period between 2006 and 
2011 (i.e., 80% of cars worldwide). WTC estimated 
that this penetration equals an insertion of 200 mil-
lion accelerometers in 2006 going up to 350 million 
in five years, with as many as eight accelerometers 
per electric control unit (ECU).
An earlier generation of airbag sensors used in the 
United States consisted of electromechanical types 
supplied by Breed and TRW (see Table 10.5). Three elec-
tromechanical accelerometers discriminated be tween 
zones according to the severity of a vehicle crash. Two 
sensors were used in the crush zone, usually on frame 
rails behind the front bumpers or on the lower por-
tion of radiator supports. These sensors determined 
the severity of impact and activation of the airbag. 
1984 – 1997
1997 – 
2002 – 
Coming soon
Hybrid
Silicon micromachined
Silicon micromachined
capactive
capactive
piezoelectric
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 10.28 Generations of high-g acceleration sensors used in automotive airbag systems at Bosch.

[Page 561]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   561
Another sensor was located outside the crush zone, 
either in or near the passenger compartment. This sen-
sor, often known as the safing sensor, prevented deploy-
ment of the airbag in the event someone inadvertently 
impacted (or tampered with) the front sensors.
Micromachined accelerometers displaced these 
electromechanical devices, as they made single-
point sensing possible. Single-point sensing requires 
only one accelerometer, located in the passenger 
compartment, reducing the number of sensors and 
associated wiring needed in the system. In addition 
to reducing the number of sensors required in each 
system, surface-micromachined accelerometers from 
ADI were costing approximately $4 per unit in vol-
ume in 1998 (and below $2 today),  significantly less 
than electromechanical accelerometers at approxi-
mately $15 per unit.
The early bulk-micromachined Si accelerometers 
lacked damping and overload protection until TRW 
NovaSensor introduced a piezoresistive accelerome-
ter combining a microactuator for reliable self-testing 
and overload protection on the same chip. This Si 
bulk-micromachined ±50-g accelerometer based on 
hybrid technology, with signal conditioning electron-
ics on a separate chip, bonded into a TO-5 header, 
is shown in Chapter 4, this volume, Figure 4.9.23 In 
1991, ADI introduced the first commercial product to 
use polysilicon surface micromachining, the so-called 
ADXL-50, a capacitive accelerometer with an electro-
static actuator built in for self-testing. The construc-
tion of this sensor was studied in Volume II, Example 
7.9 (see also Volume II, Figures 7.92–7.96).
More and more vehicles are being equipped with 
side airbags, ensuring continued growth of the accel-
erometer market. Primarily ADI, GM/Delco, and 
Motorola supply silicon accelerometers in the 50-g 
range for U.S. vehicles. Sensonor (Norway) has his-
torically provided a large portion of the European 
market, while Nippondenso is the major provider in 
Japan. The ADI accelerometer was the first integrated 
sensor; most other accelerometers on the market 
still use a multichip solution to sense and provide 
the appropriate signal condition.
Suspension Accelerometers
ADI, between 1990 and 2000, branched out from 
their high-g range of airbag (50 g) accelerometers, to 
medium and low-g sensors for suspension and sta-
bility control devices (say, 0–2 g).
Silicon accelerometers in suspension systems face 
more hurdles than the Si accelerometers in airbag 
systems. Low g is more difficult (signal-to-noise limit), 
signal conditioning is required with each remotely 
mounted package (one suspension sensor per wheel), 
and the sensor is exposed to the harsh automotive 
environment, i.e., more complex packaging. Many 
companies, including ADI and Motorola were and 
still are aggressively pursuing this application. Low-g 
accelerometers are also of utility in antilock braking 
systems (ABS) featuring traction control. No federal 
law mandates ABS/traction control, and because of 
the cost constraints, only high-end and midsize cars 
are expected to utilize the system.
In 1995, using its patented iMEMS® (integrated 
MEMS) approach, ADI introduced a 5-g acceler-
ometer, pushing the polysilicon surface micro-
machining technology it pioneered with their 
50-g device (the ADXL50) a bit further. Also out 
of ADI, in 1998, came the breakthrough 2-g dual-
axis ADXL202E accelerometer, an inexpensive, 
surface-micromachined accelerometer capable of 
measuring both static (gravitational force) and 
dynamic (vibration and shock) forces, pushing the 
surface micromachining sensor technology even 
further. This sensor detects movements on two 
axes and outputs digital signals to microcontrollers 
as simple as 4-bit microcontroller units (MCUs). 
A single moving “beam” in the ADXL202E has 
“fingers” that are used to detect beam movement 
(through capacitance change) in two directions, 
and this goes through an on-chip algorithm and is 
sent along as digital data. In Figure 10.29a we show 
how silicon is used to make the spring and proof 
mass and how a finger is added to make a variable 
differential capacitor. The beam is made up of 
many interdigitated fingers, and each finger can be 
visualized as shown in this figure. The electronics 
measure the change in displacement by measuring 
the change in differential capacitance against a set 
of fixed fingers (plates). The critical dimensions of 
fingers and the proof mass (0.7 µg) of this sensor are 
clarified in Figure 10.29b. The finger height (2 µm for 
the example product) is fixed by process technology, 
while the overlap (125 µm here) is adjustable to 

[Page 562]
562   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
some extent. Longer fingers are not desirable, 
because they are harder to manufacture and result in 
larger beam areas, which in turn translates to more 
expensive sensors. The fingers are released when the 
oxide layer between the underlying bipolar IC and 
the beam is etched away, leaving a 1.6-µm gap with 
fingers spaced every 1.3 µm. Rather than using two 
discrete beams placed orthogonally, the fingers that 
constitute the x- and y-axes, variable capacitors are 
integrated along the sides of a single square beam. 
This results in a reduction of the overall sensor 
area, yet the larger common beam mass enhances 
the resolution of the ADXL202E. The differential 
capacitance of each finger is proportional to the 
overlapping area between the fixed outer plates 
and the displacement of the moving finger. Because 
these are very small capacitors, one needs the largest 
practical differential capacitance to reduce noise and 
increase resolution. The fixed outer plates are driven 
with square waves that are 180 degrees out of phase. 
When the movable fingers (and hence the beam) are 
centered between the fixed outer plates, both sides 
of the differential capacitor have equal capacitance 
and the AC voltage on the beam is zero. However, if 
the beam is displaced due to an applied acceleration, 
the differential capacitance will be unbalanced, and 
an AC voltage of amplitude proportional to the 
displacement of the beam results. In this sensor 
movements as minute as 0.02 Å are detectable. 
Because of the combination of low cost and high 
performance acceleration/tilt sensing possible with 
this device, other applications have become possible. 
The ADXL202E is currently used in car alarms (for 
jacking or towing sensing), pen-based handwriting 
recognition systems, portable electronic games, and 
wearable sports equipment.
The ADXL202E was an early demonstration that 
there is a path for MEMS from automotive appli-
cations to consumer electronics. The average price 
of MEMS accelerometers across all applications is 
decreasing, from an average of $2.50 in 2004 to less 
than $1.90 in 2009, with consumer applications 
driving the price erosion. The average selling price 
(ASP) for a three-axis MEMS accelerometer was still 
Spring
Mass
Fixed outer
plates
Anchor to
substrate
Sensor at rest
CS1 < CS2
Applied
acceleration
Responding to an applied acceleration
(movement shown is greatly exaggerted)
(a)
(b)
Motion
1.3 µm gap
2 µm thick
125 µm
overlap
(c)
FIGURE 10.29 Analog Devices’ ± 2 g dual-axis ADXL202E accelerometer is an inexpensive, surface-micromachined 
 accelerometer capable of measuring both static (gravitational force) and dynamic (vibration and shock). (a) Silicon is 
used to make the spring and proof mass, and fingers are added to make a variable differential capacitor. (b) Critical 
dimensions and proof mass weight and dimensions for a single finger. The proof mass is 0.7 µg. The accelerometer has 
some impressive numbers: 0.1 pF per side for the differential capacitor, 20 zF (10–21 F) smallest detectable capacitance 
change, and 2.5 pm minimum detectable beam deflection (one tenth of an atomic diameter). (c) In the ADXL202 beam 
structure, note the four pairs of orthogonal serpentine springs at the corners of the proof mass. The entire mechanical 
structure is suspended from the four points where the springs meet.

[Page 563]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   563
approximately $2.00 in consumer products in 2006, 
while lowest cost products were already shipping at 
under $1.50 in 2006. It was expected that by 2009, 
the average selling price would drop to $1.35, and 
the least expensive (first-level packaged) three-axis 
accelerometers would ship for under $1.00.
Comparing Manufacturing 
Options for Accelerometers
In the automotive market 80% of accelerometers are 
manufactured using deep reactive ion etch (DRIE) 
equipment. Growth in the accelerometer market 
overall actually is driving growth of DRIE equipment 
sales. The primary wafer size for accelerometers is 
currently 6-inch (accounting for more than 80% of 
device production), but 8-inch wafers are expected 
to make inroads and were projected to account for 
nearly 10% of production by 2010. Devices are typi-
cally processed on silicon, with SOI wafers in use or 
in development by the major manufacturers.
Obtaining sufficient sensitivity was originally 
thought to be a potential problem when using poly-
silicon to manufacture low-g accelerometers. To make 
a large proof mass is especially challenging for poly-
silicon accelerometers. Process control and handling 
considerations limit the minimum flexure thick-
ness for suspending the inertial mass to about 2 µm 
and, given the relatively low density of Si, obtaining 
deflection at 1 or 2 g without making the proof mass 
large is difficult. Realizing a large proof mass directly 
affects chip size and thus cost, presenting the devel-
oper with an unattractive option. The proof mass of 
a bulk-micromachined accelerometer may be 0.1 mg, 
whereas a typical value for a surface-micromachined 
device is 0.5 µg, 200 times smaller. With a source 
capacitance in the neighborhood of 150 femtofarads 
(i.e., 0.15 pF), and orders of magnitude smaller differ-
ential capacitance changes, say 100 attofarads (10–18 
F) for a 1-g acceleration, a resolution of 23 zeptofarads 
(10–21 F) is required, and the signal output of these 
devices easily could be lost in the presence of para-
sitic capacitance or noise. Despite these early misgiv-
ings expressed here, the surface-micromachined ±2-g 
capacitive accelerometer announced in 1995 by ADI 
demonstrates that low-g polysilicon sensors and cost-
effective integration of all the electronics is quite pos-
sible. It is actually within ADI’s abilities to provide 
on-chip signal conditioning that allows the minute 
signals to be read with minimal interference. A syn-
chronous demodulation technique (“AC bridge”) is 
used to increase noise immunity and improve the 
signal to noise ratio. A square-wave carrier drives the 
sensor, and the modulated signal produced by the 
change in differential capacitance is amplified and 
synchronously demodulated, minimizing noise and 
boosting the signal-to-noise ratio.
In silicon bulk-micromachined accelerometers, 
the formation of a mesa structure (proof mass) from 
a single crystal Si is more complicated because of 
rapid and irregular etching of convex corners by 
orientation-dependent etchants, such as ethylene 
diamine pyrocatechol (EDP) and KOH. Corner com-
pensation schemes must be invoked to avoid irregu-
lar corners (see Volume II, Chapter 4).
Critics of the capacitive polysilicon accelerometer 
still maintain that the integration of electronics is 
too complex and that a bulk-micromachined sen-
sor requires only twelve mask levels, whereas the 
polysilicon device requires twenty-eight mask lev-
els. Along this line, major Japanese companies have 
chosen single-crystal solutions for building accel-
erometers to avoid the difficulties associated with 
reproducing polysilicon material properties and the 
possible unknown long-term instabilities.
The pros and cons of surface micromachining (see 
Volume II, Chapter 7) can then be summarized as 
follows:
Pros
 
◾A surface-micromachined device has a built-in 
support, resulting in cost effectiveness.
 
◾Surface micromachining only requires one-
sided processing compatible with conventional 
IC processes.
 
◾Devices made by surface micromachining are 
smaller in size, have higher yields, and accom-
modate more on-chip circuitry.
Cons
 
◾The out-of-plane dimensions in surface micro-
machining in general is limited to ~2 µm, hence 
the light mass of the proof mass, resulting in a 
low sensor sensitivity.

[Page 564]
564   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 
◾The suspended Si structure is more compliant 
(due to the high ratio of length to thickness of 
the device structure) and hence has a tendency 
to stick to the support substrate, especially in 
overdrive situations.
As we made clear in the section on pressure sens-
ing, we believe that SOI surface micromachining 
combines the best features of surface micromachin-
ing with the best features of single-crystalline Si. 
The same benefit befalls the Bosch IMAPS process, 
which enables electronic integrations just as in the 
case of ADI (see above). Using dry etching to etch 
the proof mass from an epimaterial avoids corner 
compensation issues; the epimaterial ensures larger 
mass and single-crystal performance. This approach 
might overtake both surface and bulk micromachin-
ing as SOI wafers become less expensive and more 
available. A generic design of a resonant beam struc-
ture in an SOI wafer may be possible. This design 
could constitute the basis of a wide family of pres-
sure, acceleration, and angular rate sensors.
MEMS Angular Rate Sensors 
Introduction
First, some clarifications are in order about the defi-
nitions of an angular rate sensor, gyros, and acceler-
ometers. An angular rate sensor is not a gyro, but it 
is common jargon to refer to an angular rate sensor 
as an electronic gyro or even simply a gyro. In reality 
they are quite different, although one can be made 
to act like the other. Angular rate sensors measure 
angular rate (surprise!), i.e., how fast (degrees per 
second or radians per second) something is rotating. 
A gyroscope, on the other hand, is used to mea-
sure angular position (not rate), using the principle 
of “rigidity in space” of the gyroscope (see Figure 
10.30). For example, this is how the attitude indica-
tor (artificial horizon) of an aircraft works. A gyro-
scope can be made to measure angular rate (using 
the principle of precession), but that requires a finely 
calibrated measuring spring. Conversely, an angular 
rate sensor can be made to measure angular posi-
tion by integrating the signal over time. So, an angu-
lar rate sensor can be made to act like a gyro, and a 
gyro can be made to act like an angular rate sensor, 
but they do not act the same by themselves. Lastly, 
an accelerometer is nothing like a gyro and cannot 
be made to act like one. An accelerometer measures 
linear acceleration. Using calculus, this can be inte-
grated into linear velocity and position. The rotation 
typically is measured in reference to one of three 
axes: yaw, pitch, or roll (see Figure 10.30). The differ-
ence between an accelerometer and an angular rate 
sensor is that the gyro measures the angular acceler-
ation (how fast the rate is at which an object rotates 
changes) and the accelerometer measures how much 
something is accelerating (not angular).
As an example of how an angular rate sensor could 
be used, a yaw-axis angular rate sensor that is mounted 
on a turntable rotating at 33 1/3 rpm (revolutions 
per minute) would read a constant rotation of 360° 
times 33 1/3 rpm divided by 60 seconds, or 200°/s. In 
the case of an electronic angular rate sensor, a voltage 
proportional to the angular rate, as determined by 
its sensitivity, measured in millivolts per degree 
per s (mV/°/s), would be the output. The full-scale 
voltage range determines how much angular rate can 
Pitch axis
Yaw axis
Roll axis
Roll axis
Top
Top
FIGURE 10.30 Illustration of a conventional mechanical gyroscope and the three rotational degrees of freedom it can 
measure (http://www.brassgoggles.co.uk/images/brassgyroscope.jpg). Shown are gyro axes of rotational sensitivity. 
Depending on how a gyro normally sits, its primary axis of sensitivity can be one of the three axes of motion: yaw, pitch, 
or roll (see also Figure 10.31).

[Page 565]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   565
be measured. In the turntable example, an angular 
rate sensor would need to accommodate a full-scale 
voltage corresponding to at least 200°/s. The full-
scale range is limited by the available voltage swing 
divided by the sensitivity. The ADI MEMS angular 
rate sensor we will analyze below, the ADXRS300, 
comes with 1.5 V full-scale and a sensitivity of 
5 mV/°/s, so it handles a full-scale of 300°/s. One 
practical application of an angular rate sensor is to 
measure how quickly a car is turning. If the angular 
rate sensor, mounted in the car, senses that the car is 
spinning out of control, differential braking engages 
to bring it back into control. As we saw earlier, the 
angular rate signal can also be integrated over time 
to determine angular position particularly useful 
for maintaining continuity of GPS-based navigation 
when the satellite signal is lost for short periods of 
time, for instance, when the car is in a tunnel.
Before satellite-based global positioning systems 
(GPSs), there was the mechanical gyroscope: a reli-
able rotation sensor, based on the inertial properties 
of a rapidly spinning rotor. This mechanical contrap-
tion, which has been around since the late 1700s, is 
used for maintaining a fixed orientation with great 
accuracy regardless of the earth’s rotation, as shown 
in Figure 10.30. Traditional spinning gyroscopes 
work on the basis that a spinning object that is tilted 
perpendicularly to the direction of the spin will 
have a precession. The precession keeps the device 
oriented in a vertical direction so that the angle 
relative to the reference surface can be measured. A 
rotation in the frame thus imparts a torque (rota-
tion) on the spinning disk, which precesses (rotates) 
as a result (conservation of angular momentum). In 
other words, the flywheel’s large angular momen-
tum counteracts externally applied torques and 
keeps the orientation of the spin-axle fixed. Practical 
applications limit the movement to measure only 
one axis of rotation (roll, pitch, or yaw; see Figure 
10.30). Precision-machined mechanical gyros may 
cost anywhere between $10,000 and $100,000.
The ring-laser gyroscope, first discussed by 
Georges  Sagnac (1869–1926) in 1913 and demon-
strated in 1962 by Warren Macek of Sperry Corpo-
ration, quickly displaced mechanical versions for 
high-end and high-precision applications such as avi-
ation and is now even used in high-end cars. Sagnac 
discovered that light sent around a closed loop, in 
two different directions, would show a phase differ-
ence between the two beams when the loop is rotated 
(refer here to the discussion of the Michelson-Morley 
experiment in Volume I, Chapter  5, “The Lorentz 
Transformation”). The Sagnac effect is illustrated 
in Figure 10.31. The ring-laser gyroscope consists 
of two laser beams traveling in opposite directions 
(i.e., counter-propagating) around a closed-loop 
path. The pulse traveling in the same direction as the 
rotation of the loop must travel a slightly greater dis-
tance than the pulse traveling in the opposite direc-
tion. As a result, the counter-rotating pulse arrives at 
Start
End
Start
α
End
(b)
FIGURE 10.31 (a) The RLG. (b) The Sagnac effect: if two pulses of light are sent in opposite directions around a station-
ary circular loop of radius R, they will travel the same inertial distance at the same speed, so they will arrive at the end 
point simultaneously. This is illustrated in the left-hand drawing. The drawing on the right indicates what happens if the 
loop itself is rotating during this procedure. The symbol α denotes the angular displacement of the loop during the time 
required for the pulses to travel once around the loop. For any positive value of α, the pulse traveling in the same direc-
tion as the rotation of the loop must travel a slightly greater distance than the pulse traveling in the opposite direction. 
As a result, the counter-rotating pulse arrives at the "end" point slightly earlier than the corotating pulse.

[Page 566]
566   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
the “end” point slightly earlier than the co-rotating 
pulse. The constructive and destructive interference 
patterns formed by splitting off and mixing parts of 
the two beams can be used to determine the rate and 
direction of rotation of the device itself.
The fiber optic gyroscope (FOG) is based on the 
Sagnac effect and consists of a loop of single-mode 
optical fiber (often a polarization-maintaining fiber) 
and related coupler components, a semiconductor 
laser or superluminescent LED, and signal-processing 
electronics. The coupler components generally are 
fabricated in proton-exchanged LiNbO3 integrated-
optic circuits. This material is chosen for its ability 
to modulate the light beam for improved detection. 
The FOG, being a simpler device, currently is receiv-
ing more attention due to its potential to achieve the 
required performance at a lower cost than with ring 
laser gyroscopes (RLG) or mechanical gyroscope 
technology.
These instruments still cost about $1000. For 
example, the fiber optic gyro from Andrew Corp. 
(now KVH Industries) costs $950. It is a cylindri-
cal device that measures 77 mm in diameter and is 
88 mm long. The higher-end Honeywell Ring Laser 
Gyro (RLG) has revolutionized the way the world 
navigates on land, sea, air, and space. It is highly 
reliable because it has virtually no moving parts, 
replacing spinning mass with spinning light.
Interferometric FOGs and MEMS angular rate 
 sensors are changing the commercial landscape of 
gyros once again. We cover only MEMS gyroscopes 
(angular rate sensors really) here; they are con-
structed out of silicon (often SOI) and quartz, or 
they may be ceramic-based.
Market Perspectives
The requirements for inertial sensors, i.e., accelerome-
ters and angular rate sensors, vary drastically depend-
ing on the applications they are intended for. Figures 
10.32a and 10.32b give an overview of the main per-
formance requirements for accelerometers and angu-
lar rate sensors, respectively, in various applications.
In the late 1990s, inexpensive, solid state, micro-
machined angular rate sensors became the Holy 
Grail for many micromachinists around the globe. 
The same companies that made a lot of headway in 
micromachined accelerometers, such as ADI, are 
also at the forefront of Si angular rate sensor devel-
opment today.
In 2005, according to Yole, global MEMS-based 
angular rate sensors sales were $558 million,  and 
they were expected to grow by a CAGR of 11% 
through 2010 to reach $930 million. MEMS gyro-
scopes are included in three automotive applications: 
Antirollover systems, global positioning system (GPS) 
navigation, and electronic  stability control (ESC). 
These automotive applications represent more than 
70% of the MEMS gyroscope market. ESC is a rapidly 
growing market as these systems could potentially 
reach 100% adoption in new cars shortly after 2010. 
Current navigation system designs use a combina-
tion of global positioning (GPS) and CD-ROM maps 
in addition to wheel rotation sensors and angular 
rate sensors, or magnetic compasses. Angular rate 
sensors enhance the accuracy of navigation instru-
ments in situations where satellite reception is lost, as 
for example in tunnels, between tall buildings, and 
in mountainous terrain. The cost of current naviga-
tion systems is in the $200 to $800 range, and MEMS 
solutions are expected to reduce this cost further.
As in the case of accelerometers, once gyros make 
it big in the automotive markets, they also succeed 
in consumer electronics (CE). The sensor specifi-
cations in consumer electronics are much more 
relaxed than in the automotive application, but price 
erosion and product cycles are much faster than in 
the automotive field.
Five consumer applications integrate MEMS gyro-
scopes: camcorder stabilization, camera stabiliza-
tion, cell phone stabilization, video games, and 
navigation for small electronics. In 2006, Nintendo 
Wii’s motion sensing remote control gave, for the 
first time, public visibility to inertial MEMS. The 
new attractive human-machine interface in game 
controls such as the Wii is expected to penetrate the 
cell phone market as well. Five sensors are used to 
monitor orientation of the Segway scooter, sampled 
at 100 times/s. Sensors include MEMS angular rate 
sensors and liquid-filled tilt sensors.
According to Yole, quartz and ceramic substrates 
were estimated to account for 37% by volume of total 
gyroscope production in 2005. But most new gyro-
scope development programs were silicon-based, 
so this figure was expected to decrease to 28% in 

[Page 567]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   567
2010. For gyroscopes today, 4-inch wafers are still 
the dominant technology, but the share of 6-inch 
wafers is expected to grow to 60% over the next five 
years. DRIE and SOI increasingly are being adopted 
in MEMS gyroscope manufacturing.
The average price of a MEMS gyro in defense 
applications is 4–5 times higher than in automo-
tive applications and more that 15 times the average 
sales price of consumer applications. Defense and 
aeronautic applications include missiles guidance, 
general aviation instruments, platform stabilization, 
land navigation, and smart munitions in the future. 
Gyros are made today at ADI, BEI Technologies, Inc., 
Honeywell, Kionix Inc., Matsushita Electric Industrial 
Co. Ltd., Motorola Automotive, Murata, Robert Bosch 
GmbH, SensoNor ASA, Silicon Sensing Systems Ltd, 
STMicroelectronics, and TRONIC’S Microsystems SA.
MEMS Angular Rate Sensors
Being very small, MEMS gyros obviously cannot 
operate on the flywheel principle, as that scales 
with the mass of the flywheel. Even the best MEMS 
motors still quickly slow down and stop if not exter-
nally  actuated. The inertial mass of the small MEMS 
wheels is very, very small (mass moment of inertia, 
I = ∫ r2dm; with a fifth order expression like this, it 
becomes insignificant very fast when r is made very 
small). Furthermore, MEMS rotors cannot (thus far) 
be made so that they precess freely in three dimen -
sions. Instead, MEMS often take advantage of the 
Coriolis force to detect angular rotation. The Coriolis 
force, named after Gaspard G. de Coriolis (1792–
1843), a French mathematician, is an inertial force 
that must be applied to maintain a moving body’s 
Accelerometer performance
104
103
102
101
10–1
10–6
10–4
10–2
102
104
106
1
10–4
10–2
102
104
1
1
103
102
101
10–1
1
Acceleration [G]
(1G = 9.8 m/s2)
Earth gravity
Angular rate [°/s]
Earth rotation: 4.2 × 10–9 °/sec
Gyroscope performance
Bandwidth [Hz]
Bandwidth [Hz]
Shipping
Shock meas.
Smart ammunition
Smart ammunition
Airbag
Medical applications
Active suspension
Active suspension
Pointing device
Pointing device
Automotive safety
Head mounted display
Head mounted display
Navigation
Navigation
Space app’s
Med. app’s
Platform stabilization
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10.32 Overview of applications and required performances for micromachined inertial sensors. (a) Accelero-
meters; (b) angular rate sensors.

[Page 568]
568   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
course on  a rotating surface. Motion in a rotating 
reference frame leads to “sideways” movement. 
Coriolis showed that if the ordinary Newtonian 
laws of motion of bodies are to be used in a rotat-
ing frame of reference, an inertial force, acting to the 
right of the direction of body motion for counter-
clockwise rotation of the reference frame or to the 
left for clockwise rotation, must be included in the 
motion equations (see also Figure 10.33 and Volume 
I, Chapter  6, “Centrifugal Fluidic Platform—CD 
Fluidics”).
If the path of the moving body on the rotating 
surface is constrained, the constraining device will 
feel the Coriolis force (Figure 10.34). By measuring 
the imparted force (or its effect on an oscillator), we 
can measure the angular velocity. Almost all MEMS 
rate sensors use this feature.
The double-ended tuning fork (DETF), shown in 
Figure 10.35, is one of several structures that is used as 
the basis of a MEMS rate sensor based on the Coriolis 
force. One pair of tines of the DETF is driven into 
primary flexural vibration by a drive-oscillator, thus 
providing the moving body for the Coriolis force to 
work upon, as shown in Figure 10.35. The tines of the 
fork are made to vibrate in opposite directions but in 
the plane of the fork, which represents the primary 
flexural vibration mode. The Coriolis force tends to 
displace the tips of the fork out of this plane, forcing 
the tips to describe an ellipitical path as the rotation 
excites a secondary mode of resonance, a torsional 
mode coupling with the first flexural mode. A quartz 
DETF from Systron Donner (Concord, CA; http://
systron.com) exploits the piezoelectric properties of 
D
ir
e
c
ti
o
n
 
o
f 
r
o
ta
ti
o
n
FIGURE 10.33 Illustration of the Coriolis force. A person 
moving northward toward the outer edge of a rotating 
platform must increase the westward speed component 
(blue arrows) to maintain a northbound course. The accel-
eration required is the Coriolis acceleration. (From 2003. 
Analogue Dialogue 433–37.) New iMEMS angular-rate-
sensing gyroscope [John Geen (john.geen@analog.com) 
and David Krakauer (david.krakauer@analog.com), Analog 
Devices, Micromachined Products Division.]
If path is constrained,
the constraining device
will feel the Coriolis
force.
For oscillating body
motion (oscillation)
will be induced
sideways.
FIGURE 10.34 How to use the Coriolis force in a micro-
electromechanical system device.
Drive
tines
Pickup
tines
Pickup ampliﬁer
Filter
ampliﬁer
A
A
Ref.
Ref.
Synch.
demodulator
Support
Drive oscillator
Filter
ampliﬁer
DC rate signal
Amplitude
controller
−
+
FIGURE 10.35 DETF for a rate sensor. The DETF structure may be etched from quartz or dry etched in the epilayer of a 
silicon-on-insulator wafer and released by wet etching the oxide layer underneath (from an older version of the http://
www.systron.com website).24

[Page 569]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   569
the material to both excite and sense flexural and 
torsional vibration modes. The same company made 
a Si DETF; in this case, the DETF is dry etched out of 
the episilicon layer of an SOI wafer and under-etched 
by wet etching. To drive a Si DETF, electrostatic drive 
electrodes need to be implemented; otherwise, 
the device works just like the quartz DETF device. 
Although it gives up some accuracy, the Si device 
is considerably less expensive and has more than 
enough accuracy for many applications.
Daimler Benz AG, Stuttgart, Germany, uses a single 
tuning fork based on SOI micromachining technol-
ogy for angular rate sensing. The tines of the silicon 
tuning fork vibrate out of the plane of the die, driven 
by a thin-film piezoelectric aluminum nitride actua-
tor on top of one of the tines. The Coriolis forces on 
the tines produce a torque moment about the stem 
of the tuning fork, giving rise to shear stresses that 
can be sensed with diffused piezoresistive elements. 
The shear stress is maximal on the center-line of the 
stem: this forms the optimal location for the piezore-
sistive sense elements. The selling price of angular 
rate gyros such as Bosch’s surface-micromachined 
gyro and Systron Donner’s or Matshushita’s tuning 
forks was approximately $25 in 1996, and they were 
relegated to the top of the line model vehicles.
Other types of angular rate Si sensors, taking 
advantage of the Coriolis effect, are under develop-
ment based on comb or ring structures, and both 
surface and bulk-micromachined sensors have been 
demonstrated. A comb has the advantage of a larger 
capacitive area; however, the ring has the advantage 
of better vibration immunity.
One common comb design, as illustrated in Figure 
10.36a, for ADI’s ADXRS angular rate sensors, is a 
proof mass, which can move along the two in-plane 
Inner frame
Resonating mass
Mass drive direction
Springs
Coriolis sense ﬁngers
Coriolis sense ﬁngers
Coriolis sense ﬁngers
Drive ﬁngers
  self test
Inner frame
Resonating mass
Drive direction
Velocity sense ﬁngers
D
i
r
e
c
ti
o
n 
o
f 
r
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
D
i
r
e
c
ti
o
n
 
o
f 
r
o
t
a
ti
o
n
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10.36 (a) Design principle behind the ADXRS150 and ADXRS300 from Analog Devices. These yaw-axis gyros have 
full-scale ranges of 150 and 300°/s, but they can measure rotation about other axes by appropriate mounting orienta-
tion. (b) The ADXRS sensors include two structures to enable differential sensing in order to reject environmental shock 
and vibration. (From 2003. Analogue Dialogue 433–37.) New iMEMS Angular-Rate-Sensing Gyroscope. [John Geen (john.
geen@analog.com) and David Krakauer (david.krakauer@analog.com), Analog Devices, Micromachined Products Division.]

[Page 570]
570   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
axes through a suspension system. The suspended 
mass is surface-micromachined from polysilicon 
and tethered to a polysilicon frame so that it can 
freely resonate only along one of the two in-plane 
axes. To measure the Coriolis acceleration, the frame 
containing the resonating mass is in turn tethered 
to the substrate by springs situated at 90° relative 
to the resonating motion. With the resonating mass 
moving, and the surface on which the sensor is 
mounted rotating, the mass and its frame experience 
the Coriolis force. ADI’s ADXRS sensors measure the 
displacement of the resonating mass and its frame 
due to the Coriolis effect through capacitive sens-
ing elements attached to the resonating mass. The 
comb design in this sensing approach refers to the 
Coriolis sense fingers that are used to capacitively 
sense displacement of the frame in response to the 
force exerted by the mass. These sensing elements 
are silicon beams interdigitated with two sets of sta-
tionary silicon beams attached to the substrate, just 
as we saw for accelerometers in Figure 10.29b.
The ADXRS gyro electronics can resolve capaci-
tance changes as small as 12 × 10–21 farads (12 zepto-
farads) from beam deflections as small as 0.00016 
Å (16 femtometers). The only way this can be done 
in a practical device is by situating the electronics, 
including amplifiers and filters, on the same die as 
the mechanical structure. These subatomic displace-
ments are somewhat difficult to comprehend, as 
the individual atoms on the surface of the moving 
parts are moving randomly by much more. There 
are about 1012 atoms on the surfaces of the capaci-
tors, so the statistical averaging of their individual 
motions reduces the uncertainty by a factor of 106. 
So one might wonder whether we can do better by 
removing the air molecules to prevent their impact-
ing on the sensor. The answer is no. The suspension 
mass weighs only 4 µg, its flexures are only 1.7 µm 
wide, and this assembly is suspended over the sili-
con substrate. It is air that cushions the structure, 
preventing it from being destroyed by violent shocks 
and crashes into the substrate. The ADXRS sensors 
include two identical suspended masses to enable 
differential sensing in order to reject environmental 
shock and vibration (see Figure 10.36b).
Delphi25 and Silicon Sensing Systems (formerly 
British Aerospace Systems and Equipment), in col-
laboration with Sumitomo Precision Products 
Company, are using the vibrating ring gyroscope 
(VRG) approach to exploit the Coriolis effect.26 In 
the vibrating ring approach, a ring is flexured back 
and forth in resonant mode. The Coriolis effect 
induces a flexure that is sideways (and out of phase) 
with the driving flexure (Figure 10.37).
This principle is further detailed in Figure 10.38, 
which shows a wheel that is driven to vibrate about its 
axis of symmetry. Rotation about either in-plane axis 
results in the wheel’s tilting, which can be detected 
with capacitive electrodes under the wheel, as shown 
in Figure 10.38a. The Delphi-Delco CMOS integrated 
single-chip surface-micromachined angular rate sen-
sor is shown in Figure 10.38b. The micromachined 
ring shown here is driven into resonance in the plane 
of the chip and its vibration forms nodal points. 
During angular motion, the amplitude of vibra-
tion at the defined nodal points increases, and this 
vibration signal is fed back to reduce the amplitude, 
thereby maintaining a stationary pattern with nodes 
at the defined locations. Sacrificial micromachining 
fabrication techniques are used to allow the ring and 
Te Coriolis force
always pushes
sideways to the motion
of the ring.
Te result is an
eﬀective rotation of the
ring oscillation mode.
Vibrating
ring
Support
ﬂexures
Anchor
Electrostatic drive
and sense
electrodes
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10.37 Operating principle of the rotating ring gyroscope.

[Page 571]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   571
springs to vibrate over the surface of the IC. A scan-
ning electron photomicrograph of the earliest version 
of the sensor element is shown in Figure 10.38b. The 
micromachined ring sensor incorporates an electro-
formed vibrating ring structure fabricated on a sili-
con IC control chip. Sensors are vacuum-sealed at the 
chip level using wafer-to-wafer bonding. A vacuum is 
required since the ring sensor has to be driven into 
resonance for normal operation with a quality fac-
tor >1000. Semicircular springs support the 1-mm-
diameter ring and store the vibrational energy. The 
springs are attached to the substrate with a symmet-
ric post. The post/spring design greatly reduces the 
effect of packaging stresses on the sensor.
Package-induced stress has been a longstand-
ing problem for many other sensor programs. The 
Delphi-Delco angular rate sensor is a CMOS inte-
grated single chip and is used for automotive steer-
ing assistance, active brake control, and rollover 
detection.
At the University of California, Irvine, Dr. Shkel’s 
group is developing a new class of micromachined 
vibratory angular rate sensors, emphasizing struc-
tural design concepts to improve robustness, temper-
ature range, and shock survivability. These sensors 
combine comb and ring mechanical elements. The 
Shkel group has explored multiple degree-of-free-
dom (DOF) dynamical systems in order to obtain 
sensing structures that are inherently insensitive to 
fluctuations in operation conditions, such as tem-
perature variations, or shock loads.
The Shkel angular rate sensor, shown in Figure 
10.39, features a distributed mass architecture uti-
lizing multiple linear oscillators in the drive mode 
and a single central torsional oscillator in the sense 
(a)
Rotor
Substrate
Detection electrode
Z
C
(b)
C
y
x
FIGURE 10.38 (a) Operation principle of the vibrating ring gyroscope. This polysilicon surface-micromachined vibrating 
wheel gyroscope was designed at the Berkeley Sensors and Actuators Center. (b) Delphi-Delco complementary metal-
oxide-silicon integrated single-chip surface-micromachined angular rate sensor.
(Aa)
(Ab)
(B)
FIGURE 10.39 Microelectromechanical system angular 
rate sensors developed at University of California, Irvine. 
(Courtesy of Dr. Andrei Shkel.27) (Aa) Illustration of the 
distributed-mass gyroscope. (Ab) Scanning electron 
micrograph of a in-house fabricated bulk-micromachined 
prototype. (B) A prototype is packaged in forty-pin dual 
in-line package.

[Page 572]
572   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
mode. This design address a major technical diffi-
culty in the design of MEMS vibratory angular rate 
sensors, i.e., to keep matched frequencies in the drive 
and sense directions and eliminate structural cross-
axes coupling between the drive and sense modes of 
the sensor.27
The distributed drive-mode oscillators are driven 
in-phase toward the geometric center of the struc-
ture and are constrained in the tangential direction 
with respect to the supporting frame. In the pres-
ence of an angular rotation rate about the z-axis, 
the Coriolis forces are induced on each proof mass 
orthogonal to each drive-mode oscillation direc-
tion. Thus, each of the induced Coriolis force vectors 
lies in the tangential direction, and they combine to 
generate a resultant torque on the supporting frame. 
The net Coriolis torque excites the supporting frame 
into torsional oscillations about the z-axis, which 
are detected by sensing capacitors.
The multidirectional and axisymmetric nature of 
the drive-mode oscillators has several benefits over a 
conventional angular rate sensor design. Firstly, since 
the drive forces applied to the drive-mode oscillators 
cancel out in all directions due to the radial symmetry, 
the net driving force on the structure reduces to zero 
and eliminates quadrature error in the presence of 
structural imperfections. Secondly, instability and 
drift due to mechanical coupling between the drive 
and sense modes are minimized, since the structure 
allows complete decoupling of multidirectional 
linear drive mode and the rotational sense mode. 
The symmetry of the drive-mode oscillator structure 
about several axes also cancels the effects of 
directional residual stresses. The most prominent 
advantage of the design concept is the capability to 
provide a wide-bandwidth operation region in the 
drive-mode frequency response. By designing each 
drive-mode oscillator to have incrementally spaced 
resonance frequencies, a constant total Coriolis 
torque is achieved over a wide range of driving 
frequency. If the sense-mode resonance frequency is 
designed to match the center frequency of the drive-
frequency range, robustness and reduced sensitivity 
to structural and thermal parameter fluctuations 
are achieved. Consequently, the presented design 
concept results in improved robustness and stability 
over the operating time of the device, and it is 
expected to simplify the control architecture and 
relax tight fabrication and packaging constraints.
Conclusions
The automotive sector has long been a growth 
market for MEMS sensors with applications in 
airbag release, vehicle dynamics control, ABSs, 
antitheft 
systems, 
active 
suspension 
control, 
electronic stability programs (ESPs), tire pressure 
monitoring sytems (TPMSs), headlight leveling, etc. 
However, the industry continues to change and face 
new opportunities and challenges—regulations, 
saturation in some applications, and price erosion 
issues, to name a few. Today’s high-end vehicles 
feature up to 100 different sensors. About thirty of 
these are now MEMS based. The market is made up 
of accelerometers, gyroscopes, and inclinometers, 
as well as pressure and flow sensors. Emerging 
applications include infrared (IR) sensors for air 
quality, microscanners for displays, and, further out, 
MEMS oscillators and energy scavengers for TPMS.
Consumer electronics applications are growing 
very rapidly and likely will overtake automo-
tive MEMS applications. There is a convergence of 
requirements between the automotive and consumer 
electronics sensors. The automotive market can 
potentially derive great benefit from the advances in 
consumer electronics MEMS markets, but automotive 
accelerometer performance requirements are vastly 
more stringent than those of consumer electronics.
Although the electronics content of vehicles 
continually increases, the vehicle market itself is 
expanding more slowly than in previous years. The 
net effect is a steady increase in the value of the auto-
motive electronics market. The use of IC-compatible 
process lines for MEMS production is growing. There 
are clearly high benefits in using CMOS or BiCMOS-
compatible manufacturing lines to target high-vol-
ume MEMS markets. Some specific reasons to select 
monolithic integration as a solution are its cost 
advantages, commercial imperatives, performance 
advantages, and pragmatism. Nevertheless, hybrid 
solutions are still sometimes preferred, as they offer 
distinct advantages (more flexible manufacturing 
strategy, shorter development time, a simpler and 
more easily available manufacturing process, etc.). 
The integrated MEMS market share is expected to 

[Page 573]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   573
grow in the future. However, there are still bottle-
necks to be overcome (process standardization, 
MEMS is not always a large volume market, etc.).
MEMS in Medical and Biotechnology 
Markets: Bio-MEMS
Introduction
The per capita annual expenditure for health care is 
about $3000 in the United States, $3200 in Germany, 
and $2000 on average in Europe. The total world 
health market in 2004 was about $793 billion, and 
large segments include $280 billion for medical 
instruments and $484 billion for pharmaceuticals. 
In vitro diagnostics, surprisingly, represented only 
3% of the total world health market (i.e., $27.6 bil-
lion) (see Figure 10.40; Adams Business Associates).
The biotechnology market covers a large area and 
has vast and crucial branches among them. Some of 
these biotechnology branches are genetically modi-
fied food (GMO), antibody technologies, antisense 
technology, biomaterials, biopharmaceuticals, drug 
discovery, DNA arrays, environmental/industrial 
biotechnology, enzymes, gene therapy, genetic engi-
neering, genomics, informatics, instrumentation 
and equipment, molecular biology, pharmaceuticals, 
proteomics, tissue engineering, and wound care. The 
biotechnology market had strong growth in recent 
years,  generating a total revenue of $126.3 billion 
in 2005. It represented a compound annual growth 
rate  (CAGR) of 12.8% for the period 2001–2005. 
Currently, the United States dominates the market 
and accounts for 54.3% of the global market revenue.
Medical and biotechnology markets show strong 
promise for MEMS solutions in a wide variety of 
applications, as illustrated in Table 10.8. The medi-
cal/biotechnology application field of MEMS is 
referred to as bio-MEMS. In bio-MEMS, one deals 
with life-saving disposable diagnostic sensors, DNA 
arrays systems speeding up drug discovery, smart 
pills improving drug delivery, µ-TAS and LOC, 
etc., and most of those devices come with dispos-
ables. Therefore, the sales volume in bio-MEMS is 
expected to be eventually significantly larger than 
that for mechanical MEMS, where sensors are typi-
cally in use anywhere from three to ten years.
Progress in the medical and biotechnology 
area today is only to a minor extent derived from 
silicon-based bio-MEMS. It has become clear that 
the straight  application of Si technology is very 
often inadequate in this field compared with its 
success ful application in the automotive world or 
in mechanical and optical applications in general. 
Whereas in the automotive application the market 
for Si micromachined products is mature enough 
to warrant projection of realistic future revenue 
numbers, predicted revenues for micromachined 
sensors and instrumentation for biomedical and 
biotechnology applications mostly refer to specula-
tion as commercial successes still remain short of 
realization. In the bio-MEMS field, to succeed as 
well as mechanical and MOEMS did, one will need 
to develop mass manufacturing techniques based 
on very large batches or roll-to-roll manufacturing 
on paper or plastic substrates. Through a merging 
of traditional micromanufacturing methods (e.g., 
electroplating and micromolding) with less tradi-
tional methods (e.g., lithography) and continuous 
manufacturing methods (R2R), we expect more bio-
MEMS market breakthroughs.
Total = $793 billion
62%
3%
35%
Medical
devices
$280 billion
8% pa growth
In vitro
diagnostics
$27.6 billion
6% pa growth
Pharma
$485 billion
11% pa
FIGURE 10.40 Global health care market in 2004. (From Adams Business Associates, aba@a-b-a.co.uk.)

[Page 574]
574   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
After a write-up on the market character in this 
diverse field, we look at bio-MEMS applications in 
in vitro and in vivo diagnostics while highlighting 
bio-MEMS in biomedical microinstrumentation 
[micrototal analysis system (µ-TAS) or lab-on-a-chip 
(LOC)]. Micromachining efforts for building micro-
instrumentation are seen today as a better approach 
to solving chemistry and biology problems com-
pared with building more selective chemical sen-
sors. Some underlying reasons are that the resulting 
instrument may justify significantly higher costs 
than disposable chemical sensors and help solve 
the shortcomings of chemical/biological sensors 
by enabling calibration, separating of bound and 
unbound species, cleaning the detectors, filtering 
out unwanted compounds, and obviating the need 
for very selective chemical sensors.
We conclude with a summary on progress in 
µ-TAS and LOC in sample preparation for molecular 
diagnostics, as it is felt that this is the area with the 
biggest need for bio-MEMS innovation.
Market Character
In terms of the business climate and funding 
sources in bio-MEMS, the playing ground is uneven 
and depends very much on the specific medical or 
biotechnology niche addressed. One overall trend is 
a move away from the initial application of µ-TAS 
and LOC to high-throughput screening (HTS) to its 
current application to point of care (POC) diagnos-
tics instead. Even in the technology boom years 
(before 2001), it used to be difficult to raise money 
for in vitro diagnostic bio-MEMS work; for novel in 
vitro glucose sensors it was especially difficult, and 
for in vivo diagnostic devices it was harder yet. This 
was not only because the diagnostics industry is very 
entrenched and conservative but also because inves-
tors had already invested large amounts in that area 
with little return and because of the uncertainty of 
health care reimbursement. Moreover, disposable 
diagnostics were not necessarily perceived positively 
because of the waste disposal issues. Finally, one had 
TABLE 10.8 Medical/Biotechnology MEMS Applications
Drug Delivery Systems
Typical MEMS Example
Cardiology
Typical MEMS Example
Patches
Cygnus GlucoWatch 
Biographer (Figure 1.13 this 
volume)
Pacemakers
One- or two-axis 
accelerometers for activity 
monitoring
External and implantable 
pumps
Animas-Debiotech belt-worn 
drug delivery pump (Figures 
1.10 and 1.11 this volume).
Angioplasty catheters
TRW NovaSensor, Motorola, 
and Siemens offer disposable 
pressure sensor (<$1)
Smart pill
Smart pill (Volume II, Figures 
4.99 and 4.100)
Monitoring
Biotechnologies
Point of care testing 
i-STAT handheld blood analyzer 
(Figure 10.42 this volume)
Polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR)
Polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) efforts e.g., at Cepheid
On-line monitoring of blood 
gases
Dual lumen-based pH, CO2, 
and O2 sensor array (Volume 
II, Figures 4.92 to 4.96)
Genetic tests and 
therapy
Nanogen’s NanoChip (Volume 
II, Figure 8.51)
On-line monitoring of 
pressure
TRW NovaSensor, Motorola, 
and Siemens offer disposable 
pressure sensors (<$1)
Electrophoresis
Caliper and Aclara 
electrophoretic chips 
Liquid handling systems
RotaPrep’s CD sample 
preparation station 
(Figure 10.51 this volume)
Prostheses/artificial organs
Minimally invasive 
surgery
Orthopedics, ophthalmology
Nanotexturing of surfaces for 
enhanced biocompatibility of 
implants (Chapter 5, this 
volume)
Cutting tools
Painless ultrasonic cutting 
tools 
Neurology
MEMS neural stimulator probes 

[Page 575]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   575
to demonstrate a new diagnostic sensor/instrument 
80% toward a finished product in order to even be 
able to start talking to skeptical investors or conser-
vative large diagnostic companies.
In the case of drug discovery, investors were, up to 
2001–2002, more willing to take major risks at an early 
stage of the technology development. Significantly, 
from Figure 10.40, medical devices and pharma 
are a much larger market than in vitro diagnostics. 
Consequently most microfluidic start-up companies 
working on µ-TAS or LOC concepts were targeting 
drug discovery rather than the diagnostic area for 
early market penetration with bio-MEMS products. 
The 2001 downturn in the U.S. securities market 
greatly reduced the value of all of these companies, 
who must now make money the traditional way—by 
making products that someone wants to buy.
Today, the situation is reversed with diagnos-
tic applications more attractive than research tools 
for biotechnology. Diagnostic products are indeed 
more and more appreciated as important tools in 
reducing costs of health care. In the past, diagnostic 
tests were merely used as support data for the real 
diagnosis, often to confirm the physical diagnosis 
of the doctor or for legal protection that the correct 
procedures had been carried out. A major change 
over the last 5–7 years has been the increased use in 
true diagnosis and differentiation of conditions in 
order to achieve the best treatment, i.e., theranostics 
bringing together the diagnostic and pharmaceuti-
cal industries. The driving force for this shift in role 
for diagnostic tests is the large costs for health care 
throughout the world at a time when the economies 
are less robust. The attraction of investing in the 
devel opment of diagnostic products is being boosted 
by this change in importance and the recognition 
that the overall risks are reduced together with 
an earlier return on modest investments (Adams 
Business Associates, aba@a-b-a.co.uk). 
With this improved business climate, improve m-
ents in bio-MEMS fluidics technologies may find now 
a more sizable market in better diagnostic  systems, 
such as two-point sensor calibration schemes, sensor 
cleaning devices, sample preparation strategies (see 
further below), etc., than in HTS, where microfluid-
ics are often only a minuscule part of a large robotic 
system. Diagnostics is a mass market; HTS is at most 
a research market (see above in the section Preamble 
on the MEMS market). We believe that after more 
 significant progress is made in micro fluidic platforms, 
there will be a resurgence of interest in chemical and 
biological sensors and methods to manufacture them 
inexpensively for diagnostic applications.
Perhaps this will produce more i-STAT (from 
Abbott) type products. Abbott’s i-STAT, with its pla-
nar electrochemical sensor array for in vitro blood 
electrolyte and blood gas analysis (see below, Figure 
10.42), is one of the few survivors of the many com-
panies in the area of miniaturized diagnostics that 
were started in the 1980s.
The two most promising bio-MEMS areas in the 
short term are both in molecular diagnostics, and 
they involve sample preparation for DNA or RNA 
extraction from a wide range of samples with the 
same instrument (see Sample Preparation section, 
below) and the integration of DNA arrays with micro-
fluidics to speed up the hybridization reaction.
In Vitro Diagnostics**
Introduction
Biomedical sensors and instrumentation for in 
vitro diagnostics represent a huge opportunity 
for micromachining in the broad sense of the 
word, through traditional and nontraditional 
miniaturization methods, continuous manufactur-
ing methods and combinations thereof. To date, 
the majority of routine clinical tests are performed 
in large independent clinical laboratories with 
advanced, automated, analytical equipment. As the 
amount of resources spent on health care continues 
to soar, there is an increasing pressure for the 
decentralization of the POC and toward easy-to-use, 
miniaturized, inexpensive diagnostic machines and 
devices. It is in this shift that miniaturization science 
has so much to offer. With microinstrumentation 
(µ-TAS, LOC), one envisions that analyses will be 
performed significantly faster, without the need of 
* The diagnostics market (also called in vitro diagnostics) includes the 
instruments and reagents used for the screening, diagnosis, monitor-
ing, or prognosis of disease by laboratory techniques. The products 
are used in hospitals and private laboratories, in physician offices, 
and at other point-of-care sites (emergency rooms, intensive care 
units, outpatient clinics, nursing homes), as well as in home testing 
(primarily diabetic glucose tests and pregnancy tests).

[Page 576]
576   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
highly trained technicians (e.g., in remote villages, 
small health stations, etc.), only minute samples will 
be required, and dead volume in connections will 
be eliminated. Current in vitro diagnostic tests 
are categorized as clinical chemis try, blood gas/
electrolytes, hematology/flow cytometry, coagulation, 
DNA tests (molecular diag nostics), microbiology, 
diabetes, urinalysis, his tology/cytology. As shown 
in Figure 10.41, the worldwide in vitro diagnostics 
market was about $27.6 billion in sales in 2004, 
and the annual growth rate was 6% (see also Figure 
10.40, which shows that in vitro diagnostics was 
only 3% of the global health care market for 2004).
The main areas of above-average growth (>6%) 
in in vitro diagnostics, identified in the 2003 report 
from the European Diagnostic Manufacturers 
Association (EDMA; see http://www.edma-ivd.be), 
are shown in Table 10.9.
As examples of MEMS contributions to in vitro 
diagnostics, we detail electrochemical sensors for 
blood electrolyte and blood gas analysis, glucose 
sensors and DNA arrays. We also cover MEMS con-
tributions to the fabrication of miniaturized well 
plates, flow cytometry, and surface plasmon reso-
nance (SPR) sensors.
Other in vitro diagnostic applications are reviewed 
throughout the book. For example, contributions 
to the future of immunosensing were reviewed in 
Volume I, Chapter 7. DNA and protein arrays are also 
covered in Volume II, Chapter 8 (their fabrication and 
typical use), and the Nanogen electronic DNA array 
is covered in Example 8.2 of that chapter. Generic 
challenges concerning miniaturization in biomedi-
cal equipment, such as correct partitioning issues, 
were addressed in Chapter One of this volume.
Electrochemical Sensors for Blood 
Electrolytes and Blood Gases
Background: MEMS in Tabletop and 
Handheld In Vitro Diagnostics
During the past 25 years, the commercialization of 
MEMS for in vitro diagnostics failed to keep pace 
with earlier projections. We believe that an over-
emphasis on integration of chemical sensors with 
electronic functions on Si hampered the develop-
ment. We suggest speeding up the progress by apply-
ing micromachining tools more correctly. This 
includes nonsilicon manufacturing, hybrid manu-
facturing, and roll-to-roll manufacturing, as covered 
in Chapter 1, this volume.
Progress in sensors for tabletop diagnostic instru-
ments based on nonsilicon manufacturing tech-
niques has been significant. The fully automated 
Kodak Ektachem is a tabletop clinical blood ana-
lyzer based on planar electrochemical sensor slides, 
and it has been on the market for some time. The 
Ektachem, the Seralyzer from the Ames Division of 
Miles Laboratory, the Refletron Plus system from 
Total = $27.6 billion
Japan
$4.5 billion
Europe
$9.9 billion
Rest of world
$2.7 billion
USA
$10.5 billion
FIGURE 10.41 In-vitro diagnostic markets in 2004. (From Adams Business Associates, aba@a-b-a.co.uk.)
TABLE 10.9 In Vitro Diagnostics with Above-Average 
Growth (European Diagnostic Manufacturers 
Association, http://www.edma-ivd.be)
Glucose tests
>10%
Cardiac tests
>20%
Nucleic acid-based tests
>20%
Genetic testing
>>20%, but from a small base

[Page 577]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   577
Roche Diagnostics/Boehringer Mannheim (with a 
sixteen-test menu), the Analyst from E. I. du Pont de 
Nemours, the Nucleus from Nova Biomedical, and 
other, similar instruments all cover a wide range of 
blood chemistries.28,29 However, none of these prod-
ucts involve Si micromachining bio-MEMS tech-
nology. The progress enabling their development 
mainly was based on the development of solid-state 
stabilized reagents for so-called dry electrochemistry,30 
on miniaturized electrochemical sensors, and to a 
minor extent on advances in thin-film technology. 
Despite the many earlier claims, contributions from 
micromachining (Si-based or not) are mostly at the 
component rather than the system level, and many 
machining technologies are in the experimental 
stage. Systematic analysis of different machining 
options as advocated in this book (see Chapter 1, 
this volume) is only now starting to be applied. In 
the case of diagnostics, this leaves little room for 
Si-based technology. As a result of these analyses, 
one comes to the conclusion that bio-MEMS clearly 
counts as a fragmented set of supporting technolo-
gies rather than a monolithic new industry. 
It was anticipated that Si micromachining would 
play a more prominent role in the development of 
sensors for the smaller, next-generation, handheld, 
and portable diagnostic instruments. In reality, 
micromachining and Si sensor content in the more 
advanced, handheld and portable, biomedical prod-
ucts is also surprisingly limited. Some such products 
for analysis of blood electrolytes and gases on the 
market include the GEM-Premier from Mallinckrodt 
Sensor Systems, the similar STATPal from PPG, and 
the Portable Clinical Analyzer from Abbott (the 
i-STAT system), providing data on sodium, chloride, 
potassium, urea nitrogen, glucose, and hematocrit 
in less than 2 min. Another handheld instrument 
of interest is the AccuMeter cholesterol test from 
Chemtrak, designed to screen lipids to evaluate 
cardiovascular disease risk, and the portable blood 
analysis systems by Diametrics Medical Inc. (elec-
trochemical) and AVL (optical fluorescence). Abaxis 
introduced the Piccolo™ for general blood chemis-
try analysis, a small tabletop centrifugal instrument 
with a spinning reagent disk and optical read-out. 
Biologix Inc. developed the electrochemistry-based 
handheld pHacs STAT for blood pH, potassium, and 
oxygen.28,31 Of all these products, only the i-STAT 
sensors are Si based. The Si avenue toward tabletop 
and handheld instruments has been pursued for 
more than thirty years with little success to report. 
Innovation in biomedical sensors for in vitro diag-
nostics has come mainly from the invention of new 
chemical detection schemes rather than from clever 
new micromachining methods. Actually, in biomedi-
cal sensors, a reversal toward hybrid and continuous 
manufacturing methods took place rather than a 
move toward more integration in Si embodiments.
Blood Electrolyte and Blood Gas Sensors
For blood electrolyte (pH, Na+, K+, Ca2+, etc.) and 
blood gas (O2 and CO2) analysis with tabletop or 
handheld instrumentation, one wants to develop 
inexpensive, multiuse, or disposable chemical 
sensors. The principal approach so far has been via 
electrochemical technology. Microfabrication of 
electrochemical sensors, using IC technology, has 
been extremely challenging, mainly due to process 
incompatibility issues, packaging problems, failure 
to incorporate a true reference electrode, and the 
difficulties involving patterning relatively thick 
organic layers such as ion-selective membranes 
and hydrogels (see also Volume I, Chapter 7). Most 
researchers have come to the conclusion that for 
chemical sensing, especially for in vitro applications, 
a modular, hybrid approach rather than an integrated 
Si approach marks the road to progress. Of all the 
handheld biomedical analyzers on the market, only 
the i-STAT Portable Clinical Analyzer (Abbott, see 
http://www.abbottpointofcare.com/) involves Si in 
the sensor construction itself, primarily because of a 
historical production mode. Single-crystal Si, it was 
thought at that time, was the way to manufacture 
biosensors, and after the equipment investments 
were made, it was hard to reconsider. In Figure 10.42, 
we highlight the i-STAT instrument, together with a 
disposable sensor cartridge.
The Portable Clinical Analyzer from Abbott uses 
Si in the disposable chemical sensor cartridge only 
as a substrate and a contacting base; electronics are 
kept in the handheld reader, clearly a more economi-
cal approach than putting the electronics on the dispos-
able (Figure 10.42). The sensor electrodes, gels, and 
membranes are all deposited with semiconductor-

[Page 578]
578   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
type processes.32 Without electronics onboard, the 
continued use of Si as a support has mostly a histori-
cal explanation. It should also be noted that the flu-
idic channels in the disposable i-STAT cartridge are 
made from molded plastic and not with Si micro-
machining. Abbott’s manufacturing methods of the 
Si sensor chip in the i-STAT, after twenty years, still 
make it difficult to be profitable. This may be related 
to the manufacturing approach being silicon based 
and the design being integrated rather than modu-
lar. An alternative approach for the manufacture of 
a microfabricated, modular chemical sensor arrays 
is introduced in Chapter 1, Example 1.1. Epocal in 
Toronto uses a very different approach to making 
biosensor arrays compared to the methods used 
in manufacturing the i-STAT sensors (http://www.
epocal.com). Epocal sensors are fashioned on flex 
circuits in a single continuous in-line manufactur-
ing process. Flex circuits are adapted from industry 
standard smart card modules fashioned on 35 mm 
tape-on-reel format. The Epocal approach is very 
much the type of progress in biosensor manufacture 
we promote in Example 1.1.
While the number of new tools available for 
microfabrication, as gleaned from Chapter 1 of this 
volume, has grown dramatically, few methods have 
been gainfully applied to biosensor construction for 
clinical applications (some of these few methods 
have been reviewed in Volume II, Chapter 8). In 
contrast to mechanical sensors, where the excellent 
mechanical properties of single crystalline Si often 
tend to favor Si technology, the choice of the 
optimum manufacturing technology for chemical 
sensors is far less evident. For chemical sensors, the 
Si in the sensor often serves no other role than as a 
passive substrate. Consequently, the following trend 
emerges: whereas mechanical sensors (pressure, 
acceleration, temperature, etc.) are moving toward 
more integration embodied in CMOS-compatible 
surface micromachining, chemical sensors and 
biosensors are moving away from integration on Si 
and toward hybrid technology on plastic or ceramic 
substrates with silk-screening or drop delivery 
systems for the application of the organic layers.
Glucose Sensors
In vitro glucose sensing represents the single largest 
biosensor market, and a significant amount of all 
research and development in biosensors is geared 
toward improving this technology. Glucose self-test-
ing by diabetics is one of the fastest growing segments 
of the world diagnostic market (see Table 10.9).
(a)
Cartridge label
Sample entry
well gasket
Fluid channel
Cartridge cover
Sample entry well
Tape gasket
Biosensor chips
Calibrant pouch
Puncturing barb
Cartridge base
Air bladder
(b)
FIGURE 10.42 (a) The i-STAT portable clinical analyzer (now Abbott, see http://www.abbottpointofcare.com/) is used in 
conjunction with disposable cartridges for determination of a variety of parameters in whole blood. The analyzer stores 
up to fifty patient records and permits on-screen viewing of test results, as well as transmission of records to a data man-
agement system using infrared signals. (b) An i-STAT disposable cartridge.

[Page 579]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   579
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic metabolic disorder 
that is caused by a failure of the body to produce 
insulin and/or an inability of the body to respond 
adequately to insulin. Type 1 diabetes occurs most 
often in children or young adults and accounts 
for 5–10% of the diagnosed diabetes patient 
population. Type 2 diabetes, or adult-onset diabetes, 
accounts for 90–95% of diagnosed diabetes cases 
worldwide, typically developing in middle-aged 
adults. Diabetes effects approximately 170 million 
people worldwide and is increasing, with the World 
Health Organization (WHO) predicting 300 million 
diabetics by 2025. The United States alone has 20.8 
million people suffering from diabetes. This equates 
to approximately 6% of the population. Diabetes is 
the sixth leading cause of death in the United States 
(based on number of death certificates; National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases). The global diabetes market was worth 
$18.6 billion in 2005, which was an 11.5% increase 
from 2004 sales of $16.6 billion. The United States 
has the dominant share in the global diabetes 
market, with 49.6% of 2005 global sales. The 
large U.S. market share is mainly due to the large 
population and the high prevalence of diabetes, 
the increasing incidence of diabetes associated 
with Western diets and an aging population. Kelly 
Close of Close Concerns Inc. in San Francisco, 
a consultancy devoted to diabetes and obesity 
research, estimates that on the basis of industry 
estimates worldwide sales of blood glucose meters 
were almost $5.9 billion in 2004. Roche Diagnostics 
leads, with sales of about $2.3 billion. LifeScan/J&J 
is second, with $1.7 billion. Together they control 
two-thirds of the blood glucose marketplace. Bayer, 
with $800 million, and Abbott Diabetes Care, with 
$790 million, are neck and neck for third place. The 
worldwide market for blood glucose test strips and 
monitors is currently almost $3 billion, and the 
market is growing rapidly at a sustained rate of 13% 
a year (for some example blood glucose monitors 
see Chapter 1, this volume, Figure 1.7). The most 
prominent method currently available for collecting 
blood glucose remains the painful and messy finger 
prick procedure. The recommended sampling rate is 
four times a day, further discouraging compliance. 
The need for a painless testing glucose sensor 
(minimally invasive) is a challenge that many 
MEMS engineers have worked on. A new method 
that permits painless blood testing while providing 
results that meet current standards of accuracy and 
reliability is key to success (for two examples of 
blood/interstitial fluid collections devices, see Figure 
1.15a with a lancet for blood collections device, and 
Figure 1.15b for interstitial fluid collection using a 
laser puncture).
Three generations of glucose sensor technologies 
are reviewed in Volume I, Chapter 7. A breakthrough 
came with the 1987 introduction of the ampero-
metric glucose sensor by Medisense (now owned 
by Abbott), which proved that small, planar elec-
trochemical probes can compete with colorimetric 
paper strips. The Medisense/Abbott glucose sensor, 
the Precision QID (shown in Volume I, Figure 7.80), 
is based on an innovative mediator chemistry and 
a traditional thick-film manufacturing process. The 
sales of mediated amperometric biosensors now rep-
resents a dominant 65% of the world biosensor mar-
ket.33 A comparison of manufacturing techniques for 
these types of sensors reveals the difficulty of com-
peting using a Si-based approach. One often forgets 
that in biosensors such as glucose sensors, one is not 
competing with an expensive serial manufactur-
ing process but with continuous, printing-type pro-
cesses (see Chapter 1, this volume), making products 
even cheaper than in a Si type batch production. The 
cost target for a disposable glucose sensor is about 
$0.10, about a factor of 10 less than an unpackaged 
physical sensor die. Unless a significant performance 
advantage arises, Si technology cannot compete. It is 
our belief that, besides new chemistries, continuous 
processes to manufacture disposable electrochemi-
cal sensors will be the ultimate answer to the press-
ing need for disposable, inexpensive diagnostics (see 
Chapter 1, Figure 1.17, where we used the manufac-
ture of a disposable glucose sensor to illustrate our 
streamlined decision-making process). A way to go 
about continuous biosensor manufacture is dem-
onstrated in Chapter 1, Example 1.1: “Proposed 
Scenario for Continuous Manufacture of Polymer/
Metal-Based Biosensors.” Besides Abbott’s ExacTech 
blood glucose monitoring system, there are simi-
lar products by Johnson & Johnson (Lifescan) and 
Wampole Laboratories (Answer).28

[Page 580]
580   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
The future of the glucose sensing business is quite 
intertwined with new sampling methods. Research 
is emphasizing minimally invasive, noninvasive, 
and continuous monitoring of blood glucose levels. 
MEMS microneedles are under development for 
minimally invasive sampling by several research 
groups in academia. One example of a minimally 
invasive method, recently taken off the market, is the 
GlucoWatch biographer from Cygnus (see Chapter 
1, this volume, Figure 1.13). In this device, glucose 
is extracted through the skin by electro-osmosis, 
and the glucose is measured amperometrically.34 
Kumetrix (http://www.kumetrix.com) replaces  the 
typical lancet and blood-testing strip with a 
battery-powered, handheld diagnostic instrument 
using disposable MEMS cartridges, consisting of a 
microneedle with a cross-section of about 100 µm, a 
silicon cuvette (a chamber for the blood sample), and 
a small window. The device uses capillary action to 
painlessly draw approximately 100 nL of blood into 
the cuvette, where it is mixed with a chemical reagent. 
A laser then measures the glucose and the blood’s 
glucose level is displayed. The MiniMed continuous 
glucose monitoring system (CGMS; MiniMed Inc., 
Sylmar, Calif.) is the first commercially available 
continuous glucose monitor. Each sterile, disposable 
sensor (again an electrochemical type) used with 
the CGMS can provide a continuous glucose 
profile for up to 72 hours. Glucose concentration is 
measured in the interstitial fluid every 10 seconds, 
and an average glucose value is stored in memory 
every 5 minutes. A communications device enables 
data stored in the monitor to be downloaded and 
reviewed on a personal computer. A performance 
evaluation of this very promising technology is 
reviewed by Gross et al.35
The glucose sensor field became relatively stale 
after the introduction of the MediSense technology. 
A  promising new research direction is touched upon 
in  the  section on in vivo diagnostics below and 
involves glucose binding protein for the detection. 
Roe and Smoller wrote a very comprehensive review 
on the state of the art of bloodless glucose mea-
surements as of 1998,36 and a review of non invasive 
glucose monitoring was presented by Klonoff in 
1997.37 Heller and Feldman recently reviewed in 
vitro electrochemical sensors.38
The next generation of electrochemical sensors 
will be planar, thick-film, hybrid devices, which will 
have the cost and fabrication advantages of solid 
state technology but will likely still have some of the 
same limitations as present electrochemical sensors, 
that is, repeated calibrations to compensate for long-
term drift and the need for periodic maintenance. An 
important lesson in reviewing this micromachining 
application is that there is as much need for further 
optimization of deposition of chemical sensitive 
layers as for exploration of new manufacturing 
options. Investigating continuous printing processes 
for electrochemical sensor manufacture will be most 
rewarding in the future (see Chapter 1, this volume, 
Example 1.1). In the meantime, a modular approach 
with thick-film deposition processes is advisable. 
Some of the calibration and cleaning problems will 
be resolved by implementing more sophisticated 
plastic molded microfluidics.
DNA Arrays
Molecular diagnostics is another one of the fast 
growing in vitro diagnostic applications (see Table 
10.9). With microarrays or DNA chips, thousands 
of genes or representative oligonucleotide fragments 
can be arrayed on a single microchip and hybridiza-
tion with complimentary strands can be sensitively 
detected (see Volume II, Figures 8.16 and 8.17). The 
fabrication methods and uses of DNA arrays are 
reviewed in Volume II, Chapter 8. The two most sig-
nificant applications for DNA chips are believed to 
be in gene expression profiling and single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs). In expression profiling, the 
chip is used to examine the amounts of messenger 
RNA, which controls how different genes are turned 
on or off to produce certain types of proteins and 
cells. If the gene is expressed in one way, it may 
result in a normal muscle cell, and if expressed in 
another way it may result is a tumor (see Volume II, 
Figure 8.23). By profiling the minute variations in 
a person’s DNA called single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) and correlating these to a person’s ability to 
metabolize a drug, personalized drug therapy might 
become a reality.
When biotechnology started flirting with DNA 
arrays and microfluidics-based companies, the MEMS 
market character changed overnight. The opening 

[Page 581]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   581
salvo was perhaps given on March 2, 1995, when 
Glaxo Wellcome (now GlaxoSmithKline) acquired 
Affymax, a DNA array company, including its 
ownership interest in Affymetrix, for $650 million, 
before there was even a product on the market. 
This was uncommon for the “traditional” MEMS 
companies who had always needed to show product 
revenue and even then got rewarded with only 
modest initial public offerings (IPOs). Microfluidic 
companies that were early players in the DNA 
market fray include Aclara Biosciences, Affymetrix, 
Nanogen, Caliper, Cepheid, and Orchid. There is 
some overlap between microfluidics companies 
and DNA array companies, and there will be much 
more in the future. The author expects great merit 
in merging DNA arrays with microfluidics, as it 
will enable sample preparation for diagnostic DNA 
arrays and enable working from cruder samples for 
high-throughput screening or gene expression. All 
the listed companies did go public and enjoyed large 
capitalizations due to the explosive stock market and 
generous evaluations associated with biotechnology 
companies in general. The “technology bubble” 
of 2001 took down much of these gains, but it is 
expected that these array companies will recuperate. 
The wide acceptance in the United States of genetic 
testing is not about “if” but about “when,” and it 
will be a burgeoning bio-MEMS application. It is 
not clear today, though, what is the right format to 
present molecular diagnostic panels to the market; 
should it be in small panels and handheld readers 
for the point-of-care (POC) market with a variety of 
individual cartridges/test panels (say a chip to screen 
for population linked genetic diseases, a separate 
heart disease predeposition chip, etc.), or should it 
be a high-throughput robotized clinical diagnostics 
laboratory with hundreds of test panels?
Until large market molecular diagnostic tests, 
preferably with an instrument including sample 
preparation, become available, the importance of 
DNA microarrays in research for disease diagnosis, 
understanding drug interactions and determining 
drug candidates is expected to keep the DNA array 
market growing more slowly. Molecular diagnos-
tics today is less dominated by giant multinationals 
than traditional diagnostics, and tests are performed 
in many different specialty labs and are still quite 
expensive (from a few hundred dollars to several 
thousands of dollars), so there seems to be a more 
positive outlook for potential new players.
In 2005, revenue for the total U.S. DNA microar-
ray market totaled approximately $446.8 million, 
and it is expected to rise to $532.1 million by the end 
of 2012 (Frost & Sullivan). The compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) for 2005 to 2012 is estimated 
at 10.9%.
Protein chips are also expected to emerge, driven 
by advances in proteomics. Yet despite their apparent 
similarity to DNA arrays, protein arrays represent a 
much smaller market, precisely because they are as 
finicky as the protein elements spotted/patterned on 
their surfaces. The biological activity of the capture 
protein elements, whether antibodies or proteins, must 
be maintained. One has to be able to print them while 
preserving their activity, and for a commercial prod-
uct, the arrays have to be stable for years. As a result, 
there are relatively few protein arrays on the market. 
Those that are available come in two basic flavors: 
general protein arrays and antibody arrays. Protein 
arrays from Invitrogen, ProtoArray microarrays, are 
finding utility in various applications, including dis-
covery of autoantibody biomarkers, identification of 
novel kinase and ubiquitin ligase substrates, and elu-
cidation of protein interactions. Antibody arrays serve 
a different purpose. Available from such suppliers 
as Clontech, Thermo Scientific, and Sigma-Aldrich, 
these products enable protein profiling, examin-
ing how levels of several hundred proteins change 
in response to some treatment. Thermo Scientific’s 
LabVision antibody microarray includes 720 anti-
bodies, and Clontech’s Ab Microarray includes 512. 
Typically, protein samples are labeled with Cy3 and 
Cy5 dye, and this allows the arrays to be visualized 
using most standard DNA array scanners.
Miniaturized Well Plates
Almost any new fluidic platform faces the daunting 
challenge of how to either incorporate or displace 
the current standard method of dealing with small 
amounts of chemicals, i.e., the use of miniaturized 
well plates and associated liquid dispensing systems, 
as shown in Figure 10.43.
Economic and technological forces are driving 
the continued push toward further miniaturization 

[Page 582]
582   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
of assays in plate wells for high-throughput screen-
ing (HTS) or high-volume diagnostics (Figure 10.2). 
In HTS, the number of potentially useful molecules 
is increasing, and the time during which the discov-
ered molecules have a proprietary, strategic advan-
tage is decreasing—in other words, the evaluation 
of more samples in a shorter amount of time with 
finite resources compels miniaturization. The num-
ber of samples has increased dramatically, primarily 
because of the concurrent advent of combinatorial 
and automated synthesis methods together with 
more precise biochemical or genetic definition of 
targets using genomic approaches. A first step in the 
miniaturization process for HTS and high-through-
put diagnostics was from test tubes (1-mL range) 
to 96-well microplates (0.1-mL range) and, more 
recently, to 384-well (10-µL range) and 1536-well 
plates (1-µL range). With a 1536-well plate, ultra-
high throughput (arbitrarily defined as 105 samples 
per day) becomes feasible. There are some reasons 
not to miniaturize and push to 1536-well plates and 
beyond. Certain assays become impossible if wells 
are too small. Cell-based assays, for example, can-
not be miniaturized below 100–1000 cells with-
out cell-to-cell variability becoming the dominant 
source of sample-to-sample variation, and cells 
are hard to accommodate in microfluidic systems. 
There is also substantial capital investment required 
for laboratories that are not already outfitted with 
pipetters and automated systems capable of reliably 
addressing 1536-well plates. For reading, 1536-well 
compatible readers tend to be more expensive than 
those limited to 384 wells, and the speed advan-
tage of 1536 is difficult to obtain without expen-
sive charge-coupled device (CCD camera) detectors. 
Some assays will suffer degradation in signal-to-
noise ratio upon miniaturization (e.g., those that 
employ colorimetry), but many of the assays being 
developed have sufficient dynamic range to support 
a smaller format.39 Engineering challenges asso-
ciated with handling microliter volumes include: 
1) evaporation, which limits the time of exposure 
to ambient humidity air and can cause sample-
to-sample variability across the plate; and 2) fluid 
handling, which becomes increasingly difficult at 
smaller and smaller scales. As miniaturization pro-
ceeds still further, into the nanoliter-volume assays, 
evaporation becomes a much more significant issue. 
At a certain stage, a transition to fully enclosed sys-
tems, such as the microfluidic lab-on-a-chip (LOC) 
systems, becomes a necessity for evaporation and 
fluid metering. Xeotron developed the XeoChip, a 
bulk micromachined chip that contains thousands 
of three-dimensional nanochambers in an area 
smaller than a postage stamp (http://www.touch-
briefings.com/pdf/855/fdd041_applied_tech.pdf). 
Each chamber serves as a protected reaction vessel 
for DNA synthesis and subsequent bioassay for use 
with conventional microarray scanners. The same 
system can be adapted for the synthesis of RNA, 
peptides, and other organic molecules.
Flow Cytometry
Flow cytometry is a method for high-throughput 
measurements of physical and chemical charac-
teristics of cells and other microscopic biological 
particles. Typically, in commercial cytometers, opti-
cal measurements are made as particles are passing, 
single-file, through a sensing region. The particles are 
constrained to such a single line-up by hydrodynamic 
focusing. In this method, the sample flow is a 
narrow stream formed as the innermost flow of two 
concentric fluid flows (see Figure 10.44A). The faster 
the outer sheath flow, the narrower the inner sample 
flow is focused. Hydrodynamic focusing requires 
absolute laminar flow in all positions in the flow 
cell; from some high speed on, the inner stream will 
defocus through turbulence. Existing commercial 
FIGURE 10.43 The 300 DMC dispenser configured for 
 filling 96-well plates using eight different reagents 
 (http://www.varivest.com).

[Page 583]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   583
equipment requires frequent adjustment of the 
optical components, but simpler instrumentation is 
expected through the introduction of optical fibers 
replacing lenses for sample illumination and light 
collection. Shapiro and Hercher, in 1986,40 suggested 
integration of flow channels, optical elements, and 
signal conditioning electronics as the next step 
toward more user-friendly equipment. The first such 
attempts led to complex micromachined sheath flow 
cells; for example, a five-layer stainless steel/glass 
laminate41 and a four-wafer Si micromachined flow 
chamber.42 Sobek et al.43 have made a much simpler 
micromachined flow cytometer, which seems to put 
us back on the right track in terms of correct use of 
available micromachining tools. Cost consideration 
did result in a 30 × 15 × 1 mm chip made from two 
symmetrically machined HOYA T-4040 synthetic 
quartz (fused silica) parts. These two parts, bonded 
at 1000°C, define the ovoid cross-section of the 
sheath flow channel, the circular cross-section 
of the sample injector, and the ovoid measuring 
capillary (Figure 10.44B). A smooth, flat surface of 
the capillary is essential for ensuring good optical 
measurements in the measuring region. The quartz 
starting material used here comes in 4-inch wafers, 
just like Si wafers. This is an important point, as 
most processing equipment is built to take Si wafers 
only. The resulting cytometer can focus a sample 
stream, introduced into the injector with a syringe, 
to a 10-µm width and can maintain this focusing to 
a mean velocity up to at least 10 m/s.
The next step in this development would be to find 
the correct package for the cytometer and an inter-
face to the macroworld. Connectors to the sheath 
flow ports and the sample injection mechanisms are 
areas ripe for innovative approaches.
Surface Plasmon Sensor: Spreeta™
Many opportunities for innovative micromachin-
ing applications in optical immunosensors present 
themselves. A prime example can be found in sur-
face plasmon sensors (SPRs). Incident plane polar-
ized light at a specific angle can be almost totally 
absorbed into a thin metal film (e.g., 500 Å Ag or 
Au) deposited onto a prism, fiber, or waveguide sur-
face because of resonant coupling of the light energy 
into a free-electron cloud within the metal (see SPR 
theory in Volume I, Chapter 5). This effect is known 
as surface plasmon resonance and can be extremely 
sensitive to the refractive index changes surround-
ing the metal film. By adsorption of species on the 
metal film, the specific angle of the light needed 
to create the resonant absorption changes (Figure 
10.45).44 This adsorption could be from gases or the 
binding of macromolecules onto the metal film. The 
main limitation is that the sensitivity depends on 
the molecular weight, or more correctly, the optical 
thickness of the absorbed layer, meaning that small 
Starting material: HOYA
T- 4040 4 in. fused silica wafer.
LPCVD deposition of 2.5 µm
of polysilicon.
Photolithography and
patterning of polysilicon mask.
125 µm hot BOE etch
of fused silica substrate.
Electrochemical-discharge
drilling of through-holes and
removal of polysilicon mask.
Wafer-level alignment and
thermal bonding of two
matching parts.
Sample injector
Holes for
sheath
inlet
Capillary
Outlet region
B
A
A
B
(A)
(B)
(b)
(a)
Core
ﬂow
Sheath
ﬂow
FIGURE 10.44 (A) Schematic of a flow chamber for cytometry. (B) (a) Exploded view of a fused silica flow chamber. The 
top and bottom have matching injection and outlet areas with a capillary joining them. Through-holes in the bottom 
plate are for sheath inflow and outflow. The sample is introduced through the injector into the center of the sheath 
flow. (b) The fabrication sequence shown along cross-section A-A. (After Sobek, D., S. D. Senturia, and M. L. Gray. 1994. 
In Technical Digest: 1994 Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, 260–63. Hilton Head Island, SC.)

[Page 584]
584   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
molecules will not be good candidates. The SPR-
based “immunosensor” from Amersham Pharmacia 
(Sweden) is a general-purpose, expensive, and rather 
large instrument incorporating a prism for detection 
and four parallel flow channels in removable sam-
ple chambers (in 2004 Amersham Biosciences, was 
acquired by GE Healthcare).
A significant amount of research effort is directed 
toward trying to miniaturize this large optical system. 
Comparison of diffraction gratings and prism sys-
tems clearly indicates that the diffraction grating is 
preferable for miniaturization. Garabedian et  al.45 
attempted to micromachine the whole surface plas-
mon sensing system by implementing such a grat-
ing, but their resulting microinstrument is much too 
complex for manufacturing. An elegant alternative 
to both the grating and prism approaches may come 
from using an optical fiber or a planar optical wave-
guide. For example, Jorgenson and Yee46 simplified 
SPR sensing dramatically by using such a fiber optic 
approach. As a sensing element, they used a multi-
mode fiber with a section of the cladding removed 
and a thin layer of highly reflecting metal symmetri-
cally deposited directly on the fiber core (see Figure 
10.46a). This design has potential for simplified, 
robust, remote, and disposable sensing. Unlike tra-
ditional SPR measurements, employing a discrete 
excitation wavelength while modulating the angle of 
incidence, the SPR fiber optic sensor system uses a 
fixed angle of incidence and modulates the excitation 
wavelength. The refractive index can then be deter-
mined from the resonance spectrum in the reflected 
or transmitted spectral intensity distribution. In 
Figure 10.46b, the SPR sensing surface is enclosed in 
a flow-cell. Using micromachined planar waveguides 
in a flow-channel instead of the set-up shown here 
might result in a promising commercial product.
The most advanced example of a miniaturized 
SPR instrument is embodied in the miniature SPR 
sensor from Texas Instruments shown in Figure 
10.47.47–49 This sensor is also an apt illustration of 
“functional” packaging. As seen in the schematic 
in Figure 10.47a, light from a light-emitting diode 
(LED) is reflected from a gold surface in the LED 
42
43
68
69
70
71
Angle of incidence (degrees)
1.0
0.5
Reﬂectance
Air
Water
Variable detector
follows reﬂected
beam
Variable incident
beam
500Å silver ﬁlm
Antigen
Antibody
n1
n2
n1 > n2
Clean
IgG
IgG
a – IgG
FIGURE 10.45 Measurements with a surface plasmon 
resonance sensor based on a prism. (From Sutherland, 
R. M., and C. Dahne. 1987. In Biosensors: Fundamentals 
and applications, eds. A. P. F. Turner, I. Karube, and 
G. S. Wilson, 655–78. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford 
University Press. With permission.)
Surface plasmon
wave
Silver ﬁlm
Core
Xe Flash
Flow cell
Silicone
plug
Filter
Detector
Optical ﬁber
Cladding
78.5 – 90º
Sensed medium
(a)
(b)
Ln
Ln
Ln
FIGURE 10.46 Simplified surface plasmon resonance (SPR) measurements. (a) Illustration of the SPR fiber. (b) Illustration 
of the SPR fiber enclosed in a flow-cell. (From Jorgenson, R. C., and S. S. Yee. 1993. A fiber-optic chemical sensor based on 
surface plasmon resonance. Sensors Actuators B B12:213–20. With permission.)

[Page 585]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   585
optical plastic substrate/package and is picked up on 
a photodiode array embedded in the same package. 
Also contained in the same package is a polarizer 
for the light emitting diode and a temperature sen-
sor. A plot of reflected light intensity versus angle is 
read out from the linear diode array as illustrated in 
Figure 10.48. The current noise floor of the sensor is 
7×10–7 refractive index units. A beta-version of a car-
tridge-based Spreeta handheld instrument is shown 
in Figure 10.47c. Pricing for the disposable today is 
$30, and a handheld reader might cost about $250 
(one-tenth as expensive as a Biacore).
In Vivo MEMS Applications
Introduction
The many problems involving biocompatibility 
of in vivo devices were addressed in Chapter 5, 
“Biocompatibility and Surface Modification,” where 
we learned that micromachin ing might actually 
provide a way of rendering surfaces more 
biocompatible by patterning them. Chemical 
surface modifications are also discussed. After 
the retrenching from in vivo devices in the 1990s, 
progress in materials and bio-MEMS has been so 
swift in the last decade that the problem of in vivo 
Au surface
plasmon
layer
Au reflecting
mirror
Optical
plastic
substrate
Light
emitting
 diode
Polarizer Temperature
sensor
Photodiode
array
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 10.47 A miniature surface plasmon resonance sensor from Texas Instruments: Spreeta. (a) Spreeta geometry. 
(b) Packaged Spreeta unit. (c) Beta version of a cartridge-based Spreeta handheld instrument. (Courtesy of Dr. J. Elkind, 
Texas Instruments.)
FIGURE 10.48 Surface plasmon resonance curve: reflected 
light intensity versus pixel number on the photodiode 
array. (Courtesy of Dr. J. Elkind, Texas Instruments.)

[Page 586]
586   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
sensing is ready for a new attack. This move back to 
in vivo sensing is further made easier by the progress 
in miniaturized telemetry and micropower systems 
(see Chapter 9, this volume).
In Vivo pH and Blood Gases
The cost of disposable sensors for in vivo use is not 
as big a concern as for in vitro disposable sensors; 
size is more critically important because the smaller 
the sensor, the smaller the intrusion on the patient. 
It is estimated that a catheter-based pH, CO2, and 
O2 sensor array, as shown in Volume II, Example 4.2, 
“An Electrochemical Sensor Array Measuring pH, 
CO2, and O2 in a Dual Lumen Catheter,” may cost 
up to $250 and would serve a market of well over 
$600 million a year in the United States alone. 
Unfortunately, the warm, wet, saline in vivo 
environment perhaps puts forth the most severe 
environment in which Si sensors might be used. No 
Si-based in vivo chemical sensors are commercially 
available today. Biocompatibility is the single most 
complex issue facing in vivo sensor development, 
and it needs to be addressed up front in the sensor 
design. This is in line with our philosophy of starting 
a sensor design from the package. The package for 
an electrochemical in vivo pH, CO2, and O2 sensor 
typically is a dual lumen catheter modified to 
incorporate the sensor structure with the required 
chemically sensitive materials (see Volume II, 
Example 4.2). In building such a sensor, the author 
at  first neglected to investigate biocompatibility 
issues up front and instead concentrated on the emb-
edded micromachined electrochemical sensors.50 
The measurements obtained in saline solutions 
were encouraging, but the funding for continued 
research dried up before serious biocompatibility 
testing could be started. The development of the 
disposable in vivo pH, CO2, and O2 probe, the 
room-temperature micro electronic chemical smart 
sensor (RT-MECSS) took four years and $6 million. 
The RT-MECSS puts chemistry and electronics on 
separate planes while keeping the signal line as short 
as possible (see Volume II, Figure 4.99).51 The latter 
represents a considerable improvement over both 
ISFET and EGFET (see Volume I, Chapter 7, “Ion-
Sensitive Field-Effect Transistors, Extended Gate 
Field-Effect Transistors, and Isn’t FET”).
In Vivo Glucose Sensing
There have been many different technologies 
proposed for in vivo and ex vivo detection of 
glucose, and a number of ex vivo instruments 
and devices have been commercialized. While 
some of these, in particular the ex vivo ones (see 
above), have been very  successful, a technology 
that meets the requirements of continuous in 
vivo detection of glucose and can be coupled to a 
miniaturized responsive delivery of insulin would 
be superior. Insulin delivery systems that have 
been developed are  external and quite large in 
size. Ideally, miniaturized drug delivery systems 
would be in vivo and feature an integrated sensor 
for closed-loop control (see the responsive drug 
delivery pill in Volume II, Figure 4.100). Developing 
systems that are capable of both in vivo detection 
of biomolecules and delivering a drug is complex 
and requires the  merging of technologies from 
chemistry, chemical engineering, micromachining, 
biomaterials 
engi neering, 
and 
pharmaceutical 
science. For example, an ideal in vivo biosensor 
must be capable of long-term, rapid, reproducible 
detection of its target biomolecule at physiological 
levels, must be biocompatible, and must be amena-
ble to miniaturization/microfabrication. Also, the 
insulin delivery system, controlled by the glucose 
sensor, should be capable of fast response and hold a 
sufficient amount of insulin to justify the long-term 
implantation of the device. The low success level 
achieved in designing in vivo miniaturized systems 
so far may partially stem from the fact that when 
developing these systems, researchers have placed 
more emphasis on one particular aspect than on 
others. Some of the persistent difficulties associated 
with glucose sensors include manufacturing reliability 
and consistency, short life spans, and cost. The 
number of biosensors with demonstrated capabilities 
for in vivo sensing is also limited.52 Most sensors 
in the market today utilize glucose oxidase since 
the enzyme is stable and the cost is low. However, 
major disadvantages with using glucose oxidase are 
that a number of in vivo endogenous species are 
electroactive at the applied potential required for 
peroxide formation52 and the production of H2O2 
renders the eventual disintegration of these sensors.

[Page 587]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   587
As we saw in Volume I, Chapter 7, binding proteins 
associate with a particular analyte in a highly specific 
manner. Daunert et al. utilized this property in the 
development of reagentless optical biosensors.53–56 
Specifically, one of the many proteins of interest is 
the glucose and galactose binding protein (GBP). 
Glucose binding induces a hinge motion in GBP, 
and the resulting protein conformational change 
constitutes the basis of the sensor development. 
Labeling this protein with a fluorescent probe allows 
for the monitoring of this change without the addi-
tion of any external reagents or substrates. In order 
to obtain maximal signal versus background fluo-
rescence, it is important that the fluorescent probe 
be attached to a single site (e.g., a unique cysteine) 
and at a position where maximum conformational 
change occurs. This approach has been shown to 
yield sensors with improved detection limits.56
As mentioned above, the most undesirable effect of 
current daily glucose monitoring is the frequent finger-
stick glucose monitoring that the patient needs to per-
form. Even the more successful implantable devices, 
such as the MiniMed Continuous Glucose Monitoring 
System (currently being evaluated in several clinics 
throughout the United States), need frequent recali-
bration. This is due to the direct correlation between 
sensor response and the time-dependent enzyme 
activity. The use of GBP labeled with fluorescent com-
pounds that have a long lifetime can afford sensors 
with longer service lives. Lifetime measurements are 
dependent on the glucose concentration but indepen-
dent of the concentration of the fluorescently labeled 
protein present.57 Thus, since these sensors do not 
require an active enzyme, a reduction in calibration 
frequency can be achieved. It is this type of sensor we 
envision combining with the smart pill in Volume II, 
Figure 4.100 (pharmacy-on-a-chip).
µ-TAS and LOC in Sample Preparation 
for Molecular Diagnostics
Introduction
Micromachining and genomics parallel each other in 
perceived value to society and much is expected from a 
merging of both fields. Bio-MEMS, in principle, holds 
the potential to revolutionize molecular diagnostics, 
as it could lead to much more compact, potentially 
disposable, and well-integrated molecular diagnostic 
systems. As we saw in Volume II, Chapter 8, the use 
of photolithographic techniques has already perme-
ated molecular biology; they are used, for example, 
to make DNA arrays (e.g., Volume II, Figure 8.16). To 
enhance DNA hybridization speed, DNA arrays have 
been embedded in all types of fluidic structures. The 
principal advantages associated with a bio-MEMS, 
µ-TAS/LOC approach include the following:
 
◾Small instrument footprint
 
◾Multiplexing so that several analyses can be 
completed simultaneously
 
◾Microfluidics for fluid manipulation, often obvi-
ating the need for traditional macropumps
 
◾Excellent potential for integrating various com-
ponents onto the device
 
◾Reduced volume requirements for sample and 
reagents (often expensive)
Here we analyze specifically bio-MEMS contri-
butions for sample preparation in genomics. Like 
packaging in the semiconductor industry, sample 
preparation is an area that has been less vigorously 
pursued than developing the assay itself; perhaps it is 
perceived as somewhat less glamorous, as is packag-
ing in the IC industry. But, like IC packaging, sample 
preparation is of overwhelming importance to the 
end customer. The benefit in developing miniaturized 
devices for sample preparation in genomics is the low 
dead volume requirement associated with accuracy, 
costs of reagents, and small overall footprint, and the 
difficulty is having enough copies for the analyte to 
be detectable. The latter implies a flow system reduc-
ing the volume during the sample preparation step.
Types of Samples
Procedures for preparing samples for chemical 
analysis vary dramatically from sample to sample 
and from analysis to analysis. To reduce the com-
plexity of the discussion, we single out for closer 
scrutiny the challenges faced in preparing samples 
for molecular diagnostics. Specifically, we investigate 
the feasibility of performing sample preparation in 
a small-footprint integrated instrument capable of 
performing all the aspects of a common biological 
DNA assay. The preparation of biomedical samples 

[Page 588]
588   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
prior to the diagnostic procedure is often complex, 
laborious, and time-consuming. It varies, even 
within the more limited application of DNA testing, 
depending on the sample type, for example, urine, 
whole blood, plate bacterial cultures, serum, stool, 
tissue, etc. Today, the preparation of such samples 
involves several different instruments and intensive 
manual operations such as centrifugation, heating 
and cooling, mixing with reagents, filtration, etc. 
For most clinical diagnostics, sample preparation is 
actually the rate-limiting step. In the case of whole 
blood samples, red blood cells (RBCs) must be 
separated from leukocytes [white blood cell (WBC) 
count for 0.2% of human blood cells: 1 µL of whole 
blood contains 5 × 106 RBCs and 7 × 103 WBCs) and 
other cells (bacteria, virus particles, etc.). Red blood 
cells do not have nuclei, the source of nucleic acids, 
but they do contain contaminants, which interfere 
with nucleic acid amplification [polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR)] and other enzymatic manipulations 
(e.g., both proteins and metal complexes such 
as hemoglobin bind with nucleic acid). Isolated 
leukocytes and bacteria samples must be lysed 
before the extraction of nucleic acid can take place. 
A traditional procedure for blood DNA isolation 
comprises separation of the white cell fraction from 
the whole blood, lysis with detergent, and digestion 
of proteins with proteinase K (1–6 hours) to purify 
the target material from contaminating proteins, 
followed by extraction with phenol-chloroform and 
precipitation of DNA with alcohol. DNA is not soluble 
at high ethanol concentrations, so it precipitates out 
as long strands. Salts, such as sodium chloride, also 
greatly aid in precipitating DNA. Tissue samples 
primarily contain cells and connective tissue, which 
also must be degraded before DNA extraction. The 
first step in the DNA extraction procedure from 
tissue is typically to boil a small amount of the 
tissue in a 5% Chelex solution. The boiling helps to 
break up the cells in the preparation and denatures 
proteins. The Chelex protects the DNA sample from 
DNAases*
* that might remain after the boiling and 
* DNAases are enzymes that occur naturally in all body tissues. They 
cut DNA, rendering it unsuitable for PCR. Magnesium ions are essen-
tial cofactors for DNAases. Chelex resin binds with cations, including 
Mg 2+. By binding with the magnesium ions, the Chelex resin renders 
DNAases inoperable, thus protecting DNA from their action.
that could subsequently contaminate the samples. In 
the diagnostic approach of the future one envisions 
a small footprint instrument and a test specific 
disposable cartridge providing a “sample to answer” 
solution.
General Sample Preparation Protocols
Sample Size
Miniaturization is a mixed blessing in the case of 
the amount of sample required to detect a given 
analyte concentration. That volume is determined 
by the following:
 
V
1
N C
A
i
= η
 
(10.1)
where η =  sensor efficiency, with a value between 1 
and 0
NA = Avogadro’s number (6.02 × 1023 mol–1)
Ci = the concentration of analyte i (moles/L)58 
The sample volume required is fundamentally 
dictated by the concentration of the analyte one 
wants to measure. Manz et al. examined the use 
of very small sample sizes and concluded that 
microfluidics is a desirable approach for many 
diagnostic applications.59 They summed up their 
analysis in a graph of target analyte concentration 
versus required sample volume. This graph shows 
that many biological chemicals associated with 
clinical chemistry assays (between 1014 and 1020 
copies/mL) and immunoassays (between 107 and 1018 
copies/mL) might be readily assayed with very small 
sample volumes, in the range between picoliters and 
microliters. However, Petersen et al. pointed out that 
numerous chemicals (and organisms) are routinely 
present at much lower concentrations, from less than 
100 to 107 copies/mL.58 These low-concentration 
samples include most sources of DNA, which must 
be detected and analyzed in a growing number 
of new diagnostic tests. In Figure 10.49, Petersen 
et  al. expand the boundaries of Manz’s original 
graph, which spanned a concentration range from 
108 to 1021 copies/mL and a volume range from 10 
mL to 10–18 L, and clearly show that the minimum 
sample volume required for accurate DNA assays is a 
relatively large volume of 100 µL.

[Page 589]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   589
The amount of original sample required, 
depending on the analysis method, and the number 
of DNA copies needed for detection may range 
from some microliters to several tens of milliliters. 
Figure 10.49 demonstrates that typical clinical 
chemistry assays (between 1014 and 1020 copies/mL) 
and immunoassays (between 107 and 1018 copies/
mL) are readily carried out with very small sample 
volumes, in the picoliters and microliters range, but 
numerous DNA assays deal with less than 100 to 
107 copies/mL60 and may require milliliter sample 
volumes. To summarize, modern DNA diagnostic 
assays face mounting demands to detect organisms 
or DNA mutations at very low concentrations, often 
less than 100 copies per milliliter, in raw biological 
samples such as blood or urine. Such sensitivity 
requirements set fundamental physical limitations 
on the minimum quantities of the starting sample. 
Using the current nucleic acid hybridization formats 
and stringency control methods, it remains difficult 
to detect low copy number nucleic acid targets even 
with the most sensitive reporter groups (enzyme, 
fluorophores, radioisotopes) and associated detec-
tion systems (fluorometers, luminometers, photon 
counters, scintillation counters), necessitat ing a DNA 
amplification step, for example, using polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) (see Chapter 2, “Polymerase 
Chain Reaction”). PCR is usually considered sensi tive 
enough to detect as few as twenty copies of a target 
in any given, purified, biological sample. But if the 
required assay sensitivity is 100 copies per mL, then 
a minimum of 200 µL of the original sample must be 
processed to ensure statistical confidence in the result 
of the assay. If microfluidics and small PCR chambers 
are used, this means that DNA preconcentration is 
needed, for example, on silica-type capture surfaces 
6 × 1020
6 × 1018
6 × 1016
6 × 1014
6 × 1012
6 × 1010
6 × 108
6 × 106
6 × 104
600
6
100
10–2
10–4
10–6
10–8
10–10
10–12
10–14
10–16
10–18
10–20
10–18
10–16
10–14
10–12
10–10 10–8
10–6
10–4
10–2
1
Picoliter
(10 µm)3
Nanoliter
(0.1 mm)3
(100 µm)3
Microliter
(1 mm)3
Milliliter
(1 cm)3
Sample volume
Perfect
detection and
statistical
conﬁdence
Less than
one molecule
per sample
Viral
load
DNA
probe
assays
Clinical chem
Immunoassays
Fluorescence
detection range
Moles/L
Copies/mL
FIGURE 10.49 Sample volume. Scaling of concentrations and volumes.58 (Courtesy of Dr. Kurt Petersen, Cepheid.)

[Page 590]
590   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
or on arrays of micromachined Si posts.60 The latter 
reduces the sample size from macro to micro, which 
can be accommodated in a microsystem by using 
some type of a flow system. A modular approach, 
with a variety of disposable cartridges containing 
different fluidic options and sensor chemistries 
in a small fixed instrument, is the most probable 
solution.
Lysing
Sample preparation for DNA analysis in an inte-
grated device includes releasing the nucleic acid 
from the sample by cell disruption or lysis, remov-
ing contaminants (purification), and recovering/
concentrating the nucleic acid. There are many 
mechanical and nonmechanical cell lysis or disrup-
tion methods available. The results of these may 
be evaluated in terms of the activity level of a cel-
lular enzyme released to the suspending medium 
measuring the efficiency of the disrupting process. 
We briefly review both types of lysing approaches 
and consider their relative merit for integration in 
microsystems.
Mechanical Methods
Currently, in large nonintegrated tabletop equip-
ment, intracellular products are released from 
microorganisms or tissue mainly by mechanical dis-
ruption of the cells. In this process, the cell enve-
lope is physically broken, releasing all intracellular 
components into the surrounding medium. There 
are several types of equipment for mechanical cell 
disruption commercially available. In a high-pres-
sure homogenizer, a pump forces slurry of sample 
through a restricted orifice valve. High pressure (up 
to 1500 bar) is followed by an instant expansion 
through a special exiting nozzle. Cell disruption is 
accomplished by three different mechanisms in this 
system: impingement on the valve, high liquid shear 
in the orifice, and sudden pressure drop upon dis-
charge, finally causing an explosion of the cell. This 
approach, although very efficient at cell disruption, 
is difficult to miniaturize. In a bead mill, cells are 
agitated in suspension with small abrasive particles. 
Cells break because of shear forces, grinding between 
beads, and collisions with beads. This approach is 
slightly more amenable to miniaturization. Another 
widely applied method is cell lysis through high-fre-
quency ultrasound. These devices generate intense 
sonic pressure waves in liquid media. Under the 
right conditions, the pressure waves cause formation 
of microbubbles, which grow and collapse violently. 
Called cavitation, the implosion generates a shock 
wave with enough energy to break cell membranes. 
Modern ultrasonic processors use piezoelectric gen-
erators made of lead zirconate titanate crystals (see 
Chapter 8, this volume). Vibrations are transmitted 
down a titanium metal horn or probe tuned to make 
the processor unit resonate at 15–25 kHz. A rela-
tively new development is a cordless ultrasonic pro-
cessor supplied by BioSpec Products (Bartlesville, 
OK). With a tip diameter of 1/8 inch, it easily fits 
into microtubes and ninety-six-well titer plates. 
Ultrasonic disintegrators generate considerable 
heat during processing. For this reason, the sample 
should be kept ice-cold, and one should be aware 
that free radicals can be generated during sonication 
and that these radicals may react with biomolecules. 
Ultrasonic disruption is an attractive approach for 
miniaturization of the cell lysis process.
Mechanical disruption methods suffer several 
drawbacks. Because cells are broken completely, 
all intracellular materials are released. Therefore, 
the DNA must be separated from a complex mix-
ture of proteins and cell wall fragments. Cell debris 
produced by mechanical lysis often consists of very 
small fragments, making the solution difficult to 
clarify. Moreover, complete product release often 
requires more than one pass through the mem-
brane disruption device, exacerbating the problem 
by further reducing the size of the fragments. These 
fragments are difficult to remove by continuous 
centrifugation because the throughput of a centri-
fuge is inversely related to the square of the particle 
diameter. Filtration is complicated by the gelati-
nous nature of the homogenate and by its tendency 
to foul membranes. Because of these drawbacks, 
several nonmechanical cell lysis approaches have 
gained favor.
Nonmechanical Methods
Nonmechanical lysis includes thermal, electronic, 
and chemical methods. Chemical permeabilization 

[Page 591]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   591
of cells can be achieved in numerous ways.61,62 
The most important are enzymatic lysis (e.g., with 
lysozyme), detergents, and osmotic shock. Chemical 
methods extract intracellular components from 
microorganisms by permeabilizing outer cell wall 
barriers. This can be achieved with organic solvents 
that act by creation of channels through the cell 
membrane. Some of the solvents that have been used 
for this purpose are toluene, ether, phenylethyl alco-
hol, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), benzene, metha-
nol, and chloroform.
Chemical permeabilization can also be achieved 
with antibiotics, thionins, surfactants (e.g., NP-40, 
Triton X-100, Brij, Duponal, CHAPS, SDS, etc.), 
chaotropic agents, and chelates. An important 
example in the latter category is EDTA, widely 
used 
for 
permeabilization 
of 
Gram-negative 
microorganisms. Its effectiveness is a result of its 
ability to bond the divalent cations Ca++ and Mg++. 
These cations stabilize the structure of outer cell 
membranes, by bonding the lipopolysaccharides 
to each other. Once these cations are removed 
by EDTA, the lipopolysaccharides are removed, 
resulting in increased permeability of the outer 
cell walls. Chaotropic agents, such as urea and 
guanidine, are capable of bringing hydrophobic 
compounds into aqueous solutions. The relative 
ability of various anions to influence the structural 
stability of protein (and DNA) in general follows the 
series F − < SO4
2 − < Cl − < Br − < I − < ClO−
4 < SCN − < 
Cl3CCOO −. This ranking is known as the Hofmeister 
series or chaotropic series. Fluoride, chloride, and 
sulfate salts are structure stabilizers, whereas the 
salts of other anions are structure destabilizers. 
Salts that stabilize proteins enhance hydration 
of proteins and bind weakly, whereas salts that 
destabilize proteins decrease protein hydration 
and bind strongly. In other words, the denaturing 
effect of chaotropic salts is related to destabilization 
of hydrophobic interactions in proteins. High 
concentrations (6–8 M) of compounds that tend to 
break hydrogen bonds, such as urea and guanidine 
salts, also cause denaturation of proteins. These 
substances apparently disrupt hydrogen bonds 
which hold the protein in its unique configuration. 
However, there also is evidence suggesting that 
urea and guanidine hydrocholoride may disrupt 
hydrophobic interactions by promoting the solubility 
of hydrophobic residues in aqueous solutions. 
Detergents break open (lyse) cells by destroying the 
fatty membrane that encloses them. This releases 
the cell contents, including DNA, into the solution. 
Detergents also help to strip away proteins that 
may  be associated with the DNA. Enzymes can 
also  be employed to permeabilize cells, but this 
method is often limited. Enzymes used for enzy-
matic permeabilization are glycanases, proteases, 
and mannase. The main drawbacks of employing 
enzymatic means for recovering intracellular prod -
ucts in large-scale processes are cost and the necessity 
of removing the lysing enzyme from the product. 
Basic proteins, such as protamine, or the  cationic 
polysaccharide chitosan can permeabilize yeast 
cells. Antibiotics that affect bacterial cell-wall 
biosynthesis, causing loss of viability and often cell 
lysis (penicillins and cephalosporins, bacitracin, 
cycloserine, vancomycin), may also be used. 
Similarly, mammalian cells can be permeabilized 
by exposure to several natural substances such as 
streptolysin or even viruses.
While cells exposed to slowly varying extracellu-
lar osmotic pressure are usually able to adapt to such 
changes, cells exposed to rapid changes in external 
osmolarity can be mechanically injured. This pro-
cedure is typically conducted by first allowing the 
cells to equilibrate internal and external osmotic 
pressure in a high-sucrose medium and then rapidly 
diluting away the sucrose. The resulting immediate 
overpressure of the cytosol is assumed to damage 
the cell membrane.
Repeated freezing and thawing will thermally lyse 
a cell, and in some instances, the target DNA may be 
released by elevating temperatures simultaneously 
with the denaturing step performed in PCR.63
Electronic lysis of cells has been reported by 
Cheng et al.64 and Lee and Tai.65 Of the different 
types of nonmechanical lysing, the electronic and 
thermal approach is the most amenable to minia-
turization. Chemical approaches should be ranked 
according to the amounts of chemicals required; the 
lesser the amount, the more suited the approach to 
miniaturization
Table 10.10 summarizes some lysis methods and 
subsequent purification and recovery steps.

[Page 592]
592   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Examples of Integrated Sample Preparation
Over the last ten years, several attempts have been 
made to miniaturize molecular diagnostics, inclu-
sive of sample preparation, in the areas of biological 
warfare agents and point of care.58,66–74 These efforts 
involve microfluidic systems, in which the entire pro-
tocol from sample collection through PCR, and in 
several cases all the way to detection, is embedded in 
one integrated instrument. In Table 10.11 we review a 
few of these prototype DNA analysis devices (expanded 
from Yuen et al.75). Extensive efforts pertain to isolat-
ing white blood cells from whole blood through the 
use of micromachined filters (arrays of posts, tortu-
ous channels, comb-shape, and weir-type)66,76,77 and 
different designs of silicon microfilters (3–10 µm) 
across microchannels.78,79 All these designs feature a 
high efficiency for separating red from white blood 
cells. More recently, Yuen et al.75 CNC-machined a 
Plexiglas-based module integrating white blood cell 
separation and nucleic acid amplification reactions. 
This module comprises a heater-cooler for thermal 
cycling and a series of 254 × 254 µm microchannels 
for transporting human blood and reagents in and 
out of an 8–9-µL dual-purpose (cell separation and 
PCR) glass-silicon microchip. The filter in this case 
was of the weir type (3.5-µm filter gap). A region in 
the human coagulation Factor V gene (226-bp) was 
directly amplified by the microchip-based PCR from 
DNA released from white blood cells isolated from 
the weir filter section.
In the sample preparation approach of the company 
Tecan Boston (now defunct), a compact disc (CD) 
(the LabCD; see Volume I, Figure 6.88 and Figure 
10.50 below), was used as a sample preparation 
stage (see also Table 10.11 below). The physics 
behind this centrifugal microfluidic platform is 
covered in Volume I, Chapter 6, and its prototyping 
is detailed in Chapter 5, this volume. The Tecan 
Boston prototype combined sample preparation and 
PCR, while detection was performed separately on 
an ethidium-bromide-stained gel electrophoresis 
slab. The disposable disc is shown in Figure 10.50. 
The sample preparation protocol employed is as 
follows: 1) mixing raw sample (5 µL of whole blood 
or Escherichia coli suspension) with 5 µL of 10 mM 
NaOH; 2) heating to 95°C for 1–2 minutes to lyse cells, 
releasing DNA and denaturing proteins inhibitory 
to PCR; 3) neutralization of lysate by mixing 
with 5 µL of 16 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5); 4) mixing 
of neutralized lysate with 8–10 µL of liquid PCR 
reagents and user-selected primers; and 5) thermal 
cycling. Samples of whole blood or E. coli were run 
on the discs shown in Figure 10.50 using a rotational 
profile that sequentially drives fluids past capillary 
valves d, through mixing channels e, to receiving 
reservoirs. Reservoirs a, b, and c contain sample, 
NaOH, and Tris-HCl, respectively. At the lowest rpm, 
TABLE 10.10 Cell Lysis, DNA Purification, and Recovery
Process
Technical 
Difficulty
Costs
Efficiency
Ease of Miniaturization
Lysis
Mechanical
High
High
High
Of the mechanical lysis methods reviewed, ultrasonic is 
most amenable
Chaotropic
Medium
Medium
Medium
Depends strongly on the volume of reagents involved
Thermal
Low
Low
Low
Easy to miniaturize (sometimes this step can be combined 
with polymerase chain reaction)
Purification
Ion exchange
Medium
Medium
High
Easy to implement on a miniaturized platform
Beads
Medium
Medium
Medium
Somewhat more cumbersome 
Molecular weight 
cutoff membranes
Low
Low
Low
Easy to implement on a miniaturized platform
Recovery
Silica elution
Low
Low
High
If a flow-through system is used, miniaturization of 
low-salt buffer is easy to accommodate
Bead elution
Low
Low
Medium
More cumbersome
Membrane elution
Low
Low
Low
Easiest to miniaturize

[Page 593]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   593
TABLE 10.11 Prototype Integrated DNA Analysis Devices
Sample Preparation
Biochemical Reactions
Detection
Fabrication Methods for 
Device
Source
RNA purification from 1 
mL of serum samples 
spiked with different 
copy numbers of an 
RNA transcript that 
contained a partial HIV 
sequence
Reverse transcription-
PCR, nested PCR, DNase 
fragmentation and 
dephosphorylation, and 
terminal transferase 
labeling
GeneChip 
hybridization
Conventional CNC 
machining
Anderson et al.67
White blood cells 
isolation from <3 µL of 
human whole blood
PCR using integrated 
heater-cooler to provide 
thermal cycling
Not applicable
Conventional CNC 
machining (standard 
microfabrication 
techniques for 
microchips)
Plexiglas microchip 
module75
5 µL of whole blood or E. 
coli suspension
PCR using thermoelectric 
devices on a spinning 
personal computer 
board platen
Detection is 
performed 
separately by 
electrophoresis
CNC machining of 
polycarbonate or 
poly(methylmethacrylate) 
disc combined with 
lithography in 
polydimethylsiloxane for 
smaller fluidic features
Tecan Boston74
Starting from the DEP 
collection of intact 
bacteria in a 70-µL 
sample to DNA 
hybridization assay 
(SLT1 gene of E. coli), 
Strand displacement 
amplification, 
dielectrophoretic 
collection of E. coli 
bacteria, electronic DNA 
hybridization
Electric field 
driven DNA 
assay
Laminated flexible 
substrates with electrode 
arrays (using integrated 
circuit lithography)
Nanogen73
Spores in paper products 
(0.5 gm in 10 mL of 
water)
PCR on material eluted 
from a Si DNA extraction 
chip (set of 200-µm-high 
columns, 18 µm in 
diameter, with a pitch of 
34 µm)
Gel 
electrophoresis 
in a separate 
step
Acrylic or polyester plastics 
and Si chips
Cepheid60
30 green-fluorescent 
protein-transfected 
THP-1 cells in 25 µm of 
whole blood
Real-time-PCR
Real-time PCR
Droplets containing 
surface-functionalized 
superparamagnetic 
particles
Institute of 
Bioengineering 
and 
Nanotechnology80
Source: Expanded from Yuen et al.75
CNC, computer numerical control; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
d e
l
f
g
e
d
c
b a
d
h
d
i
e
i
j
k
1 cm
n
l
p
q
m
k
j
o
1 cm
FIGURE 10.50 On the left is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) structure. The center of the disc is above the figure. 
The elements are as follows: (a) sample; (b) NaOH; (c) Tris-HCl; (d) capillary valves; (e) mixing channels; (f) lysis cham-
ber; (g) Tris-HCl holding chamber; (h) neutralized lysate holding chamber; (i) PCR reagents; (j) thermal cycling chamber; 
and (k) air gap. Fluids loaded in (a), (b), and (c) are driven at a first rpm into reservoirs (g) and (f), at which time (f) is 
heated to 95°C. The rpm is increased and the fluids are driven into (h). The rpm is increased and fluids in (h) and (i) flow 
into (j). On the right, the cross-section shows disc body (m), air gap (k), sealing layers (n),  heat-sink (l), thermoelectric 
(p), personal computer board (q), and thermistor (o). (Courtesy of Dr. G. Kellogg, Tecan Boston.)

[Page 594]
594   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
sample and NaOH mix in mixing channel e and 
move to reservoir f while Tris-HCl moves to holding 
reservoir g. Chamber f is the lysis chamber, which 
heats the sample/NaOH mixture up to 95°C for 1–2 
minutes to lyse the cells and denature the proteins. 
Heating of the lysis chamber is accomplished by a 
thermoelectric element mounted on a personal 
computer-board platen q on the spindle of the rotary 
motor and connected by a slip-ring to a stationary 
power supply and a temperature controller. The 
lysis chamber sits on top of a brass heat-sink l 
mounted directly onto the thermoelectric element 
p. A thermistor, o, mounted in the heat-sink, enables 
closed-loop temperature control. By driving up the 
rpm, the Tris-HCl from the holding chamber g and 
the lysed material in reservoir f mix in the serpentine 
mixing channel neutralizing the lysate and then 
move into chamber h. At yet a higher speed fluids in h 
and i flow into the PCR chamber j. The PCR reagents 
used were either reconstituted beads or a solution of 
necessary reagents held in reservoir i. Rapid cycling 
with small temperature gradients in chamber j 
is achieved by confining the fluid to a thin layer, 
0.5 mm thick, adjacent to another thermoelectric 
element. Above the fluid, an air pocket, k, serves 
as a thermal insulator. As a result, most of the heat 
transfer occurs via the thermoelectric. Slew rates of 
±2°C/s-1 have been achieved with fluid volumes of 
25 µL; the temperature gradients across the liquid are 
less than 0.5°C (from simulation and thermocouple 
measurements). With slight design changes, twelve 
structures of the type shown in Figure 10.50 may be 
placed on a 12-cm plastic disc. As we remarked when 
reviewing fluid propulsion options in Table 1.8 of this 
volume, a centrifuge platform is an attractive sample 
preparation stage (wide dynamic range, relatively 
insensitive to fluid composition, etc.). There is one 
major issue yet to be resolved, though: unless one 
works with all dry reagents (and has wetting take 
place only upon first use of the disc) the liquids held 
in the sample reservoirs will evaporate and distribute 
over time as there is no vapor barrier to stop them 
from expanding within the whole available open 
volume in the disc. The fluid gating in the disc works 
only for fluids, not for vapors. Electrokinetic and 
acoustic fluidic platforms suffer the same problem, 
so a major remaining challenge for developers of 
diagnostic platforms based on microfluidics is to 
implement both fluid and vapor gating. One possible 
solution is shown in Chapter 1, this volume, Figure 
1.12, where reagents of interest are sealed in small 
blister pouches in a plastic laminate and only when 
the liquid is needed does a mechanical roller break 
the liquid and vapor seal. In Figure 8.52 we suggest 
yet another solution involving ferrowax valves on a 
CD platform. An external magnet can move these 
ferrowax plugs to pump or valve fluid plugs on the 
CD platform.
Kido at RotaPrep, Inc., developed the OrbiPrep 
system, an integrated, centrifugal sample prepara-
tion system. This station does not involve PCR yet, 
so it is not listed in Table 10.11 but PCR will be inte-
grated in the future. It combines magnetism,81 cen-
trifugal acceleration, dynamic reagent dispensing,82 
and the Coriolis effect83 in a system that performs 
automated, simultaneous milling/homogenization 
of up to twelve biological samples, followed by the 
extraction, washing, and elution of purified DNA 
from each sample. The system consists of a computer-
controlled centrifuge-like device that accepts either 
two-sample rotors or twelve-sample rotors. Figure 
10.51a shows a two-sample rotor on the device with 
its main components labeled. The device is also able 
to dispense accurate volumes of up to four discrete 
reagents into the center ring-shaped distribution 
trough of the rotor while it rotates. This is accom-
plished by fixing four dispensing needles to the lid 
of the device. When the lid closes (Figure 10.51b), 
the tips of the needles enter the trough to rest below 
the top plane of the rotor. Walls within the trough 
divide the entering stream of liquid equally among 
the sample preparation units of the rotor. Figure 
10.52 shows the different stages of operation of the 
OrbiPrep. After loading the samples with buffer into 
the milling chambers through the sample loading 
ports, the milling stage involves a slow rotation at 
400 rpm that causes the free moving magnet within 
each milling chamber to oscillate in the radial 
dimension as the rotor turns through the static mag-
netic field. The yellow arrows depict the trajectory 
of the free-moving magnet. The resulting milling 
action homogenizes biological samples, releasing 
their contents. The slow rotation prevents the liq-
uid in the milling chamber from moving to the next 

[Page 595]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   595
Dispense needle ﬁxed to lid enters
ring-shaped distribution trough
1 of 4 needles
(b)
Waste chamber
Milling chamber
w/free moving
magnetic disk
Ring-shaped
distribution trough
Sample loading port
on milling chamber
Prefilter
Coriolis effect
flow switch
Silica membrane
Stationary magnet
at radius 2:1 of 6
Stationary magnet
at radius 1:1 of 6
2-sample rotor
(20 cm diameter)
Elution chamber
(a)
FIGURE 10.51 OrbiPrep system (RotaPrep, Inc.): an integrated centrifugal sample preparation system. (a) Sample 
 preparation station with open lid. (b) Lid closed.
Milling
400 RPM
CW rotation
1 min
DNA binding
8,000 RPM
CW rotation
1 min
2 min
1 min
Washing 1 & 2
DNA elution
8,000 RPM
8,000 RPM
CCW rotation
CW rotation
FIGURE 10.52 OrbiPrep system (RotaPrep, Inc.): an integrated centrifugal sample preparation system. Shown are the 
 different stages of operation of the OrbiPrep.

[Page 596]
596   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
chamber held there by capillary forces (i.e., the rota-
tion rate is below the burst frequency of the capil-
lary valve separating the two chambers, see Volume 
I, Equation 6.141). In the DNA binding step, the rate 
of rotation is increased to 8000 rpm. This causes liq-
uid from the milling chamber to flow downstream 
(i.e., the rotation speed is now increased above the 
burst frequency of the capillary valve), through the 
prefilter, toward the silica membrane. Before the liq-
uid reaches the silica membrane, it is mixed with 
ethanol that started to be dispensed through the 
first dispensing needle into the distribution trough. 
The black arrows depict the flows of the respec-
tive liquid streams and the mixing point immedi-
ately upstream of the silica membrane. The silica 
membrane extracts DNA from the combined liquid 
stream that passes through it down into the Coriolis 
effect flow switch. Since the rotor rotates clockwise, 
the stream enters the waste chamber. Washes 1 and 
2 follow, as wash buffers 1 and 2 are dispensed from 
needles 2 and 3 in series. Since the liquid from the 
milling chamber has been drained, the liquid flow 
into the silica membrane comes only from the dis-
tribution trough, as the black arrows indicate. The 
rotation continues to be clockwise, so the stream 
from the silica membrane is directed into the waste 
chamber. The rotor reverses direction and resumes 
rotation at 8000 rpm before the elution buffer is 
dispensed from needle 4. The elution buffer enters 
the silica membrane and dissolves the DNA from it 
before flowing downstream into the Coriolis effect 
flow switch. The counterclockwise rotation causes 
the stream to flow into the small elution cham-
ber, ready for use in downstream processes such 
as amplification by PCR. The whole process takes 
approximately 5 minutes to complete.
Pipper et al.80 made a free droplet containing 
surface functionalized superparamagnetic part-
icles into a virtual µ-TAS with a (sub)microliter 
volume. Aside from acting as the force mediators 
for actuating the droplet in a magnetic field, the 
superparamagnetic particles serve as a solid sup-
port for the sequential performance of biochemi-
cal processes. Depending on the task, the droplet 
becomes a pump, valve, mixer, extractor, or ther-
mocycler. In an all-automated experiment, thirty 
green fluorescent protein (GFP)-transfected THP-1 
cells are isolated from 25 µm of blood, 100-fold 
preconcentrated, purified, lysed, and subjected to a 
real-time PCR (RT-PCR) targeting the transfection 
vector all within 17 minutes. Fast thermocyles of 7 
seconds take place on a disposable substrate under 
timespace conversion by rotating the droplet clock-
wise over different temperature zones.
Beyond the prototype stage, Cepheid, in 2001, 
introduced the GeneXpert for pathogen detection 
(http://www.cepheid.com). This instrument goes 
from raw biological sample to PCR and detection 
within 30 minutes. The detection technology is 
based on DNA amplification and real-time, fluo-
rometric identification and quantitation. The real-
time optical reading of the amplified product is 
based on four colors (for four targets) per dispos-
able cartridge (the ICORE, which stands for intelli-
gent, cooling/heating, optical reaction). Four ICORE 
can be loaded at the same time into a GeneXpert 
instrument. Cepheid’s test, which looks for telltale 
genetic sequences, takes as little as 72 minutes. The 
GeneXpert machine costs $30,000 to $150,000, 
depending on how many tests it can run at once. 
Each individual test cartridge is priced at $42.
MEMS in Industrial Automation, Including 
Environmental Monitoring Markets
Introduction
According to the Nexus III report, industrial 
automation, including environmental monitoring, 
constituted 5% of a $12 billion MEMS market in 
2004 and will be a 4% of a $25 billion MEMS market 
in 2009 (see Figure 10.16). MEMS pressure sensors, 
gas sensors, flow sensors, accelerometers, infrared 
imagers, angular rate sensors, temperature probes, 
etc., all have utility in modern industrial processes 
and automation. MEMS is also expected to play 
an important role in environmental applications. 
Primary environmental MEMS prod ucts are expected 
to be in the area of distributed sensor networks for 
detection of air and water pollution and in downscaled 
instruments such as microspectrometers, micro-
gas chromatography systems, micro-ion mobility 
spectrometers, infrared detectors, and perhaps even 
electronic noses and tongues.

[Page 597]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   597
As a wide variety of non-silicon and traditional 
technologies are involved in the construction of 
novel industrial and environmental monitors it is 
harder to come up with accurate MEMS market data 
in industrial/automation and environmental control. 
Silicon technology has not penetrated this application 
as deeply as it has the automotive world. With a plethora 
of solutions and the unifying theme of silicon-based 
sensing missing, MEMS market numbers vary much 
more than for automotive sensing.
Research in industrial and environmental instru-
mentation miniaturization is especially challenging, 
as science requirements call for advances in perfor-
mance with simultaneous large reductions in device 
mass, volume, and cost. Many conventional instru-
ments operate at or near theoretical limits, and reduc-
ing the scale (volume and mass) often leads to sharp 
reduction of performance. This situation calls for new 
fundamental principles for instrumentation technol-
ogy development. In other instances, we shall see, 
miniaturization is making for better instruments.
From the time a picture of a gas chromatograph 
(see Volume I, Figure 1.22) the size of a matchbox 
was printed on the cover of the April 1983 issue 
of Scientific American84 (Terry and Angell built a 
first prototype between 1974 and 1975), there has 
been a continued effort to micromachine analytical 
instruments. Few MEMS-based microinstruments 
reached the market. They are still relatively large, 
tabletop or suitcase size, with only a few key 
components based on micromachining. One well 
know example is the Agilent MicroGC (Figure 10.8), 
looking significantly less integrated than the 
device suggested in the 1983 Scientific American 
article (the MTI gas chromatograph column itself 
is not micromachined; only the inlet and detector 
are). The wisdom of using Si micromachining 
for microinstrumentation is now in doubt, but 
looking at the miniaturization job from a precision 
engineering perspective, one becomes aware of the 
many alternative manufacturing options available.
MEMS Solid-State Gas Sensors 
Most current solid-state gas sensors operate on the 
principle of modulating the resistance of a metal-
oxide thick film by adsorption of gas molecules to 
its surface at high temperature (see Taguchi sensor, 
Volume II, Figures 9.11 to 9.13). Typical metal-ox-
ide sensor materials include SnO2, TiO2, ZnO, WO3, 
and Fe2O3. Each metal oxide is sensitive to differ-
ent gases. For example, tin oxide is most effective 
at detecting alcohol, hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide, 
and carbon monoxide, and zinc oxide is useful for 
detecting halogenated hydrocarbons. Unfortunately, 
most metal oxides are adversely affected by humid-
ity, which must be controlled at all times. In addi-
tion, variations in material properties require that 
each sensor be individually calibrated.
The market in 2000 for small solid-state gas sen-
sors and sensor systems in the toxic and combustible 
gas arena was some $120 million in the United States 
alone. Broken down by product, the U.S. market for 
these chemical sensors comprises about $25 million 
for hydrogen sulfide, $20 million for total hydrocar-
bon monitoring, $12 million each for carbon mon-
oxide and oxygen deficiency, and small percentages 
for a myriad of other gases. The use of a ceramic tube 
in a classical Taguchi sensor (see Volume II, Figure 
9.11) maximizes the utilization of the power from the 
coiled Pt wire heater inside the tube, so that most of 
the power is used to heat the tin oxide covering the 
tube. The tin-oxide paste is applied on the outside 
of the ceramic body over thick-film resistance mea-
suring pads by dip coating and is sintered at high 
temperature. The sintering stabilizes the intergranu-
lar contacts where the sensitivity of the gas sensor 
resides. The structure is not a design suited for mass 
production, as it involves excessive hand labor. The 
problems with the thick-film structure are mainly in 
the area of reproducibility: compressing and sinter-
ing a powder, the deposition of the catalyst (e.g., the 
size of palladium crystallites and how close they are 
to the intergranular contacts), and the use of bind-
ers and other ceramics (e.g., for filtering) are all very 
difficult to control. It is obvious from our discussion 
of the Taguchi sensor in Volume II, Chapter 9, that 
the application of IC techniques to Taguchi sensor 
manufacture can improve the state of the art dra-
matically in terms of the required power budget; a 
power reduction by a factor of ten is quite common. 
Unfortunately, as explained in Volume II, Chapter 
9, no thin-film tin-oxide gas sensor can yet compete 
with the thick-film-based traditional Taguchi gas 
sensor in terms of sensitivity. If one could make a 

[Page 598]
598   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
thin-film tin-oxide with the same gas sensitivity as 
a thick film, then micromachining the heater ele-
ments, and thin-film deposition of the gas-sensitive 
material would further improve reproducibility 
and make for an excellent product. For long-term 
stability, relatively low temperature semiconductor 
catalyst should be used (perhaps operating at tem-
peratures <200°C). Figaro Engineering Inc. of Japan 
pioneered the Taguchi sensor technology in 1962. 
This company is still one of the leaders today.
A major obstacle to more rapid progress with 
thin-film micromachined gas sensors remains that 
the sensitivity of thin films to gases is not yet very well 
understood. The currently available devices, already 
quite small and inexpensive, will only be replaced 
quickly when newer technology improves upon the 
existing product in terms of reproduc ibility, cost, 
sensitivity, response time, concentration range, spec -
ificity, reversibility, stability, and power consumption.
At this time, the best course for future progress 
in the Taguchi-type sensor is to continue to opti-
mize sensitivity of thin-film oxide semiconductors, 
use planar Si devices (reproducibility and cost), and 
concentrate on implementing less power-consuming 
microheater elements. Along this line MicroChemi-
cal Systems (MiCS; http://www.microchemical.com) 
produces micromechanical Si thin-film tin oxide gas 
sensors. Details about the nature of the thin-film tin 
oxide are scarce (Figure 10.53).85 For very low-cost 
and less demanding applications, the MiCS sensor 
might succeed, but for more demanding applica-
tions, planar thick-film structures on ceramic do 
present a better option.86 
An interesting new research direction in the 
MEMS gas sensor arena might be to take advantage 
of the micromachined ceramic (Al2O3) structures, as 
illustrated in Chapter 5, Figure 5.9, for both heaters 
and catalyst support. 
The MGS1100 carbon monoxide sensor from 
Motorola (Schaumburg, IL)87 is not on the mar-
ket anymore. The device incorporated a tin-oxide, 
thin-film sense resistor over a polysilicon resistive 
heater. The sense resistor and the heater reside over a 
2-µm-thick silicon membrane to minimize heat loss 
through the substrate. Consequently, a mere 47 mW 
was sufficient to maintain the membrane at 400ºC. 
There is a total of four electrical contacts: two connect 
to the tin-oxide resistor, and the other two connect to 
the polysilicon heater. The simplest method to mea-
sure resistance is to flow a constant current through 
the sense element and record the output voltage. 
Although the electronics were implemented cor-
rectly, as you would expect from Motorola, it seems 
like the fact that a gas sensor is only as good as the 
selective catalytic nature of its surface was forgotten 
in this sensor implementation.
The market for humidity sensing in the United 
States is about the same size as or larger than the total 
toxic gas sensor market ($120 million). A particularly 
interesting set of micromachined gas sensors, includ-
ing humidity sensors, is based on thin- film-coated 
chemiresistors and acoustic  devices.88 We discussed 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) microhygrom-
eter in Chapter 8, “SAW Example Application: Dew 
Point/Humidity Sensor” (Figure 8.26). 
Solid State Gas Sensor Arrays: 
Electronic Noses and Tongues
The selectivity of a chemical sensor is the ability to 
measure only one chemical in the presence of many 
other chemicals. Because of the lack of perfect selec-
tivity of chemical sensors, sensor arrays are often 
FIGURE 10.53 Microelectromechanical system gas 
sensor by MicroChemical Systems (MiCS; http://www. 
microchemical.com). Top view of the sensor chip. The key 
elements of the sensor are a heater that maintains the gas 
sensitive catalyst layer at a specific temperature (I), a thin 
supporting thin dielectric layer allowing very low power 
consumption (II), and a sensitive catalyst layer that changes 
resistance upon exposure to gases (III). MiCS uses proprie-
tary technology to deposit precise amounts of nanoparticle 
metal oxide material on the micro hot plate. The very small 
grain size provides high stability and sensitivity.

[Page 599]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   599
implemented. The solid-state gas sensors described 
above are one of the types of sensors used in arrays in 
electronic noses to fingerprint complex gas mixtures 
(other types use conductive polymers, coated quartz 
microbalances, or carbon black in nonconductive 
polymer matrix). The sensitivity of Taguchi sensors 
to different gases depends principally on the choice 
of catalytic metals and the operating temperature. 
Although the selectivity of the individual sensors is 
limited, qualitative and quantitative gas analysis can 
be performed using pattern-recognition techniques. 
Optimally, the sensors have a wide dynamic range 
and a small correlation to the other sensors in the 
array so that each contributes as much new informa-
tion as possible. When applying pattern-recognition 
techniques to chemical analysis one defines chemo-
metrics. The combination of multiple gas sensors 
and signal analysis using pattern-recognition tech-
niques is the concept behind the electronic nose or 
E-nose (Figure 10.54). The sensor array is part of a 
neural network sensor array (NNSA) consisting of 
the array, a sampling system, a flow control system, 
a preprocessor, and a pattern-recognition system.
An electronic nose is an example of biomimetics 
at work (see also Chapter 2, this volume). In ani-
mals, the olfaction system (smell) is perhaps the 
most mysterious of the senses: even the sense of 
taste, for example, consists in large part of smell. Two 
American scientists, Dr. Richard Axel and Dr. Linda 
B. Buck, who suggested an answer to the enigma of 
how, with only a limited number of receptors (350), 
people can smell more than 10,000 different odors, 
and recall them later, were awarded the 2004 Nobel 
Prize in Physiology or Medicine.89 The initial event 
in the process of olfaction is the recognition of an 
odorant by olfactory receptors—proteins found in 
the olfactory epithelium. Olfactory receptors con-
vert the “information” in odorant molecules into 
electrical signals that are interpreted by the brain. 
In animals a layer of mucus dissolves the arriving 
scents and separates out different odor molecules so 
that they arrive at the receptors at different speeds 
and times, so there is some type of snot chromato-
graphy involved as well. The brain is able to interpret 
this pattern to distinguish a diverse range of smells. 
In contrast, an artificial nose consists of a much 
smaller array of chemical sensors, typically between 
six and twelve, connected to a computer with neural 
net software capable of recognizing patterns of mol-
ecules. (Electronic noses are also touched upon in 
the context of artificial neural network software in 
Chapter 9, this volume.)
E-noses were popular at the end of the twentieth 
century and have been successfully used in a num-
ber of applications, e.g., the quality estimation of 
ground meat, the identification of different paper 
qualities, the classification of grains with respect to 
microbial quality, the screening of irradiated toma-
toes. NASA used a JPL developed electronic nose on 
the space shuttle; the manufacturers of Coors beer, 
Evian water, and Starbucks coffee use electronic 
noses to test the quality of their products; and E&J 
Gallo Winery is trying to find out whether they can 
spot bad corks. E-noses also have been tested to 
monitor pollution, spot explosives and drugs, and 
diagnose diseases.
Unfortunately, electronic noses have had a hard 
time finding acceptance in the marketplace. A lot 
of training is required of both sensor arrays and 
the technical staff running the equipment, and the 
instruments are still large and expensive. The chem-
ical sensors used in the sensor arrays drift too much, 
so that too-frequent calibration makes the use of the 
instruments cumbersome. Recognizing this prob-
lem, surviving electronic nose companies are now 
adding mass spectrometry to their sensor arrays 
(Figure 10.55).
Alpha MOS, Neotronics Scientific Lt., Illumina 
Inc, AromaScan Inc., and Cyrano Sciences, Inc., were 
all important players in this field in the 1990s. 
Alpha MOS, a French company, and AromaScan 
Inc., a British manufacturer, were the first to develop 
the electronic nose, or sensor array systems (SAS) 
Array
of
signals
Sampled gas
or vapor/odor
Sample
Array of
sensors
Computer with
pattern classiﬁer or
pattern recognition
Result
FIGURE 10.54 The electronic nose: an example of bio-
mimetics. Electronic noses were touched upon in the context 
of neural network software in Chapter 9, this volume.

[Page 600]
600   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
technology, for commercial use. At Pittcon 2000, 
Cyrano showcased a portable electronic nose, the 
Cyranose 320, which distinguished odors using 
an array of thirty-two sensors. Each sensor was 
made of a composite of conductive carbon black 
and a nonconductive polymer. Today, only Alpha 
MOS continues as an electronic nose company. 
There is little left of all the other original contend-
ers. In 2004, the Pasadena-based Cyrano Sciences 
was acquired by Smiths Detection for $15 million 
plus earn-out. Neotronics has been amalgamated 
into the Zellweger Analytics consortium, Illumina 
Inc. went on to do great things in DNA arrays (see 
Volume I, Chapter  7, “Bead Arrays for Detection 
and Analysis of DNA Sequences”), and AromScan 
became Osmetech, focusing on molecular diagnostics 
(http:// www.osmetech.com) instead.
The scientific principles of the electronic tongue 
are similar to the electronic nose but are applied 
to liquids rather than vapors. An electronic tongue 
incorporates 
electrochemical 
membrane-based 
sensors (see Volume I, Chapter 7, “Ion-Selective 
Electrodes”) mimicking the five types of taste buds, 
which sense sourness, saltiness, bitterness, sweet-
ness, and umani (deliciousness). The sensors in the 
array, like our taste buds, exhibit global selectivity 
rather than absolute selectivity; in other words, they 
are not selective to one chemical species, but to a 
wide variety. The ASTREE Electronic tongue from 
Alpha MOS is a liquid taste analyzer designed for 
taste assessment in solutions or solids dissolved in 
liquids. Like the human tongue, it provides a global 
“taste fingerprint” of a complex mixture of organic/
inorganic compounds. For all tastes, it performs 
analysis with similar or better detection threshold 
than the human tongue.
Electrochemical Gas Sensors and 
Optochemical Gas Sensors
Solid-state semiconductor devices have been her-
alded as the replacement for electrochemical sen-
sors; however, the electrochemical gas sensor sales 
are experiencing a growth rate of 30% per year. 
The latter is probably due to the slow rate of 
improvement in the selectivity of solid-state gas 
sensors and superior selectivity of electrochemical 
sensors brought on the market by companies such 
as City Technology (http://www.citytech.com) and 
Neotronics.90 There is quite some consolidation going 
on in gas sensor companies. Neotronics and Sieger 
have been amalgamated into the Zellweger Analytics 
consortium, and more recently, First Technology 
has acquired City Technology and Capteur Sensors, 
while EEV is now part of E2V Technologies. There is 
plenty of opportunity in the application of MEMS 
to 
room-temperature 
electrochemical 
sensors, 
although these sensors are typically small already, 
they are not made in batches yet.
An optochemical gas sensor approach developed 
by Quantum Group Inc.91 was adopted by First Alert 
as an inexpensive and selective fire alarm (http://
www.qginc.com/products.html). This room-temper-
ature sensor comprises a porous, semitransparent 
substrate (e.g., a glass frit) into which a self-regen-
erating chemical sensor reagent, selective for CO, is 
impregnated. Reaction with CO is fast, very selec-
tive and changes the color of the reagent. This color 
change is picked up by a diode photo-detector. 
Oxygen in the air regenerates and clears the sub-
strate slowly back to its original color (~30 minutes). 
In this fashion, the sensor is biomimetic, simulating 
human response to airborne toxins such as carbon 
FIGURE 10.55 The Prometheus from Alpha MOS is the 
world’s first odor and VOC analyzer that combines a 
highly sensitive fingerprint mass spectrometer with a 
large choice of patented multisensor array technologies 
to create an extremely flexible analysis platform (http://
www.alpha-mos.com/).

[Page 601]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   601
monoxide, mercury, ethylene oxide, volatile organic 
materials, and hydrogen sulfide. This is a very inex-
pensive and promising approach, and with further 
fine-tuning of the chemistry of various sensor reac-
tants, we might expect a large family of products 
based on this optochemical approach, with a selec-
tivity akin to an electrochemical sensor but at a cost 
similar to that of a solid state gas sensor.
The biomimetic sensor has a functional lifetime 
of over one year, and the mimicking of the human 
response to toxins is achieved by the use of a molec-
ular encapsulant that encapsulates at least one gas 
component. Work is concentrating on extending the 
sensor’s lifetime and speeding up the regeneration 
of the sensor. The optochemical gas sensor from 
Quantum Group Inc. could be miniaturized by 
using nontraditional manufacturing techniques, but 
finding selective chemistries for other gases, such as 
NO2, O3, and H2S, is a higher priority.
ISFETs
ISFET technology was covered in Volume I, Chapter 7, 
“Ion-Sensitive Field-Effect Transistors, Extended Gate 
Field-Effect Transistors, and Isn’t FET.” In the United 
States, ISFETs are manufactured only at the University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City. Orion Fisher, Corning, 
Sentron, and Rosemount, as well as UniFet, Inc. (San 
Diego, CA) sell ISFET-based pH sensors in the United 
States but do not produce them in-house. Honeywell 
sells the DuraFET, and in a detailed evaluation study, 
Sandifer and Voycheck called this sensor remarkable 
rugged, very stable, and accurate.92 Orion and 
Rosemount buy their pH ISFETs in research quanti-
ties from Neuchatel (Switzerland) and target the food 
industry where glass pH electrodes cannot be used 
for food (pH measurement in dough, for example). 
Unisensor recently acquired Sentron (www.unisen-
sor.ch). These commercially available ISFETs are for 
pH only and feature a simple pH sensitive inorganic 
membrane on the gate. To modify FETs with poly-
mer membranes for detection of other ions is difficult 
because of the thickness of the membrane and the 
need for a stable internal reference electrolyte.
As we pointed out in Chapter 1, this volume, usu-
ally it is simpler and less expensive to build electro-
chemical sensors on a nonsilicon substrate (see, for 
example, the reference electrode in Chapter 1, this 
volume, Figure 1.18).
Gas Chromatography
Gas chromatography is a technique widely used for 
the separation and analysis of gaseous samples. A 
typical gas chromatograph (GC) consists of a carrier 
gas supply, a sample injection system, a separating 
fused silica column, an output detector, and a data 
processing unit, as depicted in the block diagram 
in Figure 10.56.93 Separation of the sample vapors 
is achieved via their differential migration through 
a capillary column (see Volume I, Chapter 6). A 
precise and reproducible volume of sample vapor 
is injected at the input of the column by a valve 
and swept through it by an inert carrier gas. The 
Data
processing
system
Dual
detector
cavity
Regulator
Helium
carrier
gas
Sample
gas
Micromachined components
Miniaturized components
Sample
injection
valve
Interlocked
spiral-shaped
capillary column
FIGURE 10.56 Functional block diagram of a gas chromatography (GC) system. (After Kolesar, E. S., and R. R. Reston. 
1995. Separation and detection of toxic gases with a silicon micromachined gas chromatography system. Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Integrated Micro/Nanotechnology for Space Applications, National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) and The Aerospace Corporation. Houston, TX, October 30–November 3, 1995, pp. 102–14.93)

[Page 602]
602   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
column is lined with a liquid stationary phase, a 
substance capable of absorbing and desorbing each 
of the component vapors depending upon their 
unique partition coefficients. The migration rate 
of each vapor along the column depends on the 
sample injection pressure, the carrier gas velocity, 
the temperature, and the degree to which the vapor 
is absorbed by the stationary phase. The column’s 
output is thus a series of vapor peaks separated by 
regions of pure carrier gas. To detect those peaks, the 
output gas stream from the column is passed over a 
detector that measures a particular property of the 
gas, such as the thermal conductivity, which can be 
related to the concentration of sample vapor in the 
carrier gas. The detector produces a signal, which 
is amplified and used in the analysis of the sample 
mixture; the identity and quantity of each vapor in 
the mixture can be determined from, respectively, 
its retention time in the column and the area under 
its output peak.
Gas chromatography systems tend to be large, frag-
ile, and bulky pieces of laboratory equipment, and 
miniaturization would present many advantages:
 
◾Integration of the instrument into a process
 
◾Portable and handheld units
 
◾Fast response time (1 minute or less) in com-
parison with a large unit with comparable plate 
numbers (see Volume I, Chapter 6, “Scaling in 
Analytical Separation Equipment”)
 
◾Less calibration and carrier gases needed
 
◾Low dead volume
 
◾Higher accuracy
The first integrated GC, consisting of a long 
separating column, a sample injection valve, and 
a thermal conductivity detector (TCD), fabricated 
on a single Si wafer, was developed at Stanford as 
early as 1974 (see Volume I, Figure 1.22). The Agilent 
MicroGC, based on that original work, uses a 
traditional fused silica capillary column but retains 
the other micromachined components (Figure 
10.8). By the time MTI produced its first GC, with 
a 100-µm diameter, fused silica GC columns had 
become commercially available, and they proved to 
be superior to the Si micromachined columns. The 
reasons behind their superiority must be sought 
in the perfect symmetry of the monolithic silica 
columns. The smoothness of the stationary phase 
coating the inside of a capillary column is a function 
of the profile symmetry. The uniformity of coating 
thickness is extremely important to maintain very 
sharp separation peaks. The micromachined designs 
described in the literature usually consist of a cover 
sheet of Pyrex glass, which is anodically bonded to a 
U-shaped, V-groove, or rectangular groove etched in 
Si.94 Columns also have been made by joining two 
U-grooved halves. All these designs have a major 
potential deficiency: they are bound to accumulate 
coating on the corners or joints, leading to a less 
perfect separation.95 Analytes spend a longer time 
in areas where the coating is thick than in places 
where it is thin, leading to a broadening of peaks. 
Thermal gradients might also be induced by joining 
dissimilar materials, again causing peak broadening. 
It also should be realized that the column has to be 
replaced on a regular basis because of aging and 
fouling. Therefore, the price of a total integrated 
system would have to be very low.96
Research efforts for making better microma-
chined GC columns are continuing,93 but since 
existing fused silica columns are perfectly adequate, 
the focus would be more gainfully put on other 
GC problem arenas. Specifically, micromachin-
ing could be of great immediate use in the arena of 
better, more reproducible, miniaturized valves and 
fast heating and cooling of thermally isolated col-
umn and injector for fast temperature-programmed 
chromatograms.
A Hewlett-Packard (HP) development of a hand-
held GC may be the only effort that combines 
both excellent micromachining capabilities with 
a long-standing instrumentation knowledge. RVM 
Scientific, Inc. has also built a novel handheld min-
iaturized gas chromatograph for detection of con-
traband drugs in cargo containers and chemical 
weapons treaty verification. There are several small 
GC products now being introduced to the market. 
The SnapShot, for example, is a handheld GC from 
Photovac International Inc. (Deer Park, NY). The 
instrument has a battery pack providing 4–6 hours 
of operation and may be used for personal expo-
sure monitoring. Besides Agilent, Stanford Research 
Instruments is offering rugged GCs for field use.

[Page 603]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   603
Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometers (MSs) are extremely versatile 
tools that have found, at least for the moment, their 
greatest use in laboratory science. The determination 
of the component atomic and molecular masses 
and their abundance is indeed essential for the 
understanding of almost any chemical and/or 
process analysis. Lack of broader use is attributed to 
their large mass, volume, and power requirements. 
Especially powerful would be a miniaturized gas 
chromatography-mass 
spectrometry 
(GC-MS) 
com bination, with the GC for the isolation of the 
various compounds of a complex mixture and the 
MS for further identification. Innovative vacuum 
systems, smaller GC ovens, new sample inlets, and 
advanced electronics are now making some of this 
possible. For example, a GC-MS system built in a 
suitcase by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
in California for real-time field use is shown in 
Figure 10.57a.97 Ferran Scientific has successfully 
implemented a 1-cm scale array of quadrupoles 
for gas analysis (Figure 10.57b), and a similar MS 
is under development at Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
(JPL) in Pasadena, California. JPL researchers suggest 
that the Ferran instrument lacks in mechanical 
precision and hence resolution. In their own work, a 
miniaturized quadrupole mass filter, one machined 
with traditional but very precise machining met-
hods (Figure 10.58a) and one dramatically smaller 
in size fabricated employing LIGA (not shown), was 
pursued. The JPL research team deemed quadrupole 
and ion-trap mass spectrometers most suited 
for miniaturization, as their operation does not 
require a permanent magnetic field, and they can 
be fabricated as parallel arrays of spectrometers.98 
The 
array 
concept 
is 
extremely 
important 
considering the following simple  scaling insights. 
Miniaturization of an instrument dimension, l, by a 
FIGURE 10.57 (a) A gas chromatography-mass spectrometry system built in a suitcase for real-time field use. (Courtesy 
of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, California). (b) A 1-cm scale array of quadrupoles for gas analysis (traditional 
mechanical precision machining). Built by Ferran Scientific, California.
(a)
(b)
0.0
0
50%
Isotope abundance for Kr+
He+
N+
N+2
Ar+
Kr+ isotopes
Miniature, single quadrupole mass spectrometer
JPL
Pole length 
:  25 mm
Pole diameter :  2.0 mm
Resolution 
:  ∆m = 0.5 amu (FWHM)
rf frequency :  8.00 MHz
rf peak volts :  343 V (at 100 amu)
DC voltage 
:  58 V (at 100 amu) 
100%
Mass
0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
0.5
1.0
Relative intensities [H+, N+, N+, Ar+]
e
2
FIGURE 10.58 Miniature mass spectrometry. (a) Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s small quadrupole array made by traditional, 
but very precise, machining. (b) Spectrum generated from the single quadrupole mass spectrometer in (a).

[Page 604]
604   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
factor k leads to a cubic mass and volume reduction 
(l3 scaling) and an input aperture area reduction 
(l2 scaling), and thus sensitivity reduction of k2. 
To offset the lost sensitivity, one can construct an 
array of k2 spectrometers, all working in parallel. 
One ends up with a spectrometer array with a 
sensitivity comparable to its larger cousin but 
with mass and volume reductions of k. A present 
quadrupole or magnetic-sector instrument may be 
of the order of 104 cm3 volume and 10–15 kg mass 
and may require about 20 W power for operation. 
The JPL traditionally machined microspectrometer, 
a 4 × 4 array of nine miniature quadrupole mass 
analyzers (Figure 10.58a), has a mass of less 
than 0.8 kg (including electronics), is 20 cm3 in 
volume, and draws less than 8 W power. The rod 
alignment, straightness, and roundness accuracy 
for a mass range of 1 to 250 amu and a mass 
resolution of 0.5 amu (FWHM) at 200 amu must 
be 0.15% (see mass spectrum in Figure 10.58b). 
Initially, the rods were machined at 2 cm long, but 
they can be further reduced to 1.5 or even 1 cm. 
The alignment was carried out using a machinable 
ceramic alignment jig to accurately position the 
rods. The holes in the jigs are machined using a 
conventional, high-precision lathe (±0.0002-inch 
tolerance). With the LIGA technique, the attempt is 
to make the quadrupole rods 1 mm high and 80 µm 
in diameter, but these specifications have not yet 
been met. LIGA  might  provide more accuracy for 
the straightness of vertical walls, but the toleran ces 
in the x- and y-directions are still dependent on the 
aligner. As we may deduce from Volume II, Figure 
6.5, a 0.15% tolerance on dimensions below 100 
µm is quite a challenge.
Optical Absorption Instruments
The most common analyzers used in analyti-
cal chemistry for both gases and liquids are spec-
troscopic absorption techniques. A considerable 
amount of effort has been put into miniaturization 
of such equipment with both traditional and non-
traditional machining tools.
Consider, as an example of an environmental 
application, the detection of methane by means 
of infrared absorption (based on Beer’s law, see 
Volume I, Equation 7.133). From Volume I, Chapter 
7, we know that to obtain a better sensitivity, a longer 
optical path is required. To accomplish this on a small-
footprint instrument of a few square centimeters, a set 
of LIGA-machined micromirrors may be positioned 
in a folded configuration, as illustrated in Figure 
10.59. The infrared mirrors are preferably made 
from solid electroplated gold or by evaporating gold 
on poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) walls. The 
vertical height of the mirrors is limited by the spot 
size of the infrared laser beam. The light intensity loss 
in the miniaturized instrument is due to absorption 
and scattering by the micromirrors. Gold is the 
preferred material for the micromirrors because 
of its high reflectivity in the mid-infrared region. 
Superpolished gold surfaces can reflect as much as 
98% of an incident infrared beam in the specular 
direction. However, micromachined gold mirrors, 
electroformed or evaporated on PMMA walls, will 
likely have an inherent surface roughness, which 
may cause scattering of incident beams. Working 
in the infra red range presents an advantage in this 
case, as the roughness of the mirrors will typically 
be small compared with the wavelength used. With 
an angle of incidence close to the normal direction, 
one can typically accommodate up to 100 reflections 
before serious losses occur. With a 1.6-cm distance 
between mirrors, this means 1.6 m of optical path-
length, which may not be adequate for a 0.1-ppb 
sensitivity but would serve well for applications that 
require only a few parts per million of sensitivity. 
The conclusion is that one might well be able to 
miniaturize a gas absorption cell, but a miniaturized 
infrared analyzer of this sort will be suited only to 
less demanding applications. No products of this 
Laser beam
Micromirrors
1.6 cm
0.7 cm
FIGURE 10.59 Layout of a folded optical system. (After 
Desta et al. 1995. Microlithography and metrology in 
micromachining. Austin, TX: SPIE. With permission.)

[Page 605]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   605
sort are on the market yet. In Volume I, Chapter 
7, “Scaling in Absorption Spectroscopy and Cavity 
Ring-Down Spectroscopy,” we introduced the cavity 
ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS) technique, which 
represents a way around the sensitivity issue when 
scaling down an optical instrument. As far as we 
are aware, there is no MEMS version available of 
the CRDS.
The STEAG microParts VIS microspectrometer 
is a monolithic dielectric slab waveguide with inte-
grated  focusing echelette grating produced by a 
micromolding technique. The part sells for  $100–
$300. Light to be analyzed is coupled into the device 
by an optical fiber. Light reflected from the grating 
is detected by a diode array. The detector attached 
at the focal plane is a Hamamatsu photodiode array 
with 256 pixels. The STEAG microParts micro-
spectrometer is shown in Figure 10.60.
MEMS in IT Peripherals and 
Telecommunications Markets
Introduction
In the past, automotive applications were setting 
the pace for increases in manufacturing volumes of 
MEMS sensors. The future will present quite a differ-
ent scenario: huge growth rates in MEMS sensors are 
expected for applications in consumer electronics 
(CE) products, with a focus on IT and communica-
tions, and extensions into health care, life sciences, 
security systems, domestic appliances, and others. 
Once a MEMS device succeeds in the automotive 
application, with its very stringent specifications, 
the door is wide open to other more relaxed mar-
kets, even the consumer market. Analog Devices, for 
example, is now putting its surface micromachined 
accelerometers in video games, car and notebook 
alarms, smart pens, etc.
IT peripherals is a general term used to describe 
technologies that help produce, manipulate, store, 
communicate, or disseminate information. From 
Figure 10.16, this application area today constitutes 
already the largest MEMS market, dominated by 
hard disc drive heads, inkjet print heads and micro-
displays. Interestingly, at the moment of their mar-
ket introduction, the first two of these products were 
not even considered MEMS (see also the Preamble 
on the MEMS Market section, above).
To illustrate that there are many more MEMS 
opportunities in this market segment, consider that 
the mobile phone market crossed the 1 billion unit 
level in 2006. MEMS applications in phones include 
microphones/speakers (Knowles Acoustics), accel-
erometers (Analog Devices) for functions such as 
scrolling, gyroscopes (Invensense) for in-phone cam-
era-lens stabilization, system timing products/oscil-
lators (SiTime for myriad functions), and RF MEMS 
for band switching, filters (TeraVicta), and displays 
(Qualcom/Iridigm). The challenge for mobile phone 
MEMS manufacturers will be to meet the stringent 
price constraints demanded by the phone compa-
nies while still maintaining necessary reliability and 
product performance.
Self focusing
reﬂection grating
(d =0,2 µm; g= 2 µm)
Light input
through optical ﬁber
(a)
(b)
Light output
via reﬂecting edge
Diode array
FIGURE 10.60 Microspectrometer from STEAG microParts. 
Schematic (a) and photograph (b).

[Page 606]
606   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
Read-Write Heads, Ink-Jet Heads, 
Microdisplays, Optical Switches, 
and Accelerometers
Read-Write Heads
Read-write (RW) heads still represented around 51% 
of the MEMS market in 2009: although the tradi-
tional application of RW heads in PCs will grow 
only moderately, the RW market is experiencing a 
renaissance in consumer electronics, as hard discs 
are entering music players (e.g., in many iPod mod-
els) and smart phones (Samsung introduced the first 
cell phone with  HDD in 2004), as well as digital 
video cameras, set-top players, and DVD record-
ers. Memory read/write technology is an area where 
MEMS will continue to contribute and astound with 
its results; an important example we encountered in 
this regard is the IBM thin film read write head and 
the millipede (see Volume II, Figure 2.4, and Figure 
1.1d, this volume). Major U.S. players in this market 
segment are Seagate, Conner, IBM, Read-Rite, and 
Applied Magnetic, in Asia there are companies like 
Yamaha, TDK, Alps, and a few others. Global rev-
enues from shipments of HDDs were expected to 
reach $27.7 billion in 2010, up 18.4% from $23.4 bil-
lion in 2009. This represents a 2010 total unit ship-
ment forecast of 674.6 million compared to 549.5 
million units in 2009 (http://www.emsnow.com/
npps/story.cfm?pg=story&id=42187).
It is important to note though that MEMS will 
lose a very important market when hard disc drives 
are replaced by solid-state disc (SSD) memory (flash 
drives), as both RW heads and accelerometers will 
fall away.
Ink-Jet Heads
At a greater than 25% share, inkjet print heads rep-
resent the largest portion of the total MEMS compo-
nent market. Ink-jet heads continue to be one of the 
most profitable markets for MEMS. Cartridges for 
ink-jet printers were introduced in the early 1980s by 
HP and Canon. In Volume II, Figure 5.30, we show 
inkjet-printer heads machined with excimer lasers. 
As shown in Volume II, Figure 8.21b, some of those 
printer heads are very sophisticated, combining flu-
idics (at high temperatures!) with integrated elec-
tronics, sensors, and actuators. There are two major 
types of ink-jet print heads. First are the less expen-
sive and disposable bubble-jet printheads, such as 
the ones made by HP, Canon, Ollivetti, Lexmark, 
Xerox, etc. Then there are the more expensive piezo 
print heads, manufactured by companies like Epson, 
MIT (in Sweden), Brother (Japan), and Frankotyp-
Postalia (Germany). The main new driver for ink-
jet heads in the next couple of years is expected to 
be the printing of digital photos—especially from 
cell phone cameras—growing at 15% to 20% per 
year. An important new trend in desktop printers 
is the integration of nondisposable inkjet heads 
in the printer instead of disposable print heads in 
cartridges. After Epson and Canon, HP is now also 
starting to ship printers with integrated print head. 
Although this will slow down the growth in units, 
the value of these nondisposable print heads is 3 to 
5 times higher.
As competition in the printer marketplace con-
tinues to intensify, manufacturers of MEMS inkjet 
heads must reduce fabrication costs while improv-
ing product performance. The vast majority of 
inkjet head production in 2008 was on 6-inch 
silicon wafers, but increasing inkjet heads sizes—
and therefore die sizes—as well as a general trend 
toward larger wafer diameters were expected to shift 
almost 10% of production to 8-inch wafers by 2010. 
These MEMS devices require high-quality, high-
speed slotting of silicon wafers that are diced into 
the barrier chips, through which ink passes from 
the reservoir into the nozzles. Currently imple-
mented MEMS techniques for silicon wafer slotting 
have a number of drawbacks. Wet etching processes 
require a mask step, making them both slow and 
costly, while sandblasting creates holes with coni-
cal edges, limiting their diameter and density. Dry 
laser techniques, although somewhat more effec-
tive, typically generate debris and microcracks that 
hamper device quality and performance. Today, 
key MEMS technologies to fabricate inkjet-heads 
include increasing use of deep reactive ion etch 
(DRIE) and SU-8 resins, but new MEMS manufac-
turing techniques are being explored. The Synova 
Laser MicroJet (Volume II, Chapter 5, “Water Jet-
Guided Laser Machining,” Figure 5.23), for exam-
ple, overcomes some of the machining challenges, 
ablating the silicon material quickly and efficiently 

[Page 607]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   607
without causing any residual damage. In produc-
tion environments, the Synova water-driven laser 
has proven superior to competitive approaches, 
reducing the cutting time to just 2.5 seconds per 
slot—faster than any previously implemented slot-
ting technique—with no damage.
It is to be expected that the fluidics and their inte-
gration with electronics pioneered in this applica-
tion field will produce rewarding spin-offs in other 
application areas such as drop delivery systems, 
micromachined PCR units, etc., for medical/bio-
medical applications.
MEMS Microdisplays
MEMS microdisplays are the new MEMS block-
buster, and their revenues were expected to overtake 
inkjet heads in 2009. Millions of DMDs• were built 
into projectors (the first one came out in 1996 from 
InFocus) and big-screen televisions (the first came 
out in 2002 from Samsung). Microdisplays found 
their way from projectors and high-definition, 
large-screen TVs to microdisplays for mobile hand-
sets (e.g., the iMoD—interferometric modulator 
display—developed at Qualcomm). It was projected 
that by 2009 MEMS displays would become the sec-
ond largest MEMS market, after thin-film RW heads 
(according to the Nexus report).1 A major advantage 
for Texas Instruments (TI) is that DLP chips are an 
exception to the high-volume/low-price rule, typi-
cally for all ICs and most MEMS devices: the 2004 
asking price for a DLP chip was $400 in 2004; it was 
estimated at $190 in 2009 (Nexus).1
In an imaginative new application of TI’s micro-
mirror technology, NimbleGen Systems developed 
a set-up that enables researchers to fabricate their 
own DNA arrays without having to go through the 
expense of making large sets of expensive photo-
masks as in the case of the Affymetrix system (see 
Volume II, Figure 8.19 for a schematic of NimbleGen’s 
virtual mask generation system).
Another elegant MEMS display technology, from 
Silicon Light Machines, Sunnyvale, California (now 
owned by Cypress Semiconductor), is the grating 
light valve, or GLV• (http://www.siliconlight.com/
htmlpgs/homeset/homeframeset.html). 
In 
this 
technology, invented at Stanford, closely spaced 
parallel rows of reflective ribbons are suspended 
over a substrate. The gap between the ribbons and 
substrate is one-quarter wavelength, and in the 
resting state, the ribbons appear as a continuous 
reflective surface. With an electrostatic voltage pull-
ing down alternate rows of ribbons, light reflected 
from the pulled down ribbons travels twice the gap 
or 1/2 wavelength farther than if reflected from 
the resting ribbons. The ribbons are arranged such 
that each element is capable of either reflecting or 
diffracting light. This allows an array of elements, 
when appropriately addressed by control signals, to 
vary the level of light reflected off the surface of the 
chip. This control of light can be analog (variable 
control of light level) or digital (switching of light 
on or off). Because a GLV• device is reflective, it 
is highly efficient in its use of light. Besides Silicon 
Light Machines and TI, Samsung and Sony are also 
manufacturers of digital mirror technology.
In May 2008, Qualcomm MEMS Technologies, 
demonstrated the first reflective interferometric 
modulation (IMOD) color Mirasol• display for 
mobile phones. IMOD technology requires no 
backlighting and reflects light so that wavelengths 
interfere with each other, creating pure, vivid col-
ors. Mobile devices such as mp3 players and mobile 
phones stand to benefit from Mirasol displays, which 
require significantly less power and harness ambient 
light sources to automatically scale for optimal view-
ing in virtually any lighting condition. The inter-
ferometric modulator element (IMOD) is a simple 
MEMS device that is composed of two conductive 
plates. One is a thin-film stack on a glass substrate, 
and the other is a reflective membrane suspended 
over the substrate. There is a gap between the two 
that is filled with air. The IMOD element has two sta-
ble states. When no voltage is applied, the plates are 
separated, and light hitting the substrate is reflected 
as shown in Figure 10.61. When a small voltage is 
applied, the plates are pulled together by electro-
static attraction and the light is absorbed, turning 
the element black. This is the fundamental building 
block from which Qualcomm Mirasol• displays are 
made (Figure 10.61).
MEMS obviously figures central in various designs 
for next-generation flat panel displays. Illustrative 
is also the thin-film field emitter work from Capp 
Spindt (the author’s first mentor in MEMS at SRI 

[Page 608]
608   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
International), which is illustrated in Volume II, in 
Chapter 7, Figure 7.90.
Optical Switches
IC-based processing techniques have been used 
for a long time in the fabrication of complex opto-
electronic ICs, and MEMS has been employed in 
the fabrication of simple fiber alignment devices. 
Passive alignment devices such as V-grooves are 
either fabricated in polymer or Si, with the polymer 
embodiments enabling high-volume manufacture 
of low-cost components. The newest developments 
in optical telecommunications require a new gen-
eration of additional components, including the 
following:
 
◾Wavelength filters
 
◾Micromirror-based all-optical switches
 
◾Configurable add/drop multiplexers to add or 
drop signals to generate thousands of different 
frequencies of light
 
◾Tunable filters
 
◾Multiplexers and demultiplexers that direct 
multiple light beams onto one fiber
 
◾Stabilized optical sources
 
◾Optical polarization controllers
 
◾Integrated optical pumps and MOEMS amplifi-
ers for attenuation, dynamic gain equalization, 
and dispersion compensation
MEMS is expected to play a role in the manu-
facture of several of these optical devices. Here we 
reiterate briefly the role MEMS is playing in just 
one such application, i.e., large optical switches for 
telecommunications. As we remember from earlier 
in this chapter (see under Preamble on the MEMS 
Market), this application unfortunately led to the 
so-called MOEMS bubble in 2001–2002.
Miniature optical switches, optical cross-connects 
(OXCs), were expected to change how data are trans-
mitted in everything from communication systems 
to computers. Miniaturization methods enable the 
creation of arrays of very small, high-capacity opti-
cal switches (see Example 4.4, “Self-Aligned Vertical 
Mirrors and V-Grooves for a Magnetic Micro-optical 
Matrix Switch”). These optical switches provide a way 
of routing light paths from one fiber to another with-
out converting the signals to the electronic domain. 
OXCs seemed to have arrived at just the right time; 
optical fiber cables connecting network hubs were 
indeed quickly outpacing the capacity of electronic 
switches, and this electronic bottleneck could be 
solved by this new generation of MOEMS switches. 
Four example approaches to optical switching are 
illustrated in Figure 10.62: mechanical (bending of 
an optical fiber) (a), planar waveguides (where heat-
ers and Peltier devices change the index of refraction 
to cause the beam path to shift) (b), moving mirror 
types (c), and the bubble approach (bubbles deflect 
the light between criss-crossing waveguides) (d).
The router developed at Lucent, for example, could 
switch 256 input light beams to 256 output fibers 
without any intermediate optical-electrical conver-
sion (Figure 10.63). Supporting 256 wavelengths, 
each carrying 40 Gbit/second of traffic, this corre-
sponds to an aggregate throughput of more than 10 
Tbit/second. Tiny double-hinged mirrors are used to 
redirect optical signals by adjusting the mirror tilt. 
Open state
Te core of an interferometric modulator (IMOD) display
Incident light
Light reﬂected
oﬀ membrane
Glass
substrate
Tin-ﬁlm
stack
Air gap
Reﬂective
membrane
Collapsed state
V
V
10–100 µm
<1 µm
Incident light
FIGURE 10.61 Interferometric modulation fundamental building block from which Qualcomm Mirasol™ displays are 
made (http://www.qualcomm.com/qmt/).

[Page 609]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   609
A  first application for these new switches was 
expected to be in dense wavelength division mul-
tiplexing (DWDM). To squeeze more traffic into a 
network, one of the strategies is to deploy DWDM. 
A programmable DWDM add/drop node “drops” 
one or more wavelengths out of a multiwavelength 
channel and reroutes them to a different destina-
tion while potentially “adding” traffic from another 
source to the channel.
One of the most impressive optical switches was 
a 1152 × 1152 OXC by Xros (bought by Nortel and 
now defunct). The product was projected to be on 
the market in 2001. Another player was Ilotron a 
spin-off company from the University of Essex. Most 
major players in MEMS optical switching were 
backing the traditional micromirror approach, but 
Agilent Technologies has a fluidic approach based 
on its ink-jet technology. In the Agilent switch, bub-
bles deflect  the light between criss-crossing wave-
guides, and at Corning, liquid crystals are used. In 
Table 10.12, the four most popular optical switch 
approaches are compared.
It was expected that optical switches would 
achieve full commercialization by 2004. The great 
promise that these truly enabling MOEMS devices 
seem to offer was at first validated by the acquisition 
of a series of MOEMS companies. Among these were 
XROS (a 95-person company), acquired by Nortel 
Networks for $3.25 billion in stock; IntelliSense, 67% 
of which was acquired for $500 million by Corning; 
and Cronos Technologies, acquired for $750 million 
in stock by JDS Uniphase. However, as we explained 
in the beginning of this chapter, the more than 10 
billion dollar investment by these large telecom-
munication companies in 1999–2000 became a 
textbook example of “irrational exuberance.” There 
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Electromagnet
Light output
Light output
Light output
Light output
Light output
Electric
wiring
Switching device
on Si-substrate
Light input
Light
input
Light input 1
Light output 1
Light
passed
Light
reﬂected
Bubble generated
Light output 2
Microscopic trench
Transparent
Light input 2
Bubble
Light input
Optical
ﬁber
Optical
waveguide
Optical waveguide
Optical waveguide
Movable
Circuit
structure Heater
Silica glass
Si-substrate
Cross-section
Movable miror
Light output
FIGURE 10.62 Example principles of optical switching devices. There are four major principles of operation involved. 
(a) The mechanical type, where the optical fiber is bent with an electromagnet to change the direction of the light beam. 
(b) The planar optical waveguide, where heaters and Peltier devices are located near the optical waveguide to change 
the waveguide temperature. When the temperature changes, so does the index of refraction, causing the beam path to 
shift. (c) The mirror type. The angles of micromirrors are changed to select different light paths. Mirrors may move on 
one axis (two-dimensional) or two (three-dimensional). (d) The bubble approach. An oil-filled wall is created along the 
light path, and bubbles are generated there to reflect the light beam.
FIGURE 10.63 Lucent free-space microelectromechani-
cal system optical cross-connect mirrors with two-axis, 
gimbal-mounted micromirrors.

[Page 610]
610   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
were not enough customers for the more than eighty 
start-ups, and the three largest investing companies 
pulled back. What was left of the all-optical switch-
ing market, in the period between 2002 and 2004, 
was littered with the broken shells of startups that 
often tried to survive by doing MEMS foundry work. 
Today, some surviving MOEMS companies, build-
ing all-optical switches, are successfully targeting 
more modest switch applications; say, for apartment 
buildings or university switchboards, and for new 
emerging applications such as semiconductor test 
equipment. Companies such as Glimmerglass claim 
to have solved the problems previously associated 
with the MOEMS switches and maintain that their 
optical switches are more reliable, less complicated, 
and more cost-effective. The Reflexion eighty-switch 
pack from Glimerglass is available as either a small 
core module tailored for communications-systems 
manufacturers or as a larger evaluation system. The 
evaluation system includes the Reflexion module, 
as well as optical-channel power monitors, a fiber 
patch panel, and an ethernet* control interface. It is 
all packed into a 4.5- by 9.5- by 7.0-inch rack-mount-
able case that consumes just 20 W (see Figure 10.1).
As we saw above, instead of switching signals 
among very large arrays of fiber optic cables for 
telecommunication switches, TI targeted its digital 
light processing (DLP) technology to projectors and 
video displays. Because it focused on the right mass 
* Ethernet: LAN (local area network) connects your computer to com-
puters close by and around you.
consumer application from the get-go, TI’s digital 
micromirror device (DMD) turned out to be a big-
scale MEMS success (see above).
Today, even the large all-optical optical switches 
are back. Late-stage startup Lambda OpticalSystems 
(Reston, VA), for example, recently unveiled the 
LambdaNode 2000, an integrated optical-switching 
and DWDM transport platform. The system sup-
ports 256 wavelengths, each wavelength running at 
10 Gbit/s for a total capacity of 2.5 Tbit/s. The device 
is running live traffic today in a 10-Gbit/s transcon-
tinental network built by the U.S. Naval Research 
Laboratory. Also, Calient Networks announced 
details of an interoperability demonstration it con-
ducted with Cisco Systems.
Accelerometers
Recently, the market for accelerometers in consumer 
electronics (CE) (computers, games, phones, etc.) has 
also started to explode. Consumer electronics have 
the potential to dwarf the automotive application, 
not only of accelerometers but also of pressure sen-
sors and gyros. The first accelerometer application in 
consumer electronics was for hard drive protection 
in notebooks. IBM (now Lenovo) puts a dual-axis 
accelerometer in its notebook: the accelerometer 
detects falling motion and places the HDD in safe 
mode prior to impact. Samsung (and others) have 
experimented with motion-based applications in 
handsets (gaming, user interfaces, power manage-
ment, navigation). Early in 2007, Apple announced 
the iPhone, with motion-based features.
TABLE 10.12 Major Characteristics of Optical Switching Devices
Type
Maximum 
Channels
Switching 
Time
Insertion 
Loss
Cross-Talk 
(Interference 
with Other 
Channels)
Device Dimensions
Manufacturers
Mechanical
1 × 2 to 
2 × 4
10 milliseconds 
or less
0.3 dB
–65 dB or less
Two switches in 8.3 mm 
× 15.6 m × 28 mm
Hitachi Metals, Seiko 
Instruments, etc.
Planar 
waveguide
16 × 16
10 milliseconds 
or less
8 dB for 
an 8 × 8 
switch
–50 dB or less
10 cm square
NTT, etc.
Mirror
256 × 256
About 50 
milliseconds
Unknown
Unknown
Mirrors about 500 µm 
in diameter
Lucent Technologies, 
A&T, Japan Aviation 
Electronics, etc.
Bubble
32 × 32
10 milliseconds 
or less
0.07 dB 
per 
trench
–60 dB or less
2 cm square
NTT Electronics, 
Agilent 
Technologies, etc.

[Page 611]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   611
Consequently, MEMS growth is expected by some 
to follow a hockey stick curve, with the value of 
products rising to $40 billion in 2015 and $200 bil-
lion in 2025.99 (See also an estimate by Dr. Marinis 
from Draper Laboratory: http://www.sem.org/PDF/
s01p01.pdf.) The problem is now one of profitability 
rather than the absence of real product opportuni-
ties: how to earn money on, say $0.32 microphones 
or $1.35 triaxis accelerometers for mobile handsets? 
Only by becoming more similar to the IC industry 
can MEMS devices achieve this goal, i.e., through 
more integration on larger (8-inch) Si wafers. In a 
sense, as far as mechanical and MOEMS are con-
cerned, the IC industry has now swallowed the 
MEMS field.
RF-MEMS
Wireless communications is showing an explosive 
growth of emerging commercial and consumer 
applications of radiofrequency (RF), microwave, and 
millimeter-wave circuits and systems. Just think 
that the number of mobile phones was predicted to 
reach 4.6 billion in 2010 (http://www.cbsnews.com/
stories/2010/02/15/business/main6209772.shtml). 
Several of the new and improved functionalities 
in mobile phones will be enabled by the use of 
MEMS products, such as microphones, lenses, and 
miniaturized data and energy storage devices. Analyst 
Bourne predicts that by 2010, three-quarters of all 
cell phones will benefit from MEMS (http://www.
eetimes.com/electronics-news/4071288/MEMS-
exec-sees-billion-dollar-markets) in 2009. This is 
making the consumer industry more and more the 
driving force behind many technology developments 
in MEMS. RF-MEMS will help further reduce the 
mobile phone size, power consumption, and cost. 
According to a market study from WTC covering 
the 2005–2009 period, the market for RF MEMS 
components was $126 million in 2004, confirming 
WTC’s forecast from 2002. It was forecasted to grow 
to over $1.1 billion in 2009 (Figure 10.64).
In this application area, a situation has been 
reached where the presence of the expensive, off-
chip passive RF components, such as fixed capaci-
tors and tunable capacitors (varicaps), high-Q 
inductors, RF switches and filters, plays a limit-
ing role. MEMS promises to provide higher levels 
of integration at lower costs and reduce the power 
consumption. In RF-MEMS the compatibility of 
the MEMS process with active circuitry process-
ing is critical, and the ideal MEMS solution must 
have little if any impact on the wafer/electrical 
yield of the active circuitry. This capability will 
enable component suppliers to offer increased 
performance designs while maintaining or reduc-
ing device cost. An additional benefit of the totally 
integrated approach is the inherent reliability of 
the IC-based processing. One approach is the inno-
vative “above-IC” (AIC) technology that enables 
the placement of RF-MEMS devices directly on top 
of the IC by using a thick copper technology com-
patible with CMOS, BiCMOS and gallium arsenide 
processes.100 Over time, integration of RF-MEMS 
devices may be the means to replace all passive 
RF chips with on-chip devices, achieving the long-
awaited single-chip RF solution. Current technol-
ogy and process limitations prevent replacement 
of all passive components with on-chip MEMS 
components. But placing even some components 
on-chip offers significant space and cost savings, 
allowing smaller form factors, benefiting cell 
phones for example, or added functionality such 
as internet connectivity.
Commercially available MEMS-based switches 
(e.g., from Raytheon), with low-loss metallic structures 
for lower insertion losses and higher linearity, 
achieve actuation by using either electrostatic or 
electromagnetic techniques. Infineon, for example, 
is aiming for electrostatic switches with 10- to 100-
microsecond switching times. Electrostatic actuation 
consumes no current but requires higher actuation 
voltage (>10 V), whereas electromagnetic actuation 
requires a lower actuation voltage, but its current 
consumption is significantly higher (see Chapter 
8, this volume). The use of magnetic thin films 
introduces slightly more processing complexity. 
Electrostatic switches offer the most promise as 
reconfiguration switches (e.g., antenna switches or 
frequency band selection switches), where the key 
factor is low power consumption.
MEMS manufacturers are also fabricating induc-
tors using a thick copper-on-insulator process to 
achieve higher quality factors and resonant frequen-
cies. Similarly, vendors are fabricating MEMS-based 

[Page 612]
612   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
variable capacitors by using a thick copper-on-insu-
lator process to minimize the ohmic losses. MEMS 
inductors and capacitors are typically suspended with 
a small air gap insulating them from the lossy silicon 
or GaAs substrates. The manufacturers achieve tun-
ability of these components by using movable metal-
lic structures with actuation processes similar to the 
ones used for switches. Typically, the quality factor 
of inductors using silicon technology have been 
less than 10 at 2 GHz, so far; this means that most 
applications have still required off-chip inductors 
to realize high-performance RF circuits. The objec-
tive remains to improve the quality of these devices 
and the tunability range of the circuits. MEMSCAP 
has designed high-quality inductors from thick cop-
per on insulator; they range from 1.5 to 15 nH.101 A 
quality factor of between 50 and 80 at 2 GHz was 
obtained. Variable capacitors from the same group 
offer a high tuning range of more than 2.5, with val-
ues ranging between 1 and 10 pF. The combination 
of inductor and capacitor capabilities optimized for 
low loss and flexible tunability range is important for 
the design of voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs) 
and filters. Currently, foundries making on-chip 
RF-MEMS devices are aiming toward fabrication of 
all the RF-MEMS device types at the same time.
In Volume I, Chapter 4, we saw that for wireless 
networks such as Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, SiGe is 
becoming an important choice substrate (see also 
Chapter 5, this volume where we compare GaAs 
with SiGe). An example SiGe process is the 130-nm 
SiGe BiCMOS technology from Jazz Semiconductor. 
This process combines industry standard 130-nm 
CMOS with 200 GHz silicon-germanium (SiGe) 
heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT) NPN 
transistors for high-performance RF and millimeter-
wave ICs. This technology enables the design of the 
highest performance circuits in advanced high-speed 
optical, wireless, and millimeter-wave applications.
Currently, the bulk of the RF-MEMS market ser-
vices mobile telephony applications, with bulk 
acoustic wave (BAW) (see Chapter 8, Figure 8.18) 
duplexers and filters supplied largely by Agilent and 
Infineon (this product was predicted to continue to 
dominate and constitute around 40% of the total 
market in 2009). The RF-MEMS market earned $330 
million in 2006, with three companies shipping 
the newer FBAR (Figure 8.19) duplexers and filters: 
Avago, Infineon, and EPCOS.
Knowles Acoustics shipped 200 million surface-
mount MEMS microphones (a two-chip solution 
in a single package) and confirmed its clear leader-
ship in this sector, doubling its estimated revenues 
to $92 million for 2006. Knowles has been selling 
to cell phone makers for five years and is by far the 
biggest player in MEMS cell phones. MEMS Tech 
of Malaysia is a close second. Akustica, Sonion 
MEMS, and Infineon are other entrants in this area. 
Today, Akustica is the only maker of a single-chip 
MEMS microphone, and its rival Sonion MEMS 
A/S (Roskilde, Denmark) was set to begin volume 
shipments of MEMS microphones from its new 
2004
1400
Te RF MEMS market 2004–2009
Military phased arrays
Military tactical radio
Satellites
RF Test and ATE
Automative
Microwave communications
Base stations
Consumer electronics and IT
WLAN and WPAN
Mobile telephony
1200
1000
800
600
400
Turnover (US $ million)
200
0
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
FIGURE 10.64 Radiofrequency microelectromechanical systems in wireless communication for the period 2004–2009 (WTC).

[Page 613]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   613
production facility in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, 
in 2008. Akustica puts all the functions of a min-
iature electret condenser microphone—including 
a discrete FET, a separate operational preamplifier 
chip, and an A/D converter chip—onto a single 
CMOS MEMS microphone chip.
Another mass market emerged for consumer and 
IT applications in 2006–2007 with micromechanical 
resonators. Silicon MEMS start-up companies 
Discera, Silicon Clocks, and SiTime are currently 
trying to displace quartz from the oscillator 
market. They are building packaged silicon MEMS 
oscillators, consisting of a MEMS resonator and the 
electrical circuits for the oscillator function and for 
frequency and temperature compensation. Here, 
micromechanical resonators are used not as filters 
but rather as timing devices. MEMS oscillators sales 
started at the end of 2006 with the first million 
shipments by SiTime. Seiko Epson also started to 
ship its QMEMS oscillators. RF-MEMS switches 
were only in the sampling phase in 2006 (e.g., 
at Teravicta and Panasonic) but were jolting the 
market, with Teravicta shipping 10,000 units per 
month and plans to reach the million mark by the 
end of 2007. In Chapter 5, “Quartz Properties and 
Quartz Machining,” we made a detailed comparison 
of Si oscillators with quartz oscillators. More than 
sixty companies are currently involved in RF MEMS 
manufacturing, and around a quarter of them were 
shipping commercial products or samples in 2005. 
Outside of mass markets, RF test and automated 
test equipment (ATE) offer the best opportunities, 
followed by military applications (see Figure 10.64).
MEMS Foundries
As we remarked earlier, the emerging MEMS 
consumer market is a strong driving force for the 
MEMS industry to develop MEMS devices integrated 
with ICs and is pushing the MEMS industry to even 
adapt 8-inch wafer size manufacturing. Capital 
requirements for a MEMS production line can be very, 
very large. And, as with semiconductors, the smaller 
the features, the more expensive the production line 
is. Many MEMS startups expended plenty of investor 
dollars wrestling with exotic materials and getting 
pilot production lines in place, exhausting their 
funds before their markets could develop. With this 
knowledge and the current MEMS upswing, even 
foundries are now becoming profitable. Along this 
line, Bosch, a MEMS pioneering company, founded 
a subsidiary named Bosch Sensortec in early 2005. 
This subsidiary is dedicated to engineering, devel-
oping, and marketing micromechanical sensors 
with foundry services for consumer electronics, 
medical technology, security systems, and logistics. 
The firm is backed by Bosch automotive MEMS 
development and production and owns a 4000-m2 
CMOS fab and a 4200-m2 MEMS back-end fab. A 
new 8-inch fab was planned for 2009. The need to 
adhere closer to IC manufacturing rules has become 
even more urgent as few U.S. MEMS foundries have 
survived. As mentioned earlier, the MEMS foundries 
that did survive the MOEMS bubble can expect 
to be doing good business if they can scale up to 
compete with traditional IC fabs fast enough. In the 
author’s own experience, MEMS foundries are hard 
to make profitable in the United States, as they need 
to keep on accepting a wide variety of jobs to keep 
the expensive clean-room operation going. In the 
process they do not stay long enough on the learning 
curve of one new product to become world leaders 
for that particular product. As a consequence, these 
labs are moving more and more to Asia, where a 
large company might have more patience to keep the 
doors open till the MEMS foundry turns profitable. 
Olympus, in Japan, for example, already runs the 
largest MEMS foundry in the world.102
Nanotechnology Markets
Introduction
As is clear from the preceding section, although not 
as large a market as projected, MEMS has made a 
successful transition out of the laboratory into the 
marketplace. If one excludes the contributions to 
nanotechnology markets from genetic engineer-
ing (e.g., genetically engineered proteins and DNA 
probes) and the latest ICs (e.g., chips with sub-
 100-nm critical dimensions that started shipping in 
2003) and next-generation lithography equipment 
(e.g., extreme UV lithography exposure stations), 
nanotechnology (NEMS) is still in its infancy, and 
when a new field emerges it is often the tool- makers 

[Page 614]
614   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
and the conference organizers/consultants who 
make the most money. In his entertaining treatise 
on Nanotech Pioneers, Steven Edwards103 compares 
this to the California gold rush, when the hardware 
stores and whorehouses made more money than 
the miners themselves. Nanotechnology quickly 
became a buzzword and a catchall term to attract 
funding, and as in the case of MEMS, many exist-
ing activities have been relabeled to raise their stock 
market value.
Whereas in MEMS, products/markets do exist 
(Bosch makes >100 million MEMS devices a year), 
in NEMS we deal mostly with manufacturing gear 
(e.g., carbon-nanotube chemical vapor deposition, 
dip-pen lithography, nanoimprint lithography, 
etc.), metrology equipment (Veeco’s SPM, Zyvex 
Nanomanipulators, etc.), software (e.g., Atomostix, 
MEMulator™, etc.), and products based on nano-
materials (e.g., nano skin cream, suntan lotions, 
nano-enhanced tennis balls that bounce longer, 
etc.). Some market studies do also count nanode-
vices and next-generation lithography equipment in 
their market estimates. We advice against this prac-
tice, as co-opting the IC industry in nanotechnology 
market projections is bound to be misleading. The 
emphasis should be put on innovative nanofabrica-
tion methodologies making new nanomaterials and 
nanoproducts and not co-opting efforts that have 
been going on for a long time. Some will argue that, 
today at least, besides nanotools research tools, this 
leaves only low-tech nanomaterials-based products 
as a new realization. These are products with little 
technology content and scant manufacturing inno-
vation, and cynics would say that a new transparent 
sunscreen hardly justifies the current level of invest-
ment in nanotechnology.
As with any exciting topic, there is a lot of specu-
lation and exaggerated estimates about the impact 
nanotechnology will make over time. This author 
does believe that the ultimate impact of nanotech-
nology will be broader and deeper than the IC rev-
olution ever was. This is because of the potential 
of nanotechnology to apply material innovations 
to so many different situations and challenges. 
Nanotechnology will profoundly change major 
industries such as electronics, medicine, transpor-
tation, defense, and consumer goods through the 
development of advanced materials that are lighter, 
stronger, and more versatile than existing materials. 
The current nanomaterials boom will be followed 
by a nanodevices upsurge—it just might be much 
slower than current market studies suggest.
Overall Market and Market Character
The National Science Foundation (NSF) projects 
that nanotech will be a $1 trillion industry by 
2015; the accuracy of this claim is difficult to assess 
given  the  doubts expressed above about what is 
included in this estimate. Many policy makers have 
bought into this projection, though; governments 
across the world poured $4 billion into nanotech 
research in 2004, and in 2006, the worldwide invest-
ment in nanotech research and development was 
said to be $12.4 billion. There is even a stock index 
of public companies working on nanotechnology 
(launched by Lux Research in 2005).
According to a technical market research report, 
“Nanotechnology: A Realistic Market Assessment” 
from 
BCC 
Research 
(http://www.bccresearch.
com), the global market for nanotechnology was 
worth $11.6 billion in 2007. This was expected to 
increase to $12.7 billion in 2008 and $27.0 billion 
by the end of 2013, with a compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) of $16.3% (see Figure 10.65) 
This makes the NSF market projection for 2015 ($1 
trillion) seem unrealistically high. However, as a 
counterpoint, Lux Research estimates that by 2014, 
$2.6 trillion in manufactured goods will incorporate 
nanotechnology—or about 15% of the total global 
Global nanotechnology market, 2007–2013
Technology
Nanomaterials
11.7%
Nanotools
33.3%
Nanodevices
$10.14B
$10.77B
$1.49B
$24M
2007
2008
2013
$1.89B
$26M
$18.69B
$7.95B
$366M
69.5%
CAGR% 2008–2013
FIGURE 10.65 Global nanotechnology market, 2007–2013. 
(From BCC Research.)

[Page 615]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   615
output will be nanotechnology based! It is hard to 
figure out what this Lux Research number really 
means though in terms of the real nanotechnology 
market size (e.g., TiO2 and ZnO nanopowders are 
cheap and would not really constitute a big market 
share or put many people to work). We actually 
believe that even the BCC Research numbers are too 
high. This research firm breaks down the market 
into nanomaterials, nanotools, and nanodevices. 
As stated above we are uncertain about the merit of 
including nanodevices in a nanotechnology market 
study as today the only nanodevices on the market 
are the next-generation ICs. These are based on the 
traditional top-down manufacturing methodologies 
that were ongoing long before and independent of the 
current nanofocus. More critical, in terms of coming 
up with acceptable numbers, is the unfortunate 
inclusion of current next-generation lithography 
(NGL) equipment in a market study that should be 
projecting the impact that new nanotechnologies 
are bound to make. By including NGL equipment 
one runs the risk of making projected numbers a 
self-fulfilling prophecy by broadening the definition 
of what passes for nanotechnology (this is what 
happened in the MEMS field). Such work will 
also not provide sufficient information in order to 
guide corporate or individual investment decisions. 
Investors require additional data, such as the size 
of specific nanotechnology markets, novelty of 
the manufacturing method (e.g., is it evolutionary 
or revolutionary), prices, and competition, as well 
as potential regulation. Nanotechnology market 
reports should point out specifically whether one 
is just dealing with an evolutionary extension 
of IC fabrication or with a revolutionary new 
nanofabrication method (there are plenty of 
sophisticated market reports covering the future IC 
market separately).
Of the three BCC Research nanomarket catego-
ries, nanomaterials dominated in 2007, accounting 
for 87% of the market. Worth an estimated $10.8 
billion in 2008, this segment was projected to 
reach $18.7 billion in 2013, for a CAGR of 11.7%. 
Nanotools accounted for 12.8% of the market in 
2007. Worth an estimated $1.9 billion in 2008, the 
segment was predicted to reach almost $8.0 billion 
by the end of 2013, for a CAGR of 33.3%. Nanotools, 
in which BBC Research includes the nanolitho-
graphic tools used to produce the next generation 
of semiconductors, are projected to grow at a much 
faster rate than nanomaterials. As a result, that mar-
ket share was predicted to increase to 29.4% in 2013, 
while the nanomaterials’ share would fall to 69.2% 
of the total market.
The nanodevices segment, according to BCC 
Research, will enjoy a CAGR of 69.5% between 2008 
and 2013. It was expected to increase from a $26.2 
million segment in 2008 to $366.2 million by the 
end of 2013.
The largest end-user markets for nanotechnology 
in 2007, according to BCC Research, were environ-
mental remediation (56% of the total market), elec-
tronics (20.8%), and energy (14.1%). Electronics, 
biomedical and consumer applications have much 
higher projected growth rates than other applica-
tions over the next five years (i.e., 30.3%, 56.2%, and 
45.9%, respectively.) In contrast, energy applications 
are projected to grow at a CAGR of only 12.6%, and 
environmental applications should actually decline 
by an average of 1.5% per year. It is not clear to this 
author why this should be the case. Depending on 
government policies on green technologies, the real 
numbers might again be quite different.
While it appears inevitable that nanotechnology 
will have a broad and fundamental impact on many 
sectors of the world economy, various technical, 
marketing, and other hurdles need to be overcome 
before nanotechnology fulfills this promise. These 
challenges and differences of opinion regarding the 
speed of the commercial implementation of new 
nanoproducts are reflected in the wide divergence 
among existing estimates of the U.S. and global 
nanotechnology markets. Global market estimates 
for 2004–2005, for example, range from $8 billion 
to $68 billion.
Polls show that most Americans know little or 
nothing about nanotechnology, despite the fact 
that, according to some estimates, nanotechnol-
ogy was already incorporated into more than $50 
billion in manufactured goods in 2006. Public 
perceptions about risks—real and perceived—can 
have large economic consequences. How consumers 
respond to these early products—in food, electron-
ics, health care, clothing, and cars—is a litmus test 

[Page 616]
616   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
for broader market acceptance of nanotechnologies 
in the future. Along with high expectations, nano-
technology also evokes fear in some people. Bill 
Joy, cofounder of Sun Microsystems, published an 
article in 2000 in which he called nanotechnology 
(along with biotechnology and robotics) a “Faustian 
bargain” and a “Pandora’s box,” and called on man-
kind to relinquish all three technologies. In 2002, 
Michael Crichton’s novel Prey, a fictional  treatment 
of the dangers of nanotechnology, made the New 
York Times bestseller list. Interestingly, a recent 
nationwide survey conducted by the University of 
Wisconsin–Madison indicates that scientists are 
more concerned than the general public about the 
potential health and environmental risks of nano-
technology. Over 30% of scientists interviewed 
expressed concern that nanotechnology may pose 
risks to human health, whereas only 20% of ordi-
nary people shared their fears (because they do not 
understand the technology?).
An important event that helps us appreciate the 
nanotechnology market dilemma today is what 
happened to Nanosys in 2004. On April 23 of 2004, 
Nanosys Inc., a Palo Alto-based developer of inor-
ganic semiconductor nanocrystals, filed for an ini-
tial public offering (IPO). Merrill Lynch, Lehman 
Brothers, CIBC World Markets, and Needham & Co. 
were underwriting the offering. The company was 
seeking to raise up to $115 million on the Nasdaq 
market. But on August 4, 2004, Nanosys Inc. with-
drew its IPO. “Based on adverse market conditions,” 
the company explained “Nanosys has determined 
that it is not advisable at this time to proceed 
with  the proposed offering.” Press reports leading 
up to the IPO had lambasted Nanosys for having 
only $3 million in revenues in 2003. It was also 
pointed out that one of the few hard metrics avail-
able to value the firm—a price-to-revenue ratio over 
120—suggested it was a speculative investment, and 
that if it performed poorly, it would undermine the 
ability of other nanotechnology firms to access the 
public markets. One must also realize that in 2004, 
the MEMS technology bubbles of 2001–2002 were 
still vividly remembered.
Nanosys later did raise approximately $40 million 
in a private equity financing. This financing was led 
by El Dorado Ventures and includes new investors 
Masters Capital, Medtronic, Inc., Wasatch Advisors, 
and others. In addition, there was strong participa-
tion from existing investors, including Alexandria 
Equities, ARCH Venture Partners, CDIB BioScience 
Ventures, CW Group, Harris & Harris Group, Inc., 
In-Q-Tel, Intel Capital, H. B. Fuller Company, Lux 
Capital, Polaris Venture Partners, Prospect Venture 
Partners, UOB Hermes Asia Technology Fund, and 
Venrock Associates. Nanosys is using this funding 
for the ongoing development and manufacturing 
scale-up of products that incorporate its proprietary, 
inorganic nanostructures with integrated functionality 
for multiple industries. Current product develop-
ment programs include chemical analysis chips for 
pharmaceutical drug research, fuel cells for portable 
electronics, nanostructures for displays and phased 
array antennas, nonvolatile memory for electronic 
devices, and solid-state lighting products.
The type and number of California-based MEMS 
and NEMS start-up companies (see Table 10.13) 
has historically played an important role in what 
happens in these areas worldwide. In 2000, according 
to Janusz Bryzeck, there were 100 MEMS/NEMS-
based companies in California alone, 33 of which 
were fabricating MOEMS devices. Decimated by the 
MOEMS bubble of 2001, “only” sixty-five California 
MEMS/NEMS companies survived in 2005. In 
the early years (say, from 1972 on), companies 
making mechanical MEMS devices (using wet 
bulk micromachining) played a pivotal role in the 
development of the market for these mechanical Si 
sensor products. Petersen’s 1982 paper extolling the 
excellent mechanical properties of single-crystalline 
silicon helped galvanize academia’s involvement in 
Si micromachining in a major way.104 Before that 
time, timid efforts had played out in industry, and 
practical needs were driving the technology (market 
pull). Academics often explored micromachines that 
constituted gadgetry only, and, as a consequence, the 
field was perceived by some as a technology looking 
for applications (technology push). Polycrystalline 
surface micromachining-based (see Volume II, 
Chapter 7) MEMS companies started emerging 
around 1991. However, from the mid-1990s on, many 
of the MEMS compa nies became bio-MEMS oriented 
(application of MEMS to biotechnology), and single-
crystalline and polycrystalline Si were often not the 

[Page 617]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   617
TABLE 10.13 Some California Microelectromechanical System/Nanoelectromechanical System Companies
Company
Location
Date
Overview of Activity and Manufacturing Method
Sensym
Milpitas 
1972
Made sensors from silicon and piezoresistive materials. Some cavities in products made by 
anisotropic etching.
Source: U.S. Patents.
Endevco
San Juan Capistrano
1975
Produces sensors for vibration, shock, inertial motion, and dynamic pressure measurement using 
semiconductor technology and piezoceramic processing techniques.
Source: Endevco.
Irvine Sensors Co.
Costa Mesa
1980
Manufactures some products in a batch process. Products are layered silicon and connected with 
gold.
Source: Irvine Sensors Co.
Komag
San Jose
1983
Komag sputters thin-film disks using a vacuum deposition process. During the sputtering 
process, microscopic magnetic layers are successively deposited on the disk—these layers 
ultimately provide the magnetic storage capacity for data.
Source: Komag.
Nanostructures
Santa Clara
1988
Produced thin films such as silicon membranes by electrochemical means or mask production 
with RIE.
Source: U.S. Patents.
Abaxis
Sunnyvale
1989
Produces point-of-care blood analyzers from a bottom- and mid-layer of polymethymethacrylate 
plastic with a top layer of ABS made in a molding process. Some products made from joined 
thermoplastics through melting.
Source: U.S. Patents, Abaxis.
Sentir
Santa Clara
1991
Produced sensors, including a pressure sensor made on a ceramic substrate with piezoresistive 
diaphragm and gel as the transfer medium to transducer.
Source: U.S. Patents.
Affymetrix
Santa Clara
1992
The company’s microarrays were made by a process that begins by coating a 5" by 5" quartz 
wafer.
Source: Affymetrix.
Unisun
Newbury Park
1993
Unisun’s techniques provide substantial cost advantages to traditional PV products based on 
silicon wafers and to vacuum deposition techniques typically used to deposit PV thin films.
Source: Unisun. 
Nanogen
San Diego
1993
Makes microarray cartridges the only Si based DNA arrays ever made.
Source: Nanogen patents.
Front Edge 
Technology
Baldwin Park
1994
FET develops, manufactures, and markets next-generation, ultra-thin rechargeable batteries for 
card-type applications.
Source: Front Edge Technology. 
Aclara
Mountain View
1995
Some products made by thermally bonding plastics.
Source: U.S. Patents.
(Continued)

[Page 618]
618   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
TABLE 10.13 Some California Microelectromechanical System/Nanoelectromechanical System Companies (Continued)
Company
Location
Date
Overview of Activity and Manufacturing Method
Nanochip
Fremont
1996
Nanochip is developing the next generation of removable, portable memory chips for consumer 
applications. Using MEMs technology along with arrays of atomic force probe tips, Nanochip is 
developing storage chips that will store tens of gigabytes per chip. Our technology is not 
bound by lithography constraints.
Source: Nanochip.
Caliper
Mountain View
1996
Microfluidic lab-on-a-chip made of quartz, glass, or plastic-bonded to each other.
Source: Caliper.
Cepheid
Sunnyvale
1996
Made sample preparation products with the process of electrodeposition, LPVD, glass bonding, 
and RIE out of materials from the semiconductor industry.
Source: U.S. Patents. 
Fluidigm
South San Francisco
1997
Fluidgm’s NanoFlex valve consists of a membrane that deflects under pressure to pinch off the 
flow of fluids in a microchannel. The valve is made from two separate layers of elastomeric 
rubber.
Source: Fluidigm.
Carbon Solutions
Riverside
1998
Manufactures single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) in bulk quantities.
Source: Carbon Solutions.
Zyomex
Hayward
1998
Products included fluidic technologies using an etching process.
Source: U.S. Patents. 
PolyFuel
Mountain View
1999
PolyFuel’s membranes are based upon hydrocarbon polymers rather than fluorocarbon.
Source: PolyFuel. 
GeneFluidics
Monterey Park
2000
GeneFluidics disposable cartridges and sensor chips are injection-molded, using only plastic 
substrates and other low-cost materials; the GeneFluidics platform will dramatically reduce the 
cost of molecular analysis.
Molecular 
Nanosystems, Inc.
Palo Alto
2001
The company synthesizes carbon nanotubes on predefined locations with the desired 
orientation on different substrates, manipulates the properties of carbon nanotubes via 
functionalization, and integrates them into next-generation gas and biological sensors and 
other high-end electronics devices.
Source: Nanovip. 
Discera
San Jose
2001
Discera offers PureSilicon resonators, which is displacing quartz crystal solutions with systems-
on-a-chip alternatives.
Source: Discera. 

[Page 619]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   619
Ahwahnee Inc.
San Jose
2002
Ahwahnee’s industry-leading CNTs are revolutionizing a number of markets, including fuel cells, 
energy, and semiconductors.
Source: Ahwahnee. 
Apex 
Nanomaterials
San Diego
2003
Apex Nanomaterials’s world first-class SWNT production technologies using both arcing and 
CVD methods are generating SWNTs with the best quality and most cost-effective at an 
industry scale.
Source: Apex Nanomaterials.
Atomate
Santa Barbara
2003
Atomate Corporation develops complete systems, components, and materials that are optimized 
for the synthesis of nanostructures using CVD.
NanoSensors, Inc.
Santa Clara
2003
Develops and markets sensors and instruments to detect explosive (X), chemical (C), and 
biological (B) agents (“XCB”)
Source: Nanosensors.
InvenSense
Santa Clara
2003
InvenSense’s gyroscopes takes advantage of major innovations in MEMS mechanical design and 
fabrication, mixed-signal ASIC design, and wafer-level packaging, which is based on the IC 
industry.
Source: Invensense.
Intelligent Optical 
Systems, Inc.
Torrance
2004
Develops cutting-edge technologies in optical sensing and instrumentation. Current research 
and development is being conducted in various areas, including Nanoprobes and Materials for 
Sensing.
Source: Nanovip.
Unidym, Inc.
Menlo Park
2006
Unidym’s initial product is a transparent, conductive film of CNTs that replaces the 
approximately $1B of expensive and brittle metal oxide films currently employed in touch 
screens, flat-panel displays, OLEDs, and thin-film solar cells.
Source: Unidym. 
Biodent
Menlo Park
2006
Biodent is the first company to combine printed optoelectronic components with microfluidic 
systems. This combination is enabled by the fluid processability of organic semiconductor 
materials. Biodent allows for the first time to print and integrate full optical readout systems 
directly onto microfluidic devices.
Source: Biodent.

[Page 620]
620   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
preferred MEMS substrates for these applications. 
Later yet, from 1997 on, nanotechnology companies, 
mostly working on biotechnology type applications 
(bio-NEMS), started emerging, and here Si was often 
not involved at all.
For further reading on the history of MEMS and 
NEMS up to today see Volume I, Chapter 1.
Nanotechnology Tools
To estimate the size and to forecast the market 
for nanotechnology tools over the next five years, 
nanotechnology 
analysis 
firm 
Lux 
Research 
interviewed CEO’s and marketing executives at 
21 leading tool vendors worldwide and research 
and development leaders at forty-nine companies, 
universities, and national laboratories active in 
nanotechnology. They correctly excluded established 
uses of manufacturing and metrology tools in fields 
such as semiconductors and data storage. This firm 
believes that the market for tools used to fabricate 
emerging nanotechnology could grow from less 
than $20 million in 2004 to nearly $235 million by 
2010. At the same time, they claim, the market for 
metrology tools to inspect matter on the nanometer 
scale, which currently dominates the $580 million 
nanotechnology tools market, is expected to see only 
tepid growth, although still command more than 
$750 million in 2010. These numbers are lower, and 
more realistic, than the BCC Research findings (see 
above) as they exclude the traditional IC tools.
Nanotechnologists basically use three kinds of 
tools to experiment with matter on the nanometer 
scale. First, metrology tools, reviewed in Chapter 
6, this volume, such as atomic force microscopes 
(AFMs) and scanning electron microscopes (SEMs) 
visualize the nanometer-sized objects and represent 
the most mature and widely used category of tools 
for emerging nanotechnology. Second, fabrication 
tools such as nano-imprint lithography and dip-pen 
nanolithography create structures at the nanometer 
scale. Thirdly, modeling tools predict nanostructure 
properties to circumvent the costs and time associ-
ated with experiments. Lux Research predicts that 
the nanotechnology-tools market will see a CAGR of 
11% to nearly $1.1 billion in 2010. However, growth 
will not be even across each of the three market seg-
ments. The current market for nanotechnology tools 
is dominated by inspection tools, which accounted 
for 95% of the 2004 revenues. The inspection-tools 
market saw dramatic growth during the early 2000s 
nanotech explosion, when many university nano 
centers were being built and equipped. However, 
the growth outlook for inspection tools looks slow 
because the university and lab markets are now 
saturated.
Nanofabrication tools have not yet found com-
mercial use. Still, Lux Research expects these 
instruments to gain traction over the next five 
years and move beyond research and develop-
ment labs to manufacturing floors. In particular, 
Lux Research sees nano-imprint lithography as the 
favorite candidate. Lux Research felt dip-pen nan-
olithography facing sharp resistance, as in many 
cases researchers would rather have a kit to modify 
an AFM they already own than purchasing a whole 
new instrument just to do dip-pen. No wide use for 
dip-pen nanolithography in production is antici-
pated before 2010.
Modeling tools claimed less than $10 million 
in 2004 in the face of entrenched skepticism from 
potential customers. In five years, Lux Research 
expects that market to expand to only roughly $40 
million, a small fraction of the total nanotechnology-
tools market. Still, in a decade the analysts predicted 
it could break $100 million as power, accuracy, and 
ease of use of modeling tools continues to improve 
and more customer success stories emerge.
Nanomaterials
Even though much of the research is still in the ini-
tial stages, nanoproducts based on nanomaterials 
have entered the commercial market. According to 
an update to the nanotechnology consumer product 
inventory maintained by the Project on Emerging 
Nanotechnologies (PEN) (ScienceDaily, April 25, 
2008), new nanotechnology consumer products are 
coming on the market at the rate of three or four 
per week. The number of consumer products using 
nanotechnology has grown from 212 to 609 since 
PEN launched the world’s first online inventory of 
manufacturer-identified nanotech goods in March 
2006. Health and fitness items, which includes cos-
metics and sunscreens, represent 60% of these prod-
ucts. There are thirty-five automotive products in the 

[Page 621]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   621
PEN inventory, including the Hummer H2. General 
Motors Corporation bills the H2 as having a cargo 
bed that “uses about seven pounds of molded in 
color nanocomposite parts for its trim, center bridge, 
sail panel and box rail protector.” Nanoscale silver 
is the most cited nanomaterial used. It is found in 
143 products, or over 20% of the inventory. Carbon, 
including carbon nanotubes and fullerenes, is the 
second highest nanoscale material cited. Other 
nanoscale materials explicitly referenced in products 
are zinc (including zinc oxide), titanium (including 
titanium dioxide), silica, and gold. A list of nano-
technology merchandise—containing everything 
from nanotech diamonds to cooking oil to golf clubs 
to iPhones—is available at http://www.nanotech 
project.org/consumerproducts. One of the new items 
among the more than six hundred products now in the 
inventory is Swissdent Nanowhitening Toothpaste, 
with “calcium peroxides, in the form of nano-par-
ticles.” PEN Project Director David Rejeski cites Ace 
Silver Plus—another of the nine nano toothpastes 
in the inventory—as an example of the upsurge in 
nanotechnology consumer products in stores.
There are more than five hundred nanotechnol-
ogy companies globally, and one-third are in nano-
particles. Of that one-third, more than  fifty-five are 
in carbon nanotubes. Of the present carbon nano-
tube companies, about twenty are into large-scale 
production. Some representative example compa-
nies in the last category include the following:
 
1. Nanoledge—(France). Large-scale production 
(4 ounces per day)—tennis racquets, fibers.
 
2. Mitsui CNRI (Akashima, Tokyo)—new nan-
otube plant (120 tons per year at 10% of the 
present cost).
 
3. Frontier Carbon (Kitakyusyu City)—Mitsubishi 
large-scale manufacturing (400 kg per year and 
1500 tons in 2007).
Another group of carbon nanotubes companies 
sells modified carbon nanotubes (e.g., for sensor 
applications):
 
1. Carbon Nanotechnologies, the late Richard 
Smalley’s company ($15 million—from angel 
investors)—single-walled and functionalized 
tubes.
 
2. Nantero (>$20 million—DFJ and other venture 
capital firms)—NRAM™, a high-density, non-
volatile random access memory chip.
 
3. Molecular Nanosystems Stanford ($2 million—
band of angel investors)—nanotube sensors.
 
4. C Sixty ($4 million—CNI angel investors)— 
protease inhibitor, anti-HIV (merged with CNI).
Carbon nanotubes and fullerenes have very 
broad applications, and from the above it is seen 
that large manufacturing companies are stepping in, 
with the price of product dropping rapidly. There is 
also a clear trend of specializations developing (e.g., 
modified carbon nanotubes). There have not been 
any IPOs in this area yet. Applications of fullerenes 
include clothes (carbon nanotubes form waterproof 
tear-resistant cloth fibers), concrete (carbon fibers 
increase the tensile strength, and halt crack propaga-
tion), sports equipment (stronger and lighter tennis 
rackets, bike parts, golf balls, golf clubs, golf shaft, 
and baseball bats), ultrahigh-speed flywheels (the 
high strength/weight ratio enables very high speeds 
to be achieved), and bridges.
Other nanoparticles are used in catalysis, ceram-
ics, dug delivery and functional materials, and coat-
ings. Existing companies are Degussa, Cabot Corp, 
Johnson Matthey BASF, and Altana; start-up compa-
nies include the following:
 
1. NanoPhase Technologies (Nasdaq). Patents 
licensed from Argonne in 1990. This was the 
first Nanotech IPO (1998). It was overhyped 
and had to pay compensation of $4.8 (January 
2002). Altana Chemie AG acquired a 7% share 
for $10 million in 2004. Products include ZnO 
nanoparticles for sunscreens and catalysts. 
Losing $1.3 million per quarter.
 
2. Ntera ($30 million)—was lithium-ion batter-
ies, now nanochromic displays.
 
3. Nanogram ($6.7 million)—nanomaterials.
 
4. Aveka (buyout from 3M)—particle processing.
 
5. Oxonica ($4 million)—sunscreens, bio tags, 
catalysts. Floated on Aim 2005 (overdiluted).
 
6. Quantum Dot Corp ($37 million)—bio-assays. 
Acquired by Invitrogen in October 2005.
 
7. Nanosphere ($10 million). Gold nanoparticle 
DNA probes for biothreat detection (anthrax).

[Page 622]
622   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 
8. Qinetiq—nanomaterials.
 
9. Nanomagnetics—was data storage, now water 
purification, Apaclara.
 10. Nanosys—the hyped nanotech IPO (oversold; 
see above). A Larry Bock company. Sells as 
much the technology as brand name scientists 
(Charles Lieber, Hongkun Park, Paul Alivisatos, 
and many others over the years). Products 
include biosensors (functionalized inorganic 
semiconductor nanowires, 1D electron flow; 
highly sensitive and selective), photovoltaics, 
nanocrystals in host matrix, solar cells as roof 
tiles (Matsushita contract), macroelectronics; 
flexible, low-cost substrate, nanostructured sur-
faces, hydrophobic and antimicrobial surfaces.
A worthwhile book to consult is Nanotechnology 
Applications and Markets by L. Gasman.105
Example 10.2: Cosmetics
The market for cosmetics using nanotechnol-
ogy is expected to grow significantly over the 
coming years despite continued concern about 
the safety of the technology. Nanotechnology 
is being used increasingly in the personal care 
industry to develop sunscreens and antiaging 
formulations. The global market for cosmetics 
using nanotechnology was valued at $62 mil-
lion as of 2007 and is forecast to grow annu-
ally by 16.6%, reaching $155.8 million by 2012, 
according to a BCC Research report (NANO17D). 
This market research company listed sunscreens 
as one of three applications in the biomedical, 
pharmaceutical, and cosmetics industries that 
are expected to account for 95% of the market 
in 2012. Nanoparticles of titanium dioxide and 
zinc dioxide are used in sunscreens to increase 
UV light absorption and make formulations 
transparent—ultimately making them more 
appealing to the consumer.
Example 10.3: Textiles
Nanotechnologies are providing incremental 
improvements to existing textile sectors, but 
they offer the highest growth in the nontradi-
tional sectors. In the near term, the opportunity 
for nanotechnology in the textiles industry is 
in product innovation, not process innovation. 
Nanotechnology is more likely to be used to pro-
duce new materials or enhance the properties of 
existing materials than to reduce the production 
cost or improve quality. A number of nanotech-
nology innovations are already commercially 
available. These include:
 
◾Stain-, wrinkle-, and liquid-resistant fabrics 
(see NanoTex)
 
◾Clothing that can absorb body odors
 
◾Clothing that emits deodorant by slow 
release
 
◾Clothing that changes color with change in 
light
 
◾Clothing that changes color with external or 
body heat
There are a number of opportunities that 
will be explored as nanotechnology develops 
further:
 
◾New blended fabrics for specific applications 
(e.g., sportswear, mountainwear, military appli-
cations), including the incorporation of carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs) into fabrics. It is expected 
that composites with CNTs or interweaving 
with extruded CNT fibers will introduce higher 
conductivity as well as high strength.
 
◾Property enhancement or alterations (UV 
blocking, durability, breathability, flexibility, 
recyclability, color retention, self-repair etc.); 
included in this is the introduction of elec-
tronic properties into fabrics by treatment 
with inherently conducting polymers. These 
provide capabilities such as sensing (chemical 
and mechanical), energy generation (photo-
voltaics), energy storage (batteries, superca-
pacitors), and charge dissipation (antistatic). 
 
◾In addition, controlled-release polymers may 
replenish and/or trigger release of antifungal, 
surface finish, or medical growth aids to the 
polymer surface. The triggered release sys-
tems may be made to be responsive to stimuli 
such as changes in temperature, humidity pH, 
and/or dissolved oxygen.
 
◾Development of specific aesthetic proper-
ties (e.g., glow in the dark, color change with 
angle of light, color change with applied elec-
tric field).

[Page 623]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   623
The global market for nanotechnology in the 
textiles industry was around $480 million in 2007. 
The forecast is that nanobased products and 
processes will be worth $4.9 billion to the tex-
tiles industry by 2015. It is estimated that 24.6% 
of all textiles products available in 2015 will 
incorporate some form of nanotechnology, with 
the greatest level of penetration in the hygiene 
area, which covers numerous markets from 
household care to leisure and consumer goods 
to health care. Nanotechnology-based applica-
tions such self-cleaning textiles as will start to 
make a major impact in 2011. There will likely be 
a significant revenue growth in nanotechnology 
products in the sector from 2011 onward.
Questions
 10.1:  Suggest an array of sensors that could be 
used for an electronic tongue (5 tastes).
 10.2:  Why do you think that chemical microsen-
sors have not enjoyed the same commer-
cial success as physical microsensors? How 
might these deficiencies be overcome in the 
future?
 10.3:  Instrumentation 
miniaturization 
is 
a 
fast developing field. The Agilent 2100 
Bioanalyzer fabricated by Agilent & Caliper 
Technologies Co. has been awarded the 
Pittcon Editors’ Gold Award for 2000. How 
does this instrument benefit from miniatur-
ization? What are its drawbacks? In minia-
turized GC, MS, and IMS, what components 
have been micromachined?
 10.4:  At Pittcon 2000, Cyrano showcased a porta-
ble electronic nose, the Cyranose 320, which 
distinguishes odors using an array of 32 sen-
sors. Each sensor is made of a composite of 
conductive carbon black and a non-conduc-
tive polymer. Describe how the sensors work 
and explain how one “trains” an electronic 
nose to qualitatively and quantitatively ana-
lyze unknown samples.
 10.5:  Nanotechnology is currently the buzzword in 
the scientific community. What does the term 
mean to you? Provide examples of nanoscale 
building blocks. What are the characteriza-
tion tools (metrology) appropriate for this 
technology? What strategy would you con-
sider for assembling a nanodevice and why?
 10.6:  Over the last five years mechanical MEMS 
applications saw a major change in market 
acceptance. In what applications and why 
did this occur?
 10.7:  The United States seems ahead in lithogra-
phy-based MEMS and NEMS but is perhaps 
behind in non-lithography-based MEMS. 
Explain.
 10.8:  What are the three market components of 
NEMS today? How do they compare in size?
 10.9:  What are the largest MEMS applications in 
the automotive industry?
10.10:  What was behind the infamous optical 
MEMS bubble bust?
10.11:  Explain the concept behind the 1st level 
packaged MEMS and smallest commercial-
ized unit.
10.12:  How does the MEMS market compare in size 
to the IC market?
10.13:  What is the difference between an angular 
rate sensor, a gyro, and an accelerometer?
10.14:  Compare manufacturing options for Si-based 
pressure sensors and accelerometers. Give 
pros and cons.
10.15:  Give a list of reasons why the ISFET did not 
become a commercial success.
References
 
1. NEXUS. 2006. NEXUS market analysis for MEMS and micro-
systems III, 2005–2009. Neuchâtel, Switzerland: NEXUS.
 
2. Bryzek, J., S. Roundy, B. Bircumshaw, C. Chung, K. 
Castellino, J. R. Stetter, and M. Vestel. 2006. Marvelous 
MEMS: Advanced IC sensors and microstructures for 
high  volume applications. IEEE Circuits Devices Mag 
22:8–28.
 
3. Ehmann, K. F., D. Bourell, M. I. Culpepper, T. J. Hodgson, 
T. Kurfess, M. Madou, K. Rajurkar, and R. DeVor. 2007. 
International assessment of research and development in micro-
manufacturing. New York: Springer.
 
4. Maluf, N. 2000. An introduction to microelectromechanical 
systems engineering. Boston: Artech House, Boston.
 
5. Wechsung, R., N. Ünal, J. C. Eloy, and H. Wicht. 1998. 
Market analysis for micro systems 1996–2002. NEXUS Task 
Force Report. Berlin, p. 136.
 
6. Fluitman, J. H. J. 1994. Basic technologies and functions; 
microsystem technology and silicon micromachining. In 
Microsystem technology: Exploring opportunities. The Hague, 
The Netherlands: Stichting Toekomst der Techniek, pp. 
35–40.

[Page 624]
624   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 
7. National Research Council. 1995. National Research 
Council.
 
8. Busch-Vishniac, I. J. 1992. The case for magnetically driven 
microactuators. Sensors Actuators A A33:207–20.
 
9. Zdeblick, M. J., R. Anderson, J. Jankowski, B. Kline-
Schoder, L. Christel, R. Miles, and W. Weber. 1994. 
Thermopneumatically actuated microvalves and integrated 
electro-fluidic circuits. Technical Digest: 1994 Solid State 
Sensor and Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC , June 
13–16, 1994, pp. 251–55.
 10. Bryzek, J., K. Petersen, J. R. Mallon, L. Christel, and F. 
Pourahmadi. 1990. Silicon sensors and microstructures. 
Fremont, CA: Novasensor.
 11. Ravi, T. S., and R. B. Marcus. 1991. Oxidation sharpening of 
silicon tips. J Vac Sci Technol B 9:2733–37.
 12. Editorial. 1991. Menlo Park, CA: TSDC (Teknekron).
 13. Feynman, R. P. 1992. There’s plenty of room at the bottom. 
J Microelectromech Syst 1:60–66.
 14. Feynman, R. P. 1993. Infinitesimal machinery. J Micro-
electromech Syst 2:4–14.
 15. Yole. 2007. Evolution of the MEMS markets and evolution 
of the MEMS foundry business. Transducers.
 16. Collins, A. J. 1992. Problems associated with bringing a 
sensor technology to the market place. Sensors Actuators A 
A31:77–80.
 17. Greenwood, J. C. 1988. Silicon in mechanical sensors. J 
Phys E Sci Instrum 21:1114–28.
 18. Ikeda, K., H. Kuwayama, T. Kobayashi, T. Watanabe, T. 
Nishikawa, T. Yoshida, and K. Harada. 1990. Silicon pres-
sure sensor integrates resonant strain gauge on diaphragm. 
Sensors Actuators A A21-A23:146–50.
 19. Petersen, K., F. Pourahmadi, J. Brown, P. Parsons, M. 
Skinner, and J. Tudor. 1991. Resonant beam pres-
sure sensor fabricated with silicon fusion bonding. 6th 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators 
(Transducers ’91). San Francisco, CA, June 24–27, 1991, 
pp. 664–67.
 20. Zook, J. D., D. W. Burns, H. Guckel, J. J. Sniegowski, R. L. 
Engelstad, and Z. Feng. 1992. Characteristics of polysilicon 
resonant microbeams. Sensors Actuators A 35:51.
 21. Ikeda, K., H. Kuwayama, T. Kobayashi, T. Watanabe, T. 
Nishikawa, and T. Yoshida. 1988. Three dimensional 
micromachining of silicon resonant strain gauge. 7th Sensor 
Symposium. Tokyo, Japan, May 30–31, 1988, pp. 193–96.
 22. Burns, D. W., R. D. Horning, W. R. Herb, J. K. Zook, and H. 
Guckel. 1996. Sealed-cavity resonant microbeam acceler-
ometer. Sensors Actuators A 53:249–55.
 23. Bryzek, J., K. Petersen, L. Christel, and F. Pourahmadi. 
1992. New technologies for silicon accelerometers enable 
automotive applications. SAE Technical Papers Series 
920474:25–32.
 24. Editorial. 1995. Commercial brochure.
 25. Chang, S. 1998. An electroformed CMOS integrated angu-
lar rate sensor. Sensors Actuators A 66:138–43.
 26. Lutz, M. G., W. Golderer, J. Gerstenmeier, J. Marek, B. 
Maihofer, S. Mahler, H. Munzel, and U. Bischof. 1997. 
A precision yaw rate sensor in silicon micromachin-
ing. Proceedings: 1997 Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and 
Actuators. Chicago, June 1997, pp. 847–50.
 27. Shkel, A., C. Acar, and A. Shkel. 2005. An approach for 
increasing drive-mode bandwidth of MEMS vibratory gyro-
scopes. J Microelectromechan Syst 14:520–28.
 28. Roe, J. N. 1992. Biosensor development. Pharm Res 
9:835–44.
 29. Editorial. 1993. Sensor Business Digest, 1–11.
 30. Battaglia, E. A. 1980. Ion-selective electrode. US Patent 
4214968.
 31. Editorial. 1994. Microminiature tools affecting medical 
products. BBI Newsletter 17:88–91.
 32. Lauks, I. 1983. Multielement thin film chemical microsen-
sors. SPIE 138–50.
 33. Turner, A. P. F. 1994. Third World Congress on Biosensors. 
New Orleans, LA, June 1–3, 1994. Amsterdam: Elsevier 
Advanced Technology.
 34. Tierney, M. J., H. L. Kim, M. D. Burns, J. A. Tamada, and R. 
O. Potts. 2000. Electroanalysis of glucose in transcutane-
ously extracted samples. Electroanalysis 12:1–6.
 35. Gross, T. M., B. W. Bode, D. Einhorn, D. M. Kayne, J. H. 
Reed, N. H. White, and J. J. Mastrototaro. 2000. Performance 
evaluation of the MiniMed continuous glucose monitoring 
system during patient home use. Diabetes Technology and 
Therapeutics 2:49–56.
 36. Roe, J. N., and B. R. Smoller. 1998. Bloodless glucose mea-
surements. Therapeutic Drug Carrier Systems 15:199–241.
 37. Klonoff, D. C. 1997. Noninvasive blood glucose monitor-
ing. Diabetes Care 20:433–37.
 38. Heller, A., and B. Feldman. 2008. Electrochemical glucose 
sensors and their applications in diabetes management. 
Chem Rev 108:2482–505.
 39. Burbaum, J. J. 2000. The evolution of miniaturized well 
plates. J Biomol Screen 5:5–8.
 40. Shapiro, H. M., and M. Hercher. 1986. Flow cytometers 
using optical waveguides in place of lenses for spec-
troscopic illumination and light collection. Cytometry 
7:221–23.
 41. Miyake, R., H. Ohki, I. Yamazaki, and R. Yabe. 1991. A 
development of micro sheath flow chamber. Proceedings: 
IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’91). Nara, 
Japan, pp. 259–64.
 42. Sobek, D., A. M. Young, M. L. Gray, and S. D. Senturia. 
1993. An investigation of micro structures, sensors, actua-
tors, machines, and systems. Proceedings: IEEE Micro Electro 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS ’93). Fort Lauderdale, FL, pp. 
219–24.
 43. Sobek, D., S. D. Senturia, and M. L. Gray. 1994. 
Microfabricated fused silica flow chambers for flow cytom-
etry. Technical Digest: 1994 Solid State Sensor and Actuator 
Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, June 13–16, 1994, pp. 
260–63.
 44. Sutherland, R. M., and C. Dahne. 1987. In Biosensors: 
Fundamentals and applications, eds. A. P. F. Turner, I. Karube, 
and G. S. Wilson, 655–78. Oxford, United Kingdom: 
Oxford University Press.
 45. Garabedian, R., C. Gonzalez, J. Richards, A. Knoesen, 
R. Spencer, S. D. Collins, and R. L. Smith. 1995. 
Microfabricated surface plasmon sensing system. Sensors 
Actuators A A43:202–07.
 46. Jorgenson, R. C., and S. S. Yee. 1993. A fiber-optic chemi-
cal sensor based on surface plasmon resonance. Sensors 
Actuators B B12:213–20.
 47. Melendez, J., R. Carr, D. U. Bartholomew, K. Kukanskis, 
J. Elkind, S. Yee, C. Furlong, and R. Woodbury. 1996. A 
commercial solution for surface plasmon sensing. Sensors 
Actuators B 35:1–5.
 48. Melendez, J., R. Carr, D. U. Bartholomew, H. Taneja, S. Yee, 
C. Jung, and C. Furlong. 1997. Development of a surface 
plasmon resonance sensor for commercial applications. 
Sensors Actuators B 38–39:375–79.

[Page 625]
MEMS and NEMS Applications   625
 49. Ballerstadt, R., and J. S. Schultz. 1998. Kinetics of dissolu-
tion of concanavalin a/dextran sols in response to glucose 
measured by surface plasmon resistance. Sensors Actuators B 
46:50–55.
 50. Madou, M. J., and T. Otagawa. 1989. Micron and submi-
cron electrochemical sensors. AICHE Symposium Series 
267:7–14.
 51. Madou, M. J., and T. Otagawa. 1989. Microelectrochemical 
sensor and sensor array. US Patent 4874500.
 52. Wilson, G. S., and Y. Hu. 2000. Enzyme-based biosensors 
for in-vivo measurements. Chem Rev 100:2693–704.
 53. Schauer-Vukasinovic, V., L. Cullen, and S. Daunert. 1997. 
Rational design of a calcium sensing system based on 
induced conformational changes of calmodulin. J Am 
Chem Soc 119:11102–03.
 54. Salins, L. L. E., V. Schauer-Vukasinovic, and S. Daunert. 
1998. Optical sensing systems based on biomolecular rec-
ognition of recombinant proteins. SPIE 3270:16–24.
 55. Salins, L. L. E., J. Lundgren, and S. Daunert. 1999. A dynam-
ical investigation of acrylodan-labeled mutant phosphate 
binding protein. Anal Chem 71:589–95.
 56. Salins, L. L. E., R. A. Ware, C. Ensor, and S. Daunert. 2001. 
A novel reagentless sensing system for measuring glucose 
based on the galactose/glucose-binding protein. Anal 
Biochem 294:19–26.
 57. Tolosa, L., I. Gryczynski, L. R. Eichhorn, J. D. Dattelbaum, 
F. N. Castellano, Rao, and J. R. Lakowicz. 1999. Glucose 
sensor for low-cost lifetime-based sensing using a geneti-
cally engineered protein. Anal Biochem 267:114–20.
 58. Petersen, K. E., W. A. McMillan, G. T. A. Kovacs, M. A. 
Northrup, L. A. Christel, and F. Pourahmadi. 1998. Towards 
next generation clinical diagnostic instruments: Scaling and 
new processing paradigms. J Biomed Microdevices 1:71–79.
 59. Manz, A., N. Graber, and H. M. Widmer. 1990. Miniaturized 
total chemical analysis systems: A novel concept for chemi-
cal sensing. Sensors Actuators B B1:244–48.
 60. McMillan, W. A., K. E. Petersen, L. A. Christel, and M. A. 
Northrup. 1999. Application of advanced microfluidics 
and rapid PCR to analysis of microbial targets. Proceedings 
of the 8th International Symposium on Microbial Ecology, eds. 
C. R. Bell, M. Brylinsky, and P. Johnson-Green. Halifax, NS, 
Canada: Atlantic Canada Society for Microbial Ecology.
 61. Li, P. C. H., and D. J. Harrison. 1997. Transport, manipula-
tion, and reaction of biological cells on-chip using electro-
kinetic effects. Anal Chem 69:1564–68.
 62. Kuske, C. R., K. L. Banton, D. L. Adorada, P. C. Stark, 
K. K. Hill, and P. J. Jackson. 1998. Small-scale DNA 
sample preparation method for field PCR detection of 
microbial  cell  and  spores in soil. App Environ Microbiol 
64:2463–72.
 63. Belgrader, P., W. Benette, D. Hadley, J. Richards, P. Stratton, 
R. Mariella, Jr., and F. Milanovich. 1999. PCR detection of 
bacteria in seven minutes. Science 284:449–50.
 64. Cheng, J., E. L. Sheldon, L. Wu, A. Uribe, L. O. Gerrue, J. 
Carrino, M. J. Heller, and J. P. O’Connell. 1998. Preparation 
and hybridization analysis of DNA/RNA from E. coli 
on microfabricated bioelectronic chips. Nat Biotechnol 
16:541–45.
 65. Lee, S. W., and Y.-C. Tai. 1999. A micro cell lysis device. 
Sensors Actuators A 73:74–79.
 66. Wilding, P., L. J. Kricka, J. Cheng, G. Hvichia, M. A. Shoffner, 
and P. Fortina. 1998. Integrated cell isolation and poly-
merase chain reaction analysis using silicone microfilter 
chambers. Anal Chem 257:95–100.
 67. Anderson, R. C., X. Su, G. J. Bogdan, and J. Fenton. 2000. 
A miniature integrated device for automated multistep 
genetic assays. Nucleic Acids Res 28:e60.
 68. Han, F., and S. J. Lilard. 2000. In situ sampling and separa-
tion of RNA from individual mammalian cells. Anal Chem 
72:4073–79.
 69. Khandurina, J., T. E. McKnight, S. C. Jacobson, L. C. Waters, 
R. S. Foote, and J. M. Ramsey. 2000. Integrated system for 
rapid PCR-based DNA analysis in microfluidic devices. 
Anal Chem 72:2995–3000.
 70. Pourahmadi, F., M. Taylor, G. Kovacs, K. Lloyd, S. Sakai, 
T. Schafer, B. Helton, L. Western, S. Zaner, J. Ching, B. 
McMillan, P. Belgrader, and M. A. Northrup. 2000. Toward 
a rapid, integrated, and fully automated DNA diagnostic 
assay for Chlamydia tranchomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. 
Clin Chem 46:1511–13.
 71. Lagally, E. T., I. Medintz, and R. A. Mathies. 2001. Single-
molecule DNA amplification and analysis in an integrated 
microfluidic device. Anal Chem 73:565–70.
 72. Krishnan, M., V. Namasivayam, R. Lin, R. Pal, and M. A. 
Burns. 2001. Microfabricated reaction and separation sys-
tems. Anal Biotechnol 12:92–98.
 73. Yang, J. M., J. Bell, Y. Huang, M. Tirado, D. Thomas, A. 
H. Forster, R. W. Haigis, P. D. Swanson, R. B. Wallace, B. 
Martinsons, and M. Krihak. 2001. An integrated, stacked 
microlaboratory for biological agent detection with DNA 
and immunoassays. Biosens Bioelectron 17:605–18.
 74. Kellogg, G. J., T. E. Arnold, B. L. Carvalho, D. C. Duffy, and N. 
F. Sheppard. 2000. Centrifugal microfluidics: Applications. 
Micro total analysis systems, eds. A. van den Berg, W. Olthuis, 
and P. Bergveld. Enschede, The Netherlands: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, pp. 239–42.
 75. Yuen, P. K., L. J. Kricka, P. Fortina, N. J. Panaro, T. Sakazume, 
and P. Wilding. 2001. Microchip module for blood sam-
ple preparation and nucleic acid amplification reactions. 
Genome Res 405–12.
 76. Wilding, P., M. A. Shoffner, and L. J. Kricka. 1994. PCR in a 
silicon microstructure. Clin Chem 40:1815–18.
 77. Cheng, J., M. A. Shoffner, G. E. Hvichia, L. J. Kricka, and P. 
Wilding. 1996. Chip PCR: Investigation of different PCR 
amplification systems in micro-fabricated silicon-glass 
chips. Nucleic Acids Res 24:380–85.
 78. Brody, J. P., T. D. Osborn, F. K. Foster, and P. Yager. 1995. 
A planar microfabricated fluid filter. 8th International 
Conference on Solid State Sensors and Actuators, and Eurosensors 
IX. Stockholm, Sweden, June 1995, pp. 779–82.
 79. Fluitman, J. H., A. van den Berg, and T. S. Lammerink. 1995. 
In Micro total analysis systems, eds. A. van den Berg, and P. 
Bergveld, 73–83. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
 80. Pipper, J., Y. Zhang, P. Neuzil, and T-M. Hsieh. 2008. 
Clockwork PCR including sample preparation. Angew 
Chem Int Ed 47:3900–04.
 81. Kido, H., M. Micic, D. Smith, J. Zoval, J. Norton, and M. 
Madou. 2007. A novel, compact disk-like centrifugal micro-
fluidics system for cell lysis and sample homogenization. 
Colloids Surf B: Biointerfaces 58:44–51.
 82. Scott, C. D., and J. C.Mailen. 1972. Dynamic introduction 
of whole-blood samples into fast analyzers. Clin Chem 
18:749–52.
 83. Brenner, T., R. Zengerle, and J. Ducrée. 2003. A flow-switch 
based on coriolis force. In Proceedings of µTAS. Lake Tahoe, 
CA, October 2003. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic.
 84. Angell, J. B., S. C. Terry, and P. W. Barth. 1983. Silicon 
micromechanical devices. Sci Am 248:44–57.

[Page 626]
626   From MEMS to Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications
 85. Editor. 1998. MicroChemical Systems.
 86. Madou, M. J. 1994. Compatibility and incompatibility of 
chemical sensors and analytical equipment with micro-
machining. Technical Digest: 1994 Solid State Sensor and 
Actuator Workshop. Hilton Head Island, SC, June 13–16, 
1994, pp. 164–71.
 87. Lyle, R. P., and D. Walters. 1997. In 1997 International 
Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, 975–78. 
Chicago.
 88. Madou, M. J., and S. R. Morrison. 1989. Chemical sensing 
with solid state devices. New York: Academic Press.
 89. Buck, L., and R. Axel. 1991. A novel multigene family may 
encode odorant receptors: A molecular basis for odor rec-
ognition. Cell 65:175–87.
 90. Madou, M. 1994. NIST Special Publication 865. Gaithersburg, 
MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology.
 91. Goldstein, M. K. 1991. Biomimetic sensor that simulates 
human response to airborne toxins, Quantum Group. US Patent 
5063164.
 92. Sandifer, J. R., and J. J. Voycheck. 1999. A review of bio-
sensor and industrial applications of pH-ISFETs and an 
evaluation of Honeywell’s”DuraFET”. Mikrochim Acta 131: 
91–98.
 93. Kolesar, E. S., and R. R. Reston. 1995. Separation and 
detection of toxic gases with a silicon micromachined gas 
chromatography system. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Integrated Micro/Nanotechnology for Space 
Applications, National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) and The Aerospace Corporation. Houston, TX, 
October 30–November 3, 1995, pp. 102–14.
 94. Terry, S. C., J. H. Jerman, and J. B. Angell. 1979. A gas chro-
matographic air analyzer fabricated on a silicon wafer. IEEE 
Trans Electron Dev ED-26:1880–86.
 95. Overton, E. B. Ohio State University. Personal communi-
cation.
 96. Leeuwis, H., and J. a. v. V. 1994. In Microsystem technology, 
ed. G. K. Lebbink. Alphen aan den Rijn/Zaventem, The 
Netherlands: Samsom BedrijfsInformatie, pp. 90–94.
 97. Goldner, H. 1993. ‘Honey, they shrunk the GC!’ Gas chro-
matographs go mini. Res Dev June: 45.
 98. Stalder, R. E., S. Boumsellek, T. R. Van Zandt, T. W. Kenny, 
M. H. Hecht, and F. E. Grunthaner. 1993. Micromachined 
array of electrostatic energy analyzers for charged particles. 
J Vac Sci Technol A 12:2554–58.
 99. Bryzek, J., S. Roundy, B. Bircumshaw, C. Chung, K. 
Castellino, J. R. Stetter, and M. Vestel. 2006. Marvelous 
MEMS: Advanced IC sensors and microstructures for high 
volume applications. IEEE Circuits Devices Mag 22: 8–28.
 100. Leroy, C., M. B. Pisani, C. Hibert, D. Bouvet, M. Puech, and 
A. M. Ionescu. 2006. High Quality Factor Copper Inductors 
Integrated in Deep Dry-Etched Quartz Substates. Symposium 
on Design, Test, Integration and Packaging of MEMS/MOEMS, 
Stresa, Italy, pp. 26–28.
 101. Albert, P., J. Costello, and P. Salomon. 2000. RF/microwave 
applications of MEMS integrated in CMOS technology. 
MST News June: 12–13.
 102. Ehmann, K. F., D. Bourell, M. I. Culpepper, T. J. Hodgson, 
T. Kurfess, M. Madou, K. Rajurkar, and R. DeVor. 2007. 
International assessment of research and development in micro-
manufacturing. New York: Springer.
 103. Edwards, S. A. 2006. The nanotech pioneers: Where are they 
taking us? Weinheim, Berlin: Wiley-VCH.
 104. Petersen, K. E. 1982. Silicon as a mechanical material. Proc 
IEEE 70:420–57.
 105. Gasman, L. 2006. Nanotechnology applications and markets. 
Norwood, MA: Artech House Publishers.

[Page C]
V O L U M E  I I I
5516X
ISBN: 978-1-4200-5516-0
9 781420 055160
90000
From MEMS to Bio-MEMS and Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing 
Techniques and Applications
Details the Nanotechnology, Biology, and Manufacturing Techniques Applicable 
to Bionanotechnology
From MEMS to Bio-MEMS and Bio-NEMS: Manufacturing Techniques and Applications 
details manufacturing techniques applicable to bionanotechnology. After reviewing MEMS techniques, 
materials, and modeling, the author covers nanofabrication, genetically engineered proteins, artiﬁcial 
cells, nanochemistry, and self-assembly. He also discusses scaling laws in MEMS and NEMS, actuators, 
ﬂuidics, and power and brains in miniature devices. He concludes with coverage of various MEMS 
and NEMS applications. Fully illustrated in color, the text contains end-of-chapter problems, worked 
examples, extensive references for further reading, and an extensive glossary of terms.
Topics include:
• 
Nonlithography manufacturing techniques with lithography-based methods
• 
Nature as an engineering guide and contrasts top-down and bottom-up approaches
• 
Packaging, assembly, and self-assembly from ICs to DNA and biological cells
• 
Selected new MEMS and NEMS processes and materials, metrology techniques, and modeling
• 
Scaling laws, actuators, power generation, and the implementation of brains in miniaturized devices
• 
Different strategies for making micromachines smarter
• 
The transition out of the laboratory and into the marketplace
The third volume in Fundamentals of Microfabrication and Nanotechnology, Third Edition, Three-
Volume Set, the book discusses top-down and bottom-up manufacturing methods and explains how 
to use nature as a guide. It provides a better understanding of how to match different manufacturing 
options with a given application that students can use to identify additional killer MEMS and NEMS 
applications.
Other volumes in Fundamentals of Microfabrication and Nanotechnology, Third Edition, Three-Volume 
Set include:
Solid-State Physics, Fluidics, and Analytical Techniques in Micro- and Nanotechnology
Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and Nanotechnology 
Mechanical Engineering/Bioengineering/Electrical Engineering/Materials Science/Manufacturing Engineering
