# franssila_2010
# Extracted from: 2010-Franssila-ed2-Introduction to Microfabrication.pdf
# Total PDF pages: 508
# Page numbering: offset=12 (book_page = pdf_page - 12 + 1)
# ============================================================


[Page front-1]
Introduction to Microfabrication
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8

[Page front-2]
Introduction to Microfabrication
Second Edition
Sami Franssila
Professor of Materials Science at Aalto University
and Adjunct Professor of Micro- and Nanotechnology
at University of Helsinki, Finland
A John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., Publication
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-3]
This edition ﬁrst published 2010
© 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
First Edition published in 2004
Registered ofﬁce
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the
copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com.
The right of the author to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in
electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names
used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is
not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and
authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Franssila, Sami.
Introduction to microfabrication / Sami Franssila. – 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-74983-8 (cloth)
1.
Microelectromechanical systems. 2.
Integrated circuits. 3.
Semiconductor processing. 4.
Nanotechnology.
5.
Microfabrication. I. Title.
TK7875.F73 2010
621.381 – dc22
2010010076
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
Set in 9/11pt Times by Laserwords Private Limited, Chennai, India
Printed and Bound in Markono Print Media Pte Ltd, Singapore
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-4]
Contents
Preface to the First Edition
ix
Preface to the Second Edition
xiii
Acknowledgements
xv
1
Introduction
1
Substrates, Thin Films, Processes, Dimensions,
Devices, MOS Transistor, Cleanliness and Yield,
Industries, Exercises
References and Related Reading
2
Micrometrology and Materials
Characterization
15
Microscopy and Visualization, Lateral and Vertical
Dimensions, Optical Techniques, Electrical
Measurements, Physical and Chemical Analyses,
Practical Issues with Micrometrology,
Measurements Everywhere, Exercises
References and Related Reading
3
Simulation of Microfabrication Processes
29
Simulator Types, Levels of Simulation, The 1D
Simulators, The 2D Simulators, The 3D Simulators,
Other Simulation Needs in Microfabrication,
Exercises
References and Related Reading
4
Silicon
35
Silicon Material Properties, Silicon Crystal Growth,
Silicon Crystal Structure, Silicon Wafering Process,
Defects and Non-Idealities in Silicon Crystals,
Advanced Wafers, Exercises
References and Related Reading
5
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
47
Thin Films vs. Bulk Materials, Physical Vapor
Deposition, Chemical Vapor Deposition, PECVD:
Plasma-Enhanced CVD, ALD: Atomic Layer
Deposition, Electrochemical Deposition (ECD),
Other Methods, Thin Films Over Topography: Step
Coverage, Stresses, Metallic Thin Films,
Polysilicon, Oxide and Nitride Thin Films, Polymer
Films, Advanced Thin Films, Exercises
References and Related Reading
6
Epitaxy
69
Heteroepitaxy, Epitaxial Deposition, CVD
Homoepitaxy of Silicon, Doping of Epilayers,
Measurement of Epitaxial Deposition, Simulation of
Epitaxy, Advanced Epitaxy, Exercises
References and Related Reading
7
Advanced Thin Films
77
General Features of Thin-Film Processes, Film
Growth and Structure, Thin-Film Structure
Characterization, Surfaces and Interfaces, Adhesion,
Two-Layer Films, Alloys and Doped Films,
Multilayer Films, Selective Deposition, Reacted
Films, Simulation of Deposition, Thickness Limits
of Thin Films, Exercises
References and Related Reading
8
Pattern Generation
93
Pattern Generators, Electron Beam Lithography,
Laser Pattern Generators, Photomask Fabrication,
Photomask Inspection, Defects and Repair,
Photomasks as Tools, Other Pattern Generation
Methods, Exercises
References and Related Reading
9
Optical Lithography
103
Lithography Process Flow, Resist Chemistry, Resist
Application, Alignment and Overlay, Exposure,
Resist Proﬁle, Resolution, Process Latitude, Basic
Pattern Shapes, Lithography Practice, Photoresist
Stripping, Exercises
References and Related Reading
10 Advanced Lithography
115
Projection Optical Systems, Resolution of Projection
Optical Systems, Resists, Thin-Film Optics in
Resists, Lithography Over Steps, Optical Extensions
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-5]
vi
Contents
of Optical Lithography, Non-Optical Extension of
Optical Lithography, Lithography Simulation,
Lithography Triangles, Exercises
References and Related Reading
11 Etching
127
Etch Mechanisms, Etching Proﬁles, Anisotropic Wet
Etching, Wet Etching, Plasma Etching (RIE),
Isotropic Dry Etching, Etch Masks, Non-Masked
Etching, Multistep and Multilayer Etching, Etch
Processes for Common Materials, Ion Beam
Etching, Etch Process Characteristics, Selecting
Etch Processes, Exercises
References and Related Reading
12 Wafer Cleaning and Surface Preparation
143
Classes of Contamination, Chemical Wet Cleaning,
Physical Wet Cleaning, Rinsing and Drying, Dry
Cleaning, Particle Removal, Organics Removal,
Metal Removal, Contact Angle, Surface Preparation,
Exercises
References and Related Reading
13 Thermal Oxidation
153
Thermal Oxidation Process, Deal–Grove Oxidation
Model, Oxidation of Polysilicon, Oxide Structure,
Local Oxidation of Silicon, Stress and Pattern
Effects in Oxidation, Simulation of Oxidation,
Thermal Oxides vs. other Oxides, Exercises
References and Related Reading
14 Diffusion
165
Diffusion Process, Diffusion Mechanisms, Doping
of Polysilicon, Doping Proﬁles in Diffusion,
Diffusion Applications, Simulation of Diffusion,
Diffusion at Large, Exercises
References and Related Reading
15 Ion Implantation
173
The Implantation Process, Implant Applications,
Implant Damage and Damage Annealing, Tools for
Ion Implantation, Ion Implantation Simulation,
Implantation Further, Exercises
References and Related Reading
16 CMP: Chemical–Mechanical Polishing
181
CMP Process and Tool, Mechanics of CMP,
Chemistry of CMP, Non-Idealities in CMP,
Monitoring CMP Processes, Applications of CMP,
CMP as a Whole, Exercises
References and Related Reading
17 Bonding
191
Bonding Basics, Fusion Bonding Blanket Silicon
Wafers, Anodic Bonding, Metallic Bonding,
Adhesive Bonding, Layer Transfer and Temporary
Bonding, Bonding of Structured Wafers, Bond
Quality Measurements, Bonding for Packaging,
Bonding at Large, Exercises
References and Related Reading
18 Polymer Microprocessing
203
Polymer Materials, Polymer Thermal Properties,
Thick-Resist Lithography, Molding Techniques,
Hot Embossing, Nanoimprint Lithography, Masters
for Replication, Processing on Polymers, Polymer
Bonding, Polymer Devices, Polymer Overview,
Exercises
References and Related Reading
19 Glass Microprocessing
225
Structure and Properties of Glasses, Glass
Substrates, General Processing Issues with Glasses,
Glass Etching, Glass Bonding, Glass Devices,
Specialty Glasses, Exercises
References and Further Reading
20 Anisotropic Wet Etching
237
Basic Structures on <100> Silicon, Etchants, Etch
Masks and Protective Coatings, Etch Rate and Etch
Stop, Front-Side Processed Structures, Convex
Corner Etching, Membrane Fabrication,
Through-Wafer Structures, <110> Etching, <111>
Silicon Etching, Comparison of <100>, <110>
and <111> Etching, Exercises
References and Related Reading
21 Deep Reactive Ion Etching
255
RIE Process Capabilities, RIE Process Physics
and Chemistry, Deep Etching, Combining
Anisotropic and Isotropic DRIE, Microneedles and
Nozzles, Sidewall Quality, Pattern Size and Pattern
Density Effects, Etch Residues and Damage, DRIE
vs. Wet Etching, Exercises
References and Related Reading
22 Wafer Engineering
271
Silicon Crystals, Gettering, Wafer Mechanical
Speciﬁcations, Epitaxial Wafers, SOI Wafers,
Bonding Mechanics, Advanced Wafers, Variety of
Wafers, Exercises
References and Further Reading
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-6]
Contents
vii
23 Special Processes and Materials
283
Substrates other than Silicon, Pattern Generation,
Patterning, Powder Blasting, Deposition, Porous
Silicon, Molding with Lost Mold, Exercises
References and Related Reading
24 Serial Microprocessing
299
Focused Ion Beam (FIB) Processing, Focused
Electron Beam (FEB) Processing, Laser Direct
Writing, AFM Patterning, Ink Jetting, Mechanical
Structuring, Chemical and Chemomechanical
Machining Scaled Down, Conclusions,
Exercises
References and Further Reading
25 Process Integration
313
The Two Sides of the Wafer, Device Example 1:
Solar Cell, Device Example 2: Microﬂuidic Sieves,
Wafer Selection, Masks and Lithography, Design
Rules, Resistors, Device Example 3: PCR Reactor,
Device Example 4: Integrated Passive Chip,
Contamination Budget, Thermal Processes,
Metallization, Passivation and Packaging,
Exercises
References and Related Reading
26 MOS Transistor Fabrication
329
Polysilicon Gate CMOS, Polysilicon Gate CMOS:
10 μm to 1 μm Generations, MOS Transistor
Scaling, CMOS from 0.8 μm to 65 nm, Gate
Module, SOI MOSFETs, Thin-Film Transistors,
Integrated Circuits, Exercises
References and Related Reading
27 Bipolar Transistors
347
Fabrication Process of SBC Bipolar Transistor,
Advanced Bipolar Structures, Lateral Isolation,
BiCMOS Technology, Cost of Integration,
Exercises
References and Related Reading
28 Multilevel Metallization
357
Two-Level Metallization, Planarized Multilevel
Metallization, Copper Metallization, Dual
Damascene Metallization, Low-k Dielectrics,
Metallization Scaling, Exercises
References and Related Reading
29 Surface Micromachining
369
Single Structural Layer Devices, Materials for
Surface Micromachining, Mechanics of
Free-Standing Films, Cantilever Structures,
Membranes and Bridges, Stiction, Multiple Layer
Structures, Rotating Structures, Hinged Structures,
CMOS Wafers as Substrates, Exercises
References and Related Reading
30 MEMS Process Integration
387
Silicon Microbridges, Double-Sided Processing,
Membrane Structures, Piezoresistive Pressure
Sensor, Tilting and Bending Through-Wafer Etched
Structures, Needles and Tips, Channels and Nozzles,
Bonded Structures, Surface Micromachining
Combined with Bulk Micromachining, MEMS
Packaging, Microsystems, Exercises
References and Related Reading
31 Process Equipment
409
Batch Processing vs. Single Wafer Processing,
Process Regimes: Temperature and Pressure, Cluster
Tools and Integrated Processing, Measuring
Fabrication Processes, Equipment Figures of Merit,
Simulation of Process Equipment, Tool Lifecycles,
Cost of Ownership, Exercises
References and Related Reading
32 Equipment for Hot Processes
419
High-Temperature Equipment: Hot Wall vs. Cold
Wall, Furnace Processes, Rapid Thermal
Processing/Rapid Thermal Annealing, Furnaces vs.
RTP Systems, Exercises
References and Related Reading
33 Vacuum and Plasmas
425
Vacuum Physics and Kinetic Theory of Gases,
Vacuum Production, Plasma Etching, Sputtering,
Residual Gas Incorporation into Deposited Film,
PECVD, Residence Time, Exercises
References and Related Reading
34 CVD and Epitaxy Equipment
433
Deposition Rate, CVD Rate Modeling, CVD
Reactors, CVD with Liquid Sources, Silicon CVD
Epitaxy, Epitaxial Reactors, Control of CVD
Reactions, Exercises
References and Related Reading
35 Cleanrooms
441
Cleanroom Construction, Cleanroom Standards,
Cleanroom Subsystems, Environment, Safety and
Health (ESH), Cleanroom Operating Procedures,
Mini-Environments, Exercises
References and Related Reading
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-7]
viii
Contents
36 Yield and Reliability
449
Yield Deﬁnitions and Formulas, Yield Models,
Yield Ramping, Package Reliability, Metallization
Reliability, Dielectric Defects and Quality,
Stress Migration, Die Yield Loss,
Exercises
References and Related Reading
37 Economics of Microfabrication
457
Silicon, IC Costs and Prices, IC Industry, IC Wafer
Fabs, MEMS Industry, Flat-Panel Display Industry,
Solar Cells, Magnetic Data Storage, Short Term and
Long Term, Exercises
References and Related Reading
38 Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
469
From Transistor to Integrated Circuit, Historical
Development of IC Manufacturing, MOS Scaling,
Departure from Planar Bulk Technology,
Memories, Lithography Future, Moore’s Law,
Materials Challenges, Statistics and Yield, Limits of
Scaling, Exercises
References and Related Reading
39 Microfabrication at Large
485
New Devices, Proliferation of MEMS,
Microﬂuidics, BioMEMS, Bonding and 3D
Integration, IC–MEMS Integration, Microfabricated
Devices for Microfabrication, Exercises
References and Related Reading
Appendix A
Properties of Silicon
499
Appendix B
Constants and Conversion
Factors
501
Appendix C
Oxide and Nitride Thickness
by Color
503
Index
505
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-8]
Preface to the First Edition
Microfabrication is generic: its applications include
integrated circuits, MEMS, microﬂuidics, micro-optics,
nanotechnology and countless others. Microfabrication
is encountered in slightly different guises in all of these
applications: electroplating is essential for deep sub-
micron IC metallization and for LIGA-microstructures;
deep-RIE is a key technology in trench DRAMs and in
MEMS; imprint lithography is utilized in microﬂuidics
where typical dimensions are 100 μm, as well as in
nanotechnology, where feature sizes are down to 10 nm.
This book is unique because it treats microfabrication in
its own right, independent of applications, and therefore
it can be used in electrical engineering, materials science,
physics and chemistry classes alike.
Instead of looking at devices, I have chosen to
concentrate
on
microstructures on
the
wafer:
lines
and trenches, membranes and cantilevers, cavities and
nozzles, diffusions and epilayers. Lines are sometimes
isolated and sometimes in dense arrays, irrespective of
linewidths; membranes can be made by timed etching or
by etch stop; source/drain diffusions can be aligned to the
gate in a mask aligner or made in a self-aligned fashion;
oxidation on a planar surface is easy, but the oxidation of
topographic features is tricky. The microstructure-view
of microfabrication is a solution against outdating:
alignment must be considered for both 100 μm ﬂuidic
channels and 100 nm CMOS gates, etch undercutting
target may be 10 nm or 10 μm, but it is there; dopants
will diffuse during high temperature anneals, but the
junction depth target may be tens of nanometres or tens
of micrometres.
A common feature of older textbooks is concentration
on physics and chemistry: plasma potentials, boundary
layers,
diffusion
mechanisms,
Rayleigh
resolution,
thermodynamic stability and the like. This is certainly
a
guarantee
against
outdating
in
rapidly
evolving
technologies, but microfabrication is an engineering
discipline, not physics and chemistry. CMOS scaling
trends have in fact been more reliable than basic physics
and chemistry in the past 40 years: optical lithography
was predicted to be unable to print submicron lines and
gate oxides today are thinner than the ultimate limits
conceived in the 1970s. And it is pedagogically better
to show applications of CVD ﬁlms before plunging into
pressure dependence of deposition rate, and to discuss
metal ﬁlm functionalities before embracing sputtering
yield models.
In this book, another major emphasis is on materials.
Materials are universal, and not outdated rapidly. New
materials are, of course, being introduced all the time, but
the basic materials properties like resistivity, dielectric
constant, coefﬁcient of thermal expansion and Young’s
modulus must always be considered for low-k and
high-k dielectrics, SnO2 sensor ﬁlms, diamond coatings
and 100 μm-thick photoresists alike. Silicon, silicon
dioxide, silicon nitride, aluminium, tungsten, copper and
photoresist will be met again in various applications:
nitride is used not only in LOCOS isolation, but also in
MEMS thermal isolation; aluminium not only serves as a
conductor in ICs but also as a mirror in MOEMS; copper
is used for IC metallization and also as a sacriﬁcial layer
under nickel in metal MEMS; photoresist acts not only
as a photoactive material but also as an adhesive in wafer
bonding.
Devices
are,
of
course,
discussed
but
from
the
fabrication viewpoint, without thorough device physics.
The unifying idea is to discuss the commonalities and
generic features of the fabrication processes. Resistors
and capacitors serve to exemplify concepts like alignment
sequence and design rules, or interface stability. After
basic processes and concepts have been introduced,
process integration examples show a wide spectrum of
full process ﬂows: for example, solar cell, piezoresistive
pressure sensor, CMOS, AFM cantilever tip, microﬂuidic
out-of-plane
needle
and
super-self-aligned
bipolar
transistor. Small process-sequence examples include,
similarly, a variety of structures: replacement gate, cavity
sealing, self-aligned rotors and dual damascene-low-k
options are among the others.
Older textbooks present microfabrication as a toolbox
of MEMS or as the technology for CMOS manufactur-
ing. Both approaches lead to unsatisfactory views on
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-9]
x
Preface to the First Edition
microfabrication. Ten years ago, chemical–mechanical
polishing was not detailed in textbooks, and ﬁve years
ago discussion on CMP was included in multilevel
metallization chapter. Today, CMP is a generic tech-
nology that has applications in CMOS front-end device
isolation and surface micromechanics, and is used to
fabricate photonic crystals and superconducting devices.
It therefore deserves a chapter of its own, independent of
actual or potential applications. Similarly, wafer cleaning
used to be presented as a preparatory step for oxidation,
but it is also essential for epitaxy, wafer bonding and
CMP. Device-view, be it CMOS or some other, limits
processes and materials to a few known practices, and
excludes many important aspects that are fruitful in other
applications.
The aim of the book is for the student to feel comfort-
able both in a megafab and in a student lab. This means
that both research-oriented and manufacturing-driven as-
pects of microfabrication must be covered. In order to
keep the amount of material manageable, many things
have had to be left out: high density plasmas are men-
tioned, but the emphasis is on plasma processing in gen-
eral; KOH and TMAH etching are both described, but
commonalities rather than differences are shown; imprint
lithography and hot embossing are discussed but polymer
rheology is neglected; alternatives to optical lithography
are mentioned, but discussed only brieﬂy. Emphasis is on
common and conceptual principles, and not on the latest
technologies, which hopefully extends the usable life of
the book.
Structure of the Book
The structure of this book differs from the traditional
structure in many ways. Instead of discussing individ-
ual process steps at length ﬁrst and putting full processes
together in the last chapter, applications are presented
throughout the book. The chapters on equipment are sep-
arated from the chapters on processes in order to keep
the basic concepts and current practical implementations
apart.
The introduction covers materials, processes, devices
and industries. Measurements are presented next, and
more examples of measurement needs in microfabrica-
tion are presented in almost every chapter. A general
discussion of simulation follows, and more speciﬁc
simulation cases are presented in the chapters that follow.
Materials of
microfabrication are
presented next:
silicon and thin ﬁlms. Silicon crystal growth is shortly
covered but from the very beginning, the discussion
centres on wafers and structures on wafers: therefore,
silicon wafering process, and resulting wafer properties
are emphasized. Epitaxy, CVD, PVD, spin coating and
electroplating are discussed, with resulting materials
properties and microstructures on the centre stage, rather
than equipment themselves. Lithography and etching
then follow. This order of presentation enables more
realistic examples to be discussed early on.
The basic steps in silicon technology, such as oxida-
tion, diffusion and ion implantation are discussed next,
followed by CMP and bonding. Moulding and stamp-
ing techniques have also been included. In contrast to
older books, and to books with CMOS device emphasis,
this book is strong in back-end steps, thin ﬁlms, etching,
planarization and novel materials. This reﬂects the grow-
ing importance of multilevel metallization in ICs as well
as the generic nature of etch and deposition processes,
and their wide applicability in almost all microfabrica-
tion ﬁelds. Packaging is not dealt with, again in line with
wafer-level view of microfabrication. This also excludes
stereomicrolithography and many miniaturized traditional
techniques like microelectrodischarge machining.
Microfabrication is an engineering discipline, and vol-
ume manufacturing of microdevices must be discussed.
Discussions on process equipment have often been
bogged by the sheer number of different designs: should
the students be shown both 13.56 MHz diode etcher,
triode, microwave, ECR, ICP and helicon plasmas, and
should APCVD, LPCVD, SA-CVD, UHV-CVD and
PECVD reactors all be presented? In this book, the
process equipment discussion is again tied to structures
that result on wafers, rather than in the equipment per
se: base vacuum interaction with thin-ﬁlm purity is
discussed; the role of RTP temperature uniformity on
wafer stresses is considered; and surface reaction versus
transport controlled growth in different CVD reactors is
analysed. Cleanroom technology, wafer fab operations,
yield and cost are also covered. Moore’s law and other
trends expose students to some current and future issues
in microfabrication processes, materials and applications.
In many cases, treatment has been divided into two
chapters: for example, Chapter 5 treats thin ﬁlm basics,
and Chapter 7 deals with more advanced topics. Lithogra-
phy and etching have been divided similarly. This enables
short or long course versions to be designed around the
book. The ﬁgures from the book are available to teach-
ers via the Internet. Please register at Wiley for access
www.wileyeurope.com/go/microfabrication.
Advice to Students
This book is an introductory text. Basic university physics
and chemistry sufﬁces for background. Materials science
and electronics courses will of course make many aspects
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-10]
Preface to the First Edition
xi
easier to understand, but the structure of the book does
not necessitate them. The book contains 250 homework
problems, and in line with the idea of microfabrication as
an independent discipline, they are about fabrication pro-
cesses and microstructures; not about devices. Problems
fall mainly in three categories: process design/analysis,
simulations and back-of-the-envelope calculations. The
problems that are designed to be solved with a simulator
are marked by “S”. A simple one-dimensional simulator
will do. The “ordinary” problems are designed to de-
velop a feeling for orders of magnitude in the microworld:
linewidths, resistances, ﬁlm thicknesses, deposition rates,
stresses etc. It is often enough to understand if a process
can be done in seconds, minutes or hours; or whether
resistance range is milliohms, ohms or kiloohms. You
must learn to make simplifying assumptions, and to live
with uncertain data. Searching the Internet for answers
is no substitute to simple calculations that can be done
in minutes because the simple estimates are often as ac-
curate (or inaccurate) as answers culled from Internet.
It should be borne in mind that even constants are of-
ten not well known: for instance, recent measurements
of silicon melting point have resulted in values 1408 ◦C
by one group, 1410 ◦C by one, 1412 ◦C by seven groups,
1413 ◦C by eight groups and 1416 ◦C by three groups,
and if older works are encountered, values range from
1396 ◦C to 1444 ◦C. With thin ﬁlm materials properties
are very much deposition process dependent, and differ-
ent workers have measured widely different values for
such basic properties as resistivity or thermal conductiv-
ity. Even larger differences will pop up, if, for instance,
the phase of metal ﬁlm changes from body-centered cu-
bic to β-phase: temperature coefﬁcient of resistivity can
then be off by a factor of ten. Polymeric materials, too,
exhibit large variation in properties and processing. There
are also calculations of economic aspects of microfabri-
cation: wafer cost, chip size and yield. A bit of memory
costs next to nothing, but the fabs (fab is short for fabri-
cation facility) that churn out these chip are enormously
expensive.
Comments and hints to selected homework problems
are given in Appendix A. In Appendix B you can ﬁnd
useful physical constants, silicon material properties and
unit conversion factors.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-11]
Preface to the Second Edition
If you search on “microfabrication” in Google Scholar,
there will be over 100 000 hits; if you type in “MEMS”
in Science Direct, you will get in excess of 300 000 hits;
“transistor” in IEEE Xplore produces 60 000 articles; and
“thin ﬁlm” in Scirus, over a million articles. There is
obviously no problem ﬁnding the scientiﬁc literature.
This book is a primer that prepares you to access the
primary literature. It is a textbook, not a reference work
or an encyclopedia, and even less a review article. This
means that the topics and examples are chosen on ped-
agogic grounds, so many remarkable seminal works and
recent breakthroughs are not addressed. It also means that
most fabrication processes are not shown in full detail,
rather fundamental ideas are described, and nuances and
special features are left out, in order to highlight the main
ideas. The articles and books in the “References and Fur-
ther Reading” sections have been selected to be accessible
to students, and serve as supplementary reading for as-
signments and exercises.
This is a fabrication text, and device physics is dis-
cussed only brieﬂy. It would be impossible to include
device physics because microfabrication can be applied
to hundreds of different microdevices. In this book the
examples are drawn mostly from CMOS, MEMS, mi-
croﬂuidics and solar cells, but there are examples from
hard disk drives, ﬂat panel displays, optics and opto-
electronics, DNA chips, bipolar and power semiconductor
devices, and nanotechnology.
What is New in this Second Edition?
There is about 25% more material, and the text and ﬁgures
have been revised throughout. The basic structure of the
book remains unchanged, and the order of chapters is
mostly as in the ﬁrst edition.
Silicon wafer basics are discussed in Chapter 4. More
advanced wafers, and wafer behavior during processing,
are discussed elsewhere, in Chapters 6 (epitaxy), 17
(bonding) and 22 (wafer engineering). Chapters 5 and
7 on thin ﬁlms have been reorganized into basic and
advanced chapters, with step coverage and stresses now
included in the basic chapter.
Pattern generation (Chapter 8) now includes additional
material on electron beam lithography. Chapter 9 intro-
duces photoresists and optical lithography, but it is lim-
ited to 1× contact/proximity lithography only. Chapter
10 deals with advanced IC fabrication lithography with
reduction steppers and scanners.
Chapter 12, on wafer cleaning and surface preparation,
has been expanded to include polymer surface treatments
and aspects of ﬂuid behavior on surfaces that are impor-
tant in ﬂuidics.
Chapter 17 on bonding has been completely rewritten.
It now covers fusion, anodic, metallic and adhesive bond-
ing, including process physics and chemistry as well as
technical implementations. Much of the more specialized
material on silicon fusion bonding and SOI wafers has
been moved to Chapter 22 on wafer engineering.
Chapter 18 has been completely rewritten and is now
called “Polymer Microprocessing.” In addition to the old
material on embossing, imprinting and replica molding, it
now contains more on polymer materials properties, thick-
resist lithography, polymer bonding and a great number
of device examples, especially in ﬂuidics.
Chapter 19, on glass microprocessing, is new, but
it incorporates some elements of a dismantled chapter
“Processing on Non-silicon Substrates”. The new chapter,
however, concentrates on processing glass itself, to make
microdevices of glass, in addition to fabricating devices
on glass.
Chapter 23, on special processes, is a collection of tech-
niques which are not in the mainstream of microfabrica-
tion: namely, niche techniques, non-standard approaches,
special materials, and the like. For instance, porous sili-
con by electrochemical etching has been moved from the
etching chapter to this chapter, in order to streamline the
basic etching chapter.
Another new chapter, Chapter 24, deals with serial
microprocessing. This includes many direct writing and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page front-12]
xiv
Preface to the Second Edition
machining techniques, like focused ion beam processing,
laser microfabrication and micromilling and machining.
The core of the book, Chapter 25, on process integra-
tion, is now hopefully more general because CMOS- and
MEMS-speciﬁc issues have been moved to their respec-
tive chapters, Chapters 26 and 30. Examples include solar
cell devices, ﬂuidic ﬁlters, resistors and integrated passive
devices and PCR chips for DNA ampliﬁcation. The MOS
chapter now covers thin ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) as well.
Advanced CMOS is treated in Chapter 38 in order to keep
the introduction to CMOS simple enough.
The old Chapter 22, on sacriﬁcial structures, has been
moved, greatly expanded and renamed. It is now Chapter
29, entitled “Surface Micromachining.” Chapter 30 con-
cerns MEMS process integration. It has been completely
rewritten and contains almost 100% more material with
many device examples.
Chapter 31 on process equipment has been rewritten
with elements from a dismantled chapter on integrated
processing, and with parts from an old Chapter 37,
Wafer fab.
Chapter 36 is now called “Yield and Reliability.” It
draws on the old chapters on yield, process integration and
wafer fab. The discussion has been expanded, especially
regarding MEMS reliability.
Each of Chapters 37, 38 and 39 can serve as a conclud-
ing chapter, with a slightly different emphasis: Chapter
37, on the economics of microfabrication, centers on costs
and markets for CMOS, MEMS, solar and ﬂat-panel dis-
plays, and magnetic data storage; Chapter 38, on Moore’s
law, deals with scaling trends in ICs; and Chapter 39, on
microfabrication at large, concerns the integration of dif-
ferent technologies, materials and functionalities, scaling
with “More than Moore.”
Teachers adopting the text will have access to all
the ﬁgures and tables in the book as PDF slides.
Additionally, a solutions manual will be available at
www.wiley.com/go/Franssila_Micro2e.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 1]
Acknowledgements
A number of people have contributed to this 2nd edition
in various capacities. Sardar Bilal Alam, Susanna Aura,
Kestas Grigoras, Eero Haimi, Klas Hjort, Ville Joksa
Jokinen, Jari Koskinen, Heikki Kuisma, Tomi Laurila,
Marianne Leinikka, Antti Niskanen, Victor Ovtchinnikov,
Ville Saarela, Lauri Sainiemi, Ali Shah, Gianmario
Scotti, Pia Suvanto, Markku Tilli and Santeri Tuomikoski
each read part of the manuscript and gave input that led
to rewriting and reorganizing of the text.
Numerous
colleagues
and
friends
have
provided
assistance in ﬁnding material, editing ﬁgures, helping
with software, looking for articles, and contributing their
SEMs and other primary material. These people include
Veli-Matti
Airaksinen,
Tapani
Alasaarela,
Florence
Amez-Droz, Nikolai Chekurov, Nico de Rooij, Kai-Erik
Elers, Jean-Christophe Eloy, Martin Gijs, Leif Gr¨onberg,
Ulrika Gyllenberg, Atte Haapalinna, Kalle Hanhij¨arvi,
Ole Hansen, Paula Heikkil¨a, Ari Hokkanen, Scotten
W. Jones,
Tord Karlin,
Ivan Kassamakov,
Hannu
Kattelus, Marianna Kemell, Kimmo Kokkonen, Kai
Kolari,
Jorma
Koskinen,
Anders
Kristensen,
Anu
K¨arkk¨ainen, Boris Lamontagne, Volker Lerche, Lauri
Lipi¨ainen, Laura Luosuj¨arvi, Merja Markkanen, Jyrki
Molarius, Juha Muhonen, Joachim Oberhammer, Peter
Ochojski,
Antti
Peltonen,
Tuomas
Pensala,
Risto
J. Puhakka, Mikko Ritala, Tapani Ryh¨anen, Henrik
R¨odjeg˚ard, Tomi Salo, Anke Sanz-Velasco, Jens Schmid,
Pekka Sepp¨al¨a, Andreas Stamm, Andrey Timofeev,
Daniel Tracy, Esa Tuovinen, Albert van den Berg,
Brandon Van Leer and Matthias Worgull.
Simone Taylor, Nicky Skinner, Laura Bell and Clarissa
Lim at Wiley have been instrumental in pulling it all
together.
Last but not least, thanks are due to Anna, Aku, Atte,
Kiira and Oliver.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 2]
1
Introduction
Integrated circuits, microsensors, microﬂuidics, solar
cells, ﬂat-panel displays and optoelectronics rely on
microfabrication technologies. Typical dimensions are
around 1 micrometer in the plane of the wafer (the range
is rather wide, from 0.02 to 100 μm). Vertical dimensions
range from atomic layer thickness (0.1 nm) to hundreds of
micrometers, but thicknesses from 0.01 to 10 μm are most
typical. Microfabrication is the collection of techniques
used to fabricate devices in the micrometer range.
The historical developments of microfabrication-related
disciplines are shown below. The invention of the tran-
sistor in 1947 sparked a revolution. The transistor was
born out of the fusion of radar technology (fast crystal
detectors for electromagnetic radiation) and solid state
physics. Developments of microfabrication methods en-
abled the fabrication of many transistors on a single piece
of semiconductor and, a few years later, the fabrication of
integrated circuits; that is, transistors were connected to
each other on the wafer, rather than separated from each
other and reconnected on the circuit board.
Microelectronics makes use of the semiconductor prop-
erties of silicon, but it is also important that silicon dioxide
is such a useful material, for passivating silicon surfaces
and protecting silicon during wafer processing. Silicon
dioxide is readily formed on silicon, and it is high-quality
electrical insulator. In addition to silicon transistors, inte-
grated circuits require multiple levels of metal wiring, to
route signals. Silicon microelectronic devices today are
characterized by their immense complexity and minia-
turization: a billion transistors ﬁt on a chip the size of
a ﬁngernail.
Micromechanics makes use of the mechanical pro-
perties of silicon. Silicon is extremely strong, and
ﬂexible beams,
cantilevers and
membranes
can
be
made from it. Pressure sensors, resonators, gyroscopes,
switches and other mechanical and electromechanical
devices utilize the excellent mechanical properties of
silicon. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) or
NEMS
PowerMEMS
RF MEMS
Microacoustics 
Microsensors MEMS
Microelectronics
Microfluidics
BioMEMS 
Optoelectronics
Micro-optics
Lab-on-a-Chip
Optical MEMS
Optofluidics
Figure 1.1
Evolution of microtechnology subﬁelds from
the 1960s onwards
microsystems, as they are also called, have expanded in
every possible direction: microﬂuidics, microacoustics,
biomedical microdevices, DNA microarrays, microre-
actors and microrockets to name a few. New subﬁelds
have emerged: BioMEMS, PowerMEMS, RF MEMS, as
shown in Figure 1.1.
Silicon optoelectronic devices can be used as light
detectors like diodes and solar cells, but light emitters like
lasers and LEDs are made of gallium arsenide and indium
phosphide semiconductors. Micro-optics makes use of
silicon in another way: silicon, silicon dioxide and silicon
nitride are used as waveguides and mirrors. MOEMS, or
optical MEMS, utilize silicon in yet another way: silicon
can be machined to make tilting mirrors, adjustable
gratings and adaptive optical elements. The micromirror
of Figure 1.2 takes advantage of silicon’s smoothness
and ﬂatness for optics and its mechanical strength
for tilting.
Microtechnology has evolved into nanotechnology
in many respects. Some of the tools are common, like
electron beam lithography machines, which were used
to draw nanometer-sized structures long before the term
nanotechnology was coined. Electron beam and ion beam
deﬁned nanostructures are shown in Figure 1.3. Thin
ﬁlms down to atomic layer thicknesses have been grown
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 3]
2
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 1.2
Micromirror made of silicon, 1 mm in diameter, is supported by torsion bars 1.2 μm wide and 4 μm thick
(detail ﬁgure). Reproduced from Greywall et al. (2003), Copyright 2003, by permission of IEEE
Figure 1.3
Electron microscope image of an electron beam deﬁned gold–palladium horizontal nanobridge (courtesy Juha
Muhonen, Aalto University) and vertical ion beam patterned nanopillars (courtesy Nikolai Chekurov, Aalto University);
100 nm minimum dimension in both
and deposited in the microfabrication communities for
decades. Novel ways of creating nanostructures by
self-assembly (self-organization) are being continuously
adopted by the microfabrication community as tools to
extend the capabilities of microfabrication. The tools of
nanotechnology, such as the atomic force microscope
(AFM), have been adopted in microfabrication as a way
to characterize microstructures.
Solar cells and ﬂat-panel displays can be large in area,
but the crucial microstructures are similar to those in mi-
crodevices. Hard disks, and hard disk read/write heads
especially, are microfabricated devices, with some of the
most demanding feature size and ﬁlm thickness issues
anywhere in microfabrication.
Listed in the references and further reading section at
the end of this chapter are a number of books and review
articles on microfabrication in diverse disciplines.
1.1 Substrates
Silicon is the workhorse of microfabrication. Silicon is a
semiconductor, and the power of microelectronics arises
strongly from the fact that silicon is available in both
p-type (holes as charge carriers) and n-type (electrons as
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 4]
Introduction
3
Figure 1.4
Silicon wafer, 100 mm in diameter, with about
200 device chips and a dozen test chips on it. Courtesy VTT
charge carriers), and its resistivity can be tailored over a
wide range, from 0.001 to 20 000 ohm-cm. Silicon wafers
are available in 100, 125, 150, 200 and 300 mm diameters
and various thicknesses. Silicon is available in different
crystal orientations, and the control of its crystal quality
is very advanced.
Bulk silicon wafers (Figure 1.4) are single crystal
pieces cut from larger single crystal ingots and polished.
Silicon is extremely strong, on a par with steel, and it
also retains its elasticity to much higher temperatures
than metals. However, single crystalline (also known as
monocrystalline) silicon wafers are fragile: once a fracture
starts, it immediately develops across the wafer because
covalent bonds do not allow dislocation movements.
Many microfabrication disciplines use silicon for con-
venience: it is available in a wide variety of sizes and
resistivities; it is smooth, ﬂat, mechanically strong and
fairly cheap. Most of the machinery for microfabrication
was originally developed for silicon ICs and newer tech-
nologies ride on those developments.
Single crystalline substrates include silicon, quartz
(crystalline SiO2),
gallium
arsenide
(GaAs),
silicon
carbide (SiC), lithium niobate (LiNbO3) and sapphire
(Al2O3). Polycrystalline silicon is widely used in solar
cell production. Amorphous substrates are also common:
glass (which is SiO2 mixed with metal oxides like
Na2O), fused silica (pure SiO2; chemically it is identical
to quartz) and alumina (Al2O3) are used in microﬂuidics,
optics and microwave circuits, respectively. Sheets of
polyimides, acrylates and many other polymers are also
used as substrates. Substrates must be evaluated for
available sizes, purities, smoothness, thermal stability,
mechanical strength, etc. Round substrates are compatible
with silicon, but square and rectangular ones need special
processing because tools for microfabrication are geared
for round silicon wafers.
1.2 Thin Films
More functionality is built on the substrates by deposition
(and further processing) of thin ﬁlms: various conducting,
semiconducting, insulating, transparent, superconducting,
catalytic, piezoelectric and other layers are deposited on
the substrates. Thin ﬁlms for microfabrication include
a wide variety of elements: metals of common usage
include aluminum, copper, tungsten, titanium, nickel,
gold and platinum. Metallic alloys and compounds
commonly
encountered
include
Al–0.5%
Cu,
TiW,
titanium silicide (TiSi2), tungsten silicide (WSi2) and
titanium nitride (TiN). The compound is stoichiometric
if its composition matches the chemical formula; for
example, there is one nitrogen atom for each titanium
atom in TiN. In practice, however, titanium nitride
is more accurately described as TiNx, with the exact
value of x determined by the details of the deposition
process. The most common dielectric thin ﬁlms are
silicon dioxide (SiO2) and silicon nitride (Si3N4). Other
dielectrics include aluminum oxide (Al2O3), hafnium
dioxide (HfO2), diamond, aluminum nitride (AlN) and
many polymers.
A special case of thin-ﬁlm deposition is epitaxy: the
deposited ﬁlm registers the crystalline structure of the un-
derlying substrate, and, for example, more single crystal
silicon can be deposited on a silicon wafer but with dif-
ferent dopant atoms and different dopant concentration.
The general material structure of a microfabricated
devices is shown in Figure 1.5. Interfaces between the
thin ﬁlm and bulk, and between ﬁlms, are important for
the stability of structures. Wafers experience a number
substrate
thin film 1
thin film 2
surface
interface 2
interface 1
Figure 1.5
Materials
and
interfaces
in
a
schematic
microstructure
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 5]
4
Introduction to Microfabrication
 
Figure 1.6
Single crystalline, polycrystalline and amorphous materials
of thermal treatments
during their fabrication, and
various chemical and physical processes are operative at
interfaces, for example chemical reactions and diffusion.
Sometimes reactions between ﬁlms are desired, but most
often they should be prevented. This can be achieved by
adding extra ﬁlms, known as barriers, in between ﬁlms.
For example, thin ﬁlm 1 might present an aluminum
conductor and thin ﬁlm 2 the passivation layer of silicon
nitride; or ﬁlms 1 and 2 are antireﬂective and scratch-
resistant coatings in optics; or ﬁlm 1 is thin tunnel oxide
and ﬁlm 2 a charge storage layer (as in memory cards).
Surface physical properties like roughness and reﬂec-
tivity are material and fabrication process dependent. The
chemical nature of the surface is important: some sur-
faces are reactive, others passive. Many surfaces will be
covered by native oxide ﬁlms if left unattended for some
time: for example, silicon, aluminum and titanium form
surface oxides over a time scale of hours. Water vapor ad-
sorbed on surfaces must be eliminated before the wafers
are processed further.
Thick substrates are not immune to thin ﬁlms: a thin
ﬁlm 0.1 μm thick may have such a high stress that a
silicon wafer 500 μm thick will be curved by tens of mi-
crometers; or minute iron contamination on the surface
will diffuse through a wafer 500 μm thick during a fairly
moderate thermal treatment.
Just like substrate wafers, the grown and deposited thin
ﬁlms can be
• single crystalline
• polycrystalline
• amorphous
as shown in Figure 1.6. During wafer processing, single
crystal ﬁlms usually stay single crystalline, but they can
be amorphized by ion bombardment for example. Poly-
crystalline ﬁlms experience grain growth, for instance
during heat treatments. Foreign atoms, dopants and
100 nm
Figure 1.7
Atomic layer deposited aluminum oxide and
titanium oxide thin ﬁlms over silicon waveguide ridges.
Courtesy Tapani Alasaarela, Aalto University
alloying atoms do not distribute themselves uniformly
in polycrystalline material but aggregate at grain bound-
aries, which can lead to both beneﬁcial and detrimental
effects, depending on the particular materials and process
conditions. Amorphous ﬁlms can stay amorphous or they
can crystallize during high-temperature steps, usually
into the polycrystalline state.
Sometimes it is enough to deposit ﬁlms on ﬂat, planar
wafers, but most often the ﬁlms have to extend over steps
and into trenches (Figure 1.7). These severe topographies
introduce further deposition process-dependent subtleties.
Note on notations
<Si>
single crystal material
c-Si
single crystal material
α-Si/a-Si
amorphous material
a-Si:H
amorphous material with imbedded
hydrogen (atomic % sometimes given)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 6]
Introduction
5
nc-Si
nanocrystalline material (grain size a
few nanometers)
μc-Si
microcrystalline material (grain size in
the range of tens of nanometers)
mc-Si
multicrystalline (large-grained
polycrystalline, grain size ≫ﬁlm
thickness)
Al–0.5% Cu
aluminum alloy with 0.5% copper
W2N, Si3N4
stoichiometric compounds
SiNx, x ≈0.8
non-stoichiometric compound
W:N
stuffed material, nitrogen at grain
boundaries (non-stoichiometric)
WF6 (g)
material in gas phase (for WF6,
boiling point 17 ◦C)
WF6 (l)
material in liquid phase
W (s)
material in solid phase
H2SiOF6 (aq)
aqueous solution
SiH2 (ad)
material adsorbed on a surface
Si/SiO2/Si3N4
ﬁlm stacks are marked with substrate
or bottom ﬁlm on the left
1.3 Processes
Microfabrication processes consist of four basic opera-
tions:
1. High-temperature processes to modify the substrate.
2. Thin-ﬁlm deposition on the substrate.
3. Patterning of thin ﬁlms and the substrate.
4. Bonding and layer transfer.
Under each basic operation there are many speciﬁc tech-
nologies, which are suitable for certain devices, substrates,
linewidths or cost levels. Some techniques work well in
research, producing a few devices with elaborate features,
but completely different methods may be required if those
devices are to be mass produced.
Surface preparation and wafer cleaning could be
termed the ﬁfth basic operation but, unlike the other four,
no permanent structures are made. Surfaces are modiﬁed
by etching away a few atomic layers, or by depositing
one molecular layer. Surface preparation requirements
are widely different in different process steps: in wafer
bonding it is paramount to eliminate particles that would
create voids if left between the wafers, while in oxidation
it is important to eliminate metallic contamination and in
epitaxy to ensure that native oxides are removed.
High-temperature steps are used to oxidize silicon and
to dope silicon by diffusion, and they are crucial for
making transistor, diodes and other electronic devices.
3.5 eV
2.2 eV
Figure 1.8
Diffusion process: the 2.2 eV barrier can be
crossed at ease at 900 ◦C but the frequency of crossing the
3.5 eV barrier is low. A higher temperature, for example
1050 ◦C, would be needed for the 3.5 eV barrier to be
crossed at ease
Devices like piezoresistive pressure sensors also rely on
high-temperature steps, with epitaxy and resistor diffu-
sion as the key processes. High-temperature steps can
be simulated extensively, by solving diffusion equations
on a computer. The high-temperature regime in micro-
fabrication is ca. 900 ◦C to 1200 ◦C, temperatures where
dopants readily diffuse and the silicon oxidation rate is
technically relevant.
Many chemical and physical processes are exponen-
tially temperature dependent. The Arrhenius equation
(Equation 1.1) is a very general and very useful descri-
ption of the rates of thermally activated processes.
Activation energy can be illustrated as a jumping process
over a barrier (Figure 1.8). According to the Boltzmann
distribution, an atom at temperature T has an excess
of energy Ea with a probability exp (−Ea/kT). Higher
temperature leads higher barrier crossing probability:
rate = z(T ) e(−Ea/kT )
k = 1.38 × 10−23 J/K = 8.62 × 10−5 eV/K
(1.1)
The magnitude of the pre-exponential factor z(T ) and the
activation energy Ea vary a lot.
In etching reactions, the activation energy is below
1 eV, in polysilicon chemical vapor deposition Ea is
1.7 eV, in substitutional dopant diffusion it is 3.5–4 eV
and in silicon self-diffusion 5 eV. For a silicon etching
process with 0.7 eV activation energy, raising the temper-
ature from 20 to 40 ◦C results in a rate six times higher.
A
great
many
microfabrication
processes
show
Arrhenius-type dependence: etching, resist development,
oxidation, epitaxy, chemical vapor deposition (which are
chemical processes) are all governed by exponential tem-
perature dependencies, as are diffusion, electromigration
and grain growth (which are physical processes).
Low-temperature processes leave metal-to-silicon inter-
faces stable, and generally 450 ◦C is regarded as the upper
limit for low temperatures. Between 450 and 900 ◦C there
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 7]
6
Introduction to Microfabrication
is a middle range which must be discussed with speciﬁc
materials and interfaces in mind.
The high-temperature regime is also known as the front-
end of the line (FEOL) in the silicon IC business and
the low-temperature regime as the back-end of the line
(BEOL). But these terms have other meanings as well:
for many people in the electronics industry outside sil-
icon wafer fabrication, front-end includes all processing
on wafers, and back-end refers to dicing, testing, encap-
sulation and assembly. We will use the ﬁrst deﬁnition.
Many thin-ﬁlm steps can be carried out identically on
silicon wafers and other substrates; by deﬁnition they are
layers deposited on top of a substrate. Thin-ﬁlm steps do
not affect the dopant distribution inside silicon; that is,
diodes and transistors are unaffected by them.
Processes act on whole wafers – this is the basic
premise. The whole wafer is subject to, for instance, dif-
fusion from the gas phase, and metal is evaporated every-
where. Either selected areas must be protected by masks
before the process, or else the material must be removed
from selected areas afterward, by etching or polishing.
Patterning processes deﬁne structures usually in two
steps: polymer processing to form an intermediate pattern
which then acts as a mask for etching, deposition, ion
implantation or other modiﬁcation of the underlying ma-
terial; and after the pattern has been transferred to solid
material, the intermittent polymer mask is removed.
The main patterning technique in microfabrication is
optical lithography, also known as photolithography. In
Figure 1.9 photolithography is shown side by side with
the thermal imprint/embossing process. In both processes
a polymer ﬁlm is modiﬁed locally to create patterns. In
lithography, photosensitive polymer ﬁlm is exposed to
UV light, which hardens the polymer by crosslinking
(so-called negative resists). In imprinting, a thermoplastic
polymer softens upon heating, and a master stamp is
pressed against it. The system is allowed to cool down
before the stamp is released, and then the polymer retains
its imprinted shape.
Many old methods have been successfully scaled
down to micrometer and nanometer scales. Etching was
once used by knights to engrave their armor with their
coats-of-arms, and metal etching with similar acidic
solutions can make aluminum patterns in the micrometer
range. Once an original microstamp or nanostamp has
been made, its replication into polymers is fairly easy (it
is actually the detachment that is difﬁcult). Electroplating
is likewise easily applicable to nanometer structures.
Casting polymers into micromolds is also popular in
microfabrication: the elastomeric (rubber-like) material
PDMS (poly(dimethyl)siloxane) is a favorite material for
simple microﬂuidic devices.
UV exposure of polymer
Stamping of polymer
Detachment of stamp
Development of image
Bottom clearing etch
Figure 1.9
Optical lithography (left) and thermal imprint
(right): UV light crosslinks photosensitive polymer, and un-
exposed parts are developed away (in so-called negative
resists). In imprinting, softened polymer is forced to shape,
and after cooling the shape is retained even though the mas-
ter is removed. In imprinting, some material remains at the
bottom and must be cleared by etching
Wafer bonding and layer transfer enable more complex
structures to be made. Bonding a wafer on top of a trench
turns it into a channel, useful for microﬂuidics. Bonding
more wafers can lead to elaborate ﬂuidic channel patterns,
as in the burner of a ﬂame ionization detector, Figure 1.10.
Bonding two wafers with electrodes creates a capacitor,
for instance for pressure sensing. Bonding two different
wafers can also be used simply as a method to create a
new kind of a starting wafer, with the best properties of
the two wafers combined.
These elementary operations of patterning, modiﬁca-
tion, deposition and bonding are combined many times
over to create devices. Process complexity is often dis-
cussed in terms of the number of lithography steps (the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 8]
Introduction
7
pyrex cover
silicon substrate
oxyhydrogen
pyrex base
sample gas
nozzle
chamber
injection system
micro nozzle
Figure 1.10
Oxyhydrogen burner of a ﬂame ionization detector by Pyrex–glass/silicon/Pyrex–glass bonding. Reproduced
from Zimmermann et al. (2002), Copyright © 2002 by permission of Elsevier Science Ltd
term mask levels is also used): ﬁve lithography steps are
enough for a simple PMOS transistor (late 1960s’ tech-
nology, and still used as a student lab process in many
universities), and many MEMS, solar cell and ﬂat-panel
display devices can be made with two to six photolithogra-
phy steps, but 32 nm linewidth microprocessors and logic
circuits require over 30 patterning steps.
1.4 Dimensions
Microfabricated systems have minimum dimensions from
20 nm to 50 μm, depending on the device types. Ad-
vanced microprocessors and memories and the read/write
heads of hard disk drives must have features <100 nm to
be competitive. In Figure 1.11 the transmission electron
micrograph shows the cross-section of a 65 nm MOS
gate. Many other electronic devices like RF and power
transistors make do with 100 nm to 1 μm dimensions.
MEMS devices typically have 1–10 μm minimum lines
and microﬂuidic devices might have 50 μm as the
smallest feature.
Microfabricated device sizes are compared to physical,
chemical and biological small objects in Figure 1.12, with
microscopy methods capable of observing them.
Narrow individual lines can be made by a variety of
methods; what really counts is resolution, the power to re-
solve two neighboring structures. It determines the device
packing density. Resolution usually gets most attention
when microscopic dimensions are discussed, but align-
ment between structures in different lithography steps is
equally important. Alignment is, as a rule of thumb, one-
third of minimum linewidth. High resolution but poor
alignment can result in inferior device packing density
compared to poorer resolution but tighter alignment.
As another rule of thumb, vertical and lateral dimen-
sions of microdevices are similar. If the height-to-width
Figure 1.11
Transmission electron microscope image of
65 nm MOS transistor gates. Courtesy Young-Chung Wang,
FEI Company
or aspect ratio is more than 2:1, special processing is
needed, and new phenomena need to be addressed in such
three-dimensional devices. Highly 3D structures are used
extensively in both deep submicron ICs and in MEMS,
for example in the microneedle of Figure 1.13.
Oxide thicknesses below 5 nm are used in CMOS man-
ufacturing as gate oxides and as ﬂash-memory tunnel
oxides. Epitaxial layer thicknesses go down to the atomic
layer and up to 100 μm in the thick end. There are also
self-limiting deposition processes which enable extremely
thin ﬁlms to be made, often at the expense of deposition
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 9]
8
Introduction to Microfabrication
0.1 nm      1 nm      10 nm      100 nm      1 µm      10 µm       100 µm 
atoms          biomolecules   viruses  bacteria cells 
TEM    AFM            SEM         NSOM     optical microscope 
X-rays         EUV         UV  visible  IR
smog     smoke      dust 
R&D 
transistors 
CMOS 
production 
MEMS 
devices 
fluidic 
devices 
Figure 1.12
Dimensions in the microworld: electromagnetic radiation, natural objects, humanmade devices, microscopy
methods and dirt
Figure 1.13
Silicon microneedle, about 100 μm. Repro-
duced from Griss and Stemme (2003), Copyright 2003, by
permission of IEEE
rate. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) can be used for
anything from a few nanometers to a few micrometers.
Sputtering also produces ﬁlms from 0.5 nm to 5 μm. Spin
coating is able to produce ﬁlms as thin as 100 nm, or
as thick as 100 μm. Typical applications include polymer
spinning. Electroplating (galvanic deposition) can produce
metal layers of almost any thickness, from a few nanome-
ters up to hundreds of micrometers.
But almost every device includes structures with di-
mensions of about 100 μm. These are needed to interface
the microdevices to the outside world: most devices need
electrical connections (by a wire-bonding or bumping
process); microﬂuidic devices must be connected to
capillaries or liquid reservoirs; solar cells and power
semiconductors must have thick and large metal areas
to bring in and take out the high currents involved; and
connections to and from optical ﬁbers require structures
about the size of ﬁbers, which is also on the order
of 100 μm.
1.5 Devices
Microfabricated device can be classiﬁed in many ways:
• material: silicon, III–V, wide band gap (SiC, diamond),
polymer, glass
• integration: monolithic integration, hybrid integration,
discrete devices
• active vs. passive: transistor vs. resistor, valve vs. sieve
• interfacing: externally (e.g.,
sensor) vs. internally
(e.g., processor).
The above classiﬁcations are based on device material or
functionality. In this book we are concentrating on fabri-
cation technologies, so the following classiﬁcation is more
useful:
• volume (bulk) devices
• surface devices
• thin-ﬁlm devices
• stacked devices.
Power transistors, thyristors, radiation detectors and solar
cells (Figure 1.14) are volume devices: currents are gen-
erated and transported (vertically) through the wafer, or,
alternatively, device structures extend through the wafer,
as in many bulk micromechanical devices. The starting
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 10]
Introduction
9
Drain
n+
n+
n+
p+
p+
p
p
n− 
Source
Gate
Source
Cell space 
(Ls)
Half 
cell 
Width 
(Lw)
RCH
RCH
RACC
RJFET
Repl
RACC
(a)
(b)
Finger
Rear contact
Oxide
‘Inverted’ pyramids
p+
n
n+
p-silicon
Oxide
p+
p+
p+
Figure 1.14
Volume devices: (a) passivated emitter, rear
locally diffused solar cell, reproduced from Green (1995)
by permission of University of New South Wales; (b) n-
channel power MOSFET cross-section, reproduced from
Yilmaz et al. (1991) by permission of IEEE
wafers for volume devices need to be uniform throughout.
Patterns are often made on both sides of the wafer and it
is important to note that some processes affect both sides
of the wafer and some are one sided.
Surface devices make use of the material properties of
the substrate but generally only a fraction of wafer thick-
ness is utilized in making the devices. However, device
structure or operation is connected with the properties of
the substrate. Most ICs fall under this category: namely,
MOS and bipolar transistors, photodiodes, CCD image
sensors as well as III–V optoelectronic devices.
In silicon CMOS, only the top 5 μm layer of the wafer is
used in making the active devices, the remaining 500 μm
of wafer thickness being for support: that is, mechanical
strength and impurity control. Shown in Figure 1.15 are
CMOS polysilicon gates of 0.5 μm width and 0.25 μm
Figure 1.15
Surface devices: 0.5 μm minimum linewidth
CMOS in a scanning electron microscope (SEM) view
Figure 1.16
Curl switch. Reproduced from Oberham-
mer and Stemme (2004), Copyright 2004, by permission
of IEEE
height. Surface devices can have very elaborate 3D struc-
tures, like multilevel metallization in logic circuits, which
can be 10 μm thick, but this is still only a fraction of wafer
thickness; therefore the term surface device applies.
Devices can be built by depositing and patterning
thin ﬁlms on the wafers, where the wafer has no role
in device operation. Wafer properties like thermal con-
ductivity or optical transparency may be part of device
operation, but another substrate could be used instead.
Thin-ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) are most often fabricated on
non-semiconductor substrates of glass, plastic or steel.
Devices like RF switches and relays, optical modulators
or DNA arrays are often fabricated on silicon wafers
for convenience, but they could be fabricated on glass
or polymer substrates as well. Figure 1.16 shows a
RF switch: the silicon nitride/gold thin ﬁlm ﬂap curls
up because of ﬁlm stresses, but can be forced ﬂat by
electrostatic actuation.
In MEMS devices with free-standing elements, mem-
branes and cantilevers pose certain processing limitations
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 11]
10
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 1.17
A microturbine by ﬁve-wafer silicon-to-
silicon bonding. Reproduced from Lin et al. (1999) by
permission of IEEE
of their own. Many processes cannot be done on movable,
bending structures because they are not stable enough, and
therefore the release step is often the very last process
step. Similarly, devices with through-wafer holes pose
serious limitations in many process steps.
Stacked devices are made by layer transfer and bond-
ing techniques. Two or more wafers are joined together
permanently. Devices with vacuum cavities, for example
absolute pressure sensors, accelerometers and gyroscopes,
are stacked devices made of bonded silicon/glass wafer
pairs. Micropumps and valves are typically stacks of many
wafers. Figure 1.17 shows a microturbine. It is made by
bonding together ﬁve wafers. More and more layer trans-
fer and wafer bonding techniques are being developed,
and stacked devices of various sorts are expected to be
appear, for example GaAs optical devices bonded to Si-
based electronics, or MEMS devices bonded to ICs.
1.6 MOS Transistor
The MOS transistor is a capacitor with a silicon substrate
as the bottom electrode, the gate oxide as the capac-
itor dielectric and the gate metal as the top electrode
(Figure 1.18). The MOS transistor has been the driving
force of the microfabrication industries. It is the top device
by all measures: number of devices sold, the narrowest
linewidths and the thinnest oxides in mass production,
as well as dollar value of production. Most equipment
for microfabrication was originally designed for MOS IC
fabrication, and later adapted to other applications.
Despite the name MOS, the gate electrode is usually
made of phosphorus-doped polycrystalline silicon, not of
S      D
channel 
SiO2
SiO2
gate
gate oxide
Figure 1.18
Schematic of a MOS transistor: gate, source
(S) and drain (D) in an active area deﬁned by thick isolation
oxide
metal. The basic function of a MOS transistor is to con-
trol the ﬂow of electrons from the source to drain by the
gate voltage and the ﬁeld it generates in the channel. In
a NMOS transistor, a positive voltage on the gate pulls
electrons from the p-type channel to the Si/SiO2 interface
where an overabundance of electrons inverts the region
under the gate to n-type, enabling electrons to ﬂow from
the n+ source to the n+ drain.
Transistors are isolated electrically from neighboring
transistors by SiO2 ﬁeld oxide areas. This isolation
takes up a lot of area, and therefore the transistor
packing density on a chip does not depend on transistor
dimensions alone.
Scaling down MOS transistor channel length makes the
transistors faster. The other main aspect is area scaling:
a factor N linear dimension scaling reduces the area to
A/N2. Gate width, gate oxide thickness and source/drain
diffusion depths are closely related, and the ratios are
more or less unchanged when the transistors are scaled
down. As a rough guide, for a gate width of L, the
oxide thickness is L/50, and the source/drain junction
depth is L/5.
1.7 Cleanliness and Yield
Microfabrication takes place under carefully controlled
conditions of constantly circulating puriﬁed airﬂow, with
temperature, humidity and vibrations also under strict con-
trol because micrometer-scale structures would otherwise
be destroyed by particles or else the lithography process
would be ruined by vibrations or temperature and humid-
ity ﬂuctuations. Personnel in cleanrooms wear gowns to
prevent particle emissions (Figure 1.19), and work proce-
dures have been developed to minimize all disturbances.
Wafers are cleaned actively during processing: thou-
sands of liters of ultrapure water (UPW, as known as
de-ionized water, DIW) is used for each wafer during
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 12]
Introduction
11
Figure 1.19
Working in a cleanroom, courtesy VTT
device fabrication. This is the dynamic part of particle
cleanliness: the passive part comes from careful selec-
tion of materials for cleanroom walls, ﬂoors and ceilings,
including sealants and paints, as well as selection of mate-
rials for design and for process equipment, wafer storage
boxes and all associated tools, ﬁxtures and jigs.
Even though extreme care is taken to ensure cleanliness
in microprocessing, some devices will always be defec-
tive. As the number of process steps increases, yield Y
goes down according to
Y = Y n
0
(1.2)
where Y0 is the yield of a single process step and n is
the number of steps. With 100 process steps and 99%
yield in each individual step, this results in a 37% yield
(representative of a 64 k DRAM chip), but a 99% yield for
a 500-step process (representative of a 16 Mbit DRAM)
results in a yield <1%. Clearly a 99% yield is not enough
for modern memory fabrication. Chip design also affects
yield through area:
Y = e−DA
(1.3)
where A is the chip area and D is the defect density:
making small chips is much easier than making big chips.
Yield has two major components: stochastic and sys-
tematic. Stochastic (random) defects are unpredictable oc-
currences of pinholes in protective ﬁlms, particle adhesion
on the wafer, corrosion of metal lines, etc. Systematic
defects come from equipment performance limitations,
impurities in starting materials and design errors: two
features may be placed so close to each other that they in-
advertently touch, or impurities in chemicals do not allow
low enough leakage currents.
scribe
lines for
chip
dicing
wafer flat for orientation checking
edge
exclusion
alignment
marks for
lithography
Figure 1.20
Silicon wafer with chips, alignment marks
and edge exclusion. The scribe line area is reserved for
dicing the chips separately
IC wafers contain typically a hundred or hundreds of
chips (also called die). This is depicted in Figure 1.20.
It also shows the other elements: alignment marks for
registering structures on different layers to each other;
and scribe lines, the space reserved for dicing the wafer
into separate chips after completing the processing. The
number of chips on a wafer has remained more or less un-
changed for decades because chip size and wafer size have
grown in parallel: 0.2 cm2 chips were made on 100 mm
wafers while 2 cm2 chips are usual on 300 mm wafers. In
extreme cases only one chip ﬁts the wafer, for example a
solar cell, a thyristor or a position-sensitive radiation de-
tector. Microﬂuidic separation devices with channels 5 cm
long and optical waveguide devices with large radii of
curvature can have a handful of devices per wafer. With
standard logic chips or micromechanical pressure sensors
and accelerometers, thousands can be crammed together
to ﬁt a wafer.
1.8 Industries
Worldwide, about $6 billion is spent on silicon wafers
annually. These are used to make $250 billion worth
of semiconductor devices, which fuel the $1200 billion
electronics industry. In 2009, about 1019 transistors were
shipped, approximately 1 billion devices for each and
every person on Earth. As recently as 1968 it was one
transistor per year per person. Price of course explains a
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 13]
12
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 1.1
Wafer size and linewidth distribution
in 2009
Wafer size
% of area
% of wafers
300 mm
38
15
200 mm
38
35
150 mm
17
30
<150 mm
7
20
Linewidth distribution in production:
≥400 nm
10%
160–400 nm
15%
80–160 nm
20%
65–80 nm
20%
<65 nm
35%
Data from SEMI and SICAS.
lot: in 1968 transistors cost about 1$ a piece; in 2009 the
cost was less than one-millionth of a cent.
Device density on chips is quadrupling every three
years, a trend known as Moore’s law.
Scaling has continued relentlessly for the past 50 years.
Linewidths were in the 30 μm range in the early 1960s,
and they are 30 nm in the year 2010. Lithographic scaling
has thus improved packing density by a factor of a million
(linear dimension scaling by a factor of 1000 equals area
density scaling by a factor of 1 000 000). The number
of transistors on a chip has increased from one to one
billion, however. The other two main factors have been
an increase in chip size and in circuit cleverness: new
designs, new fabrication processes and novel materials
use less area for the same functionality.
IC technology generations are classiﬁed by their
linewidths and each new generation has dimensions
roughly 30% smaller than the previous one. In 2010
the minimum linewidth in production is about 30 nm,
but this represents just a small fraction of all ICs
manufactured. The 200 million wafers (approximately 6
square kilometers) are distributed as shown in Table 1.1.
Small
wafers
are
used
to
fabricate
specialty
ICs,
MEMS and power devices. Gigabit memories and latest
generation processors are made on 300 mm wafers.
When counted as silicon area, the smaller linewidths
gain in importance because linewidth scaling has been
accompanied by an increase in wafer size, which means
that 65 nm devices are fabricated on 300 mm wafers
but 1 μm devices on 100 mm wafers. Only 35% of all
devices are fabricated with the latest 45 nm and 32 nm
generation technologies, but the fabrication facilities
for the 65 nm technology generation (commonly called
“wafer fabs” or simply “fabs”) are very new: they were
mostly built in 2005–2007.
The microsystems/MEMS industry as such does not
exist: microsystems are more a technology than an
industry, therefore statistics are erratic. Some estimates
put microsystem sales at $8 billion. The ﬂat-panel
display industry has sales of close to $100 billion. The
solar cell industry is growing rapidly, with sales of $30
billion. The magnetic data storage industry is similar
in size but consists of a limited number of established
players, while the solar industry is mostly populated by
start-up companies.
Note on drawings
The z-dimension is enlarged relative to the x- and
y-directions to make drawings easier to read. For
example, in bulk micromechanics the diaphragm of a
piezoresistive sensor is 20 μm, or 5% of wafer thickness,
and the piezoresistor diffusion depth is 5% of diaphragm
thickness, that is 1 μm.
1.9 Exercises
1. Silicon atom density is 5 × 1022 cm−3. If the boron
dopant concentration is 1015 cm−3, how far are the
boron atoms from each other?
2. IC chips are getting larger even though the linewidths
are scaled down because more functions are integrated
on a chip. Calculate the signal line resistance for:
(a) aluminum conductors 1 μm thick, 3 μm wide and
500 μm long (resistivity 3 μohm-cm);
(b) copper conductors 0.3 μm wide, 0.5 μm thick and
1 mm long (resistivity 2 μohm-cm).
3. Silicon dioxide can sustain a 10 MV/cm electric ﬁeld.
Calculate oxide thickness regimes for:
(a) CMOS ICs where the operating voltages are
1–5 V;
(b) capillary electrophoresis (CE) microﬂuidic chips
where 500–5000 V is used.
4. DRAM memory is a capacitor. How many electrons
are stored in a DRAM capacitor if it has an area of
1 μm2 and a silicon dioxide dielectric 5 nm thick?
5. A micromechanical pressure sensor consists of a
1 mm2 movable silicon electrode and 1 μm air gap as
the dielectric. What is the capacitance? If femtofarad
capacitance change can be measured, what is the
corresponding displacement of the movable capacitor
electrode?
6. Aluminum wires do not tolerate current densities
higher than 1 MA/cm2. What are the maximum
currents that can run in micrometer aluminum wiring?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 14]
Introduction
13
7. If a silicon etching reaction has an activation energy of
0.7 eV, and the etch rate at 80 ◦C is 1.3 μm/min, how
much is it at 100 ◦C?
8. What defect densities are typical of modern IC
production?
9. CMOS linewidths have been scaled down steadily by
30% every three years. In the year 2010 linewidths
were in the range of 32 nm. When will the linewidths
equal atomic dimensions?
References and Related Reading
Elwenspoek, M. (2001) Mechanical microsensors, Springer.
Geschke, O., H. Klank and P. Telleman (2004) Microsystem
Engineering of Lab-on-a-chip Devices, 2nd edn, Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH.
Green, A.M. (1995) Silicon Solar Cells, University of New
South Wales Press.
Greywall, D.S. et al. (2003) Crystalline silicon tilting mirrors
for optical cross-connect switches, J. Microelectromech.
Syst., 12, 708–712.
Griss, P. and G. Stemme (2003) Side-opened out-of-plane mi-
croneedles for microﬂuidic transdermal liquid transfer, J.
Microelectromech. Syst., 12, 296.
Hierold, C. (2004) From micro- to nanosystems: mechanical
sensors go nano, J. Micromech. Microeng., 14, S1–S11.
Lin, C.-C. et al. (1999) Fabrication and characterization of a
micro turbine/bearing rig, Proceedings of MEMS’99, p. 529.
Maluf, N. and K. Williams (2004) An Introduction to Micro-
electromechanical Systems Engineering, 2nd ed, Artech
House.
Motamedi,
M.E.
(2005)
MOEMS:
Micro-Opto-Electro-
Mechanical Systems, SPIE.
Oberhammer, J. and G. Stemme (2004) Design and fabrication
aspects of an S-shaped ﬁlm actuator based DC to RF MEMS
switch, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 13, 421–428.
Plummer, J.D., M.D. Deal and P.B. Grifﬁn (2000) Silicon
VLSI Technology, Prentice Hall.
Poortmans, J. and V. Arkhipov (eds.) (2006) Thin Film Solar
Cells, Wiley.
Rebeiz, G. (2002) RF MEMS: Theory, Design and Technol-
ogy, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Sikanen, T. et al. (2010) Microchip technology in mass spec-
trometry, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 29, 351–391.
Solgaard, O. (2008) Photonic Microsystems: Micro and
Nanotechnology Applied to Optical Devices and Systems,
Springer.
Tanaka, Y. et al. (2007) Biological cells on microchips: new
technologies and applications, Biosens. Bioelectron., 23,
449–458.
Tsuchizawa, T. et al. (2005) Microphotonics devices based on
silicon microfabrication technology, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quan-
tum Electron., 11, 232–240.
Weibel, D.B., W.R. DiLuzio and G.M. Whitesides (2007) Mi-
crofabrication meets microbiology, Nature Rev. Microbiol.,
5, 209–218.
Yilmaz, H. et al. (1991) 2.5 million cell/in2, low voltage
DMOS FET technology, Proceedings of IEEE APEC 1991,
p. 513.
Ziaie,
B.
et al.
(2004)
Hard
and
soft
micromachining
for BioMEMS: review of techniques and examples of
applications in microﬂuidics and drug delivery, Adv. Drug
Delivery Rev., 56, 145–172.
Zimmermann, S., A. Vogel and J. M¨uller (2002) Miniaturized
ﬂame ionization detector for gas chromatography, Sens. Ac-
tuators, B83, 285–289.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 15]
2
Micrometrology and Materials
Characterization
When micrometer lines are patterned, and nanometer
ﬁlms grown, measurement tools have to be available to
characterize those processes. The measurement spot must
sometimes be as small as possible, to obtain information
on details of microstructures, but sometimes we can use
blanket test wafers for ease of measurement. Often we
want to scan and map large areas for uniformity and
to get statistical data, and then speed of measurement
is paramount. Data is needed on electrical properties
like resistivity, optical properties like refractive index,
chemical properties like bond identiﬁcation, physical
properties like crystal structure, and mechanical proper-
ties like size and shape. Amazingly accurate and precise
measurements can be done, but it should be borne in
mind that routine monitoring is needed together with
complex, highly detailed measurements.
2.1 Microscopy and Visualization
Optical microscopy resolution is roughly a micrometer,
i.e. similar to wavelength. This is useful for practically all
MEMS and solar cell and display devices, while for mod-
ern ICs and nanotechnology it is hopelessly inadequate. It
is a rough and ready method for checking, for example,
thin-ﬁlm delamination, color changes due to corrosion,
scratches from mechanical handling and similar major
faults, and these can be observed even if the details of
the structures are smaller than the resolution. Defects can
also be made larger by etching or deposition, and in this
way very small pinhole defects in thin ﬁlms, for instance,
can be visually observed.
Optical microscope performance has been extended by
many simple and ingenious ways over the years. In the
near-ﬁeld scanning optical microscopes (NSOM) light is
collected through a small optical aperture, for example
50 nm, and therefore resolution is determined by this size,
not by wavelength. In confocal microscopes light is col-
lected only from the focal depth, and vertical information
can be obtained. In dark-ﬁeld microscopes illumination
is from the side, and detection is from above as usual.
This gives enhanced information about edges and steps
on the wafer. Fluorescence microscopes measure ﬂuores-
cence, and in the best case the signal is generated by a
single molecule, which is deﬁnitely smaller than the opti-
cal resolution of the microscope. Fluorescence is therefore
able to detect very small amounts of material, for example
photoresist residues.
Electron
microscopes
can
resolve
much
smaller
features: the scanning electron microscope (SEM) can
see 5 nm objects. In top view imaging the SEM is
very much like the optical microscope, but with two
advantages: higher magniﬁcation and better depth of
ﬁeld (Figure 2.1). Its real power, however, comes into
play in tilted and cross-sectional views (Figure 2.2).
Cross-sectional
images
reveal
information
like
the
sidewall angle of microstructures, and sidewall surface
quality, or ﬁlm thickness variation over a step. SEM
resolution is sufﬁcient for ﬁlm thickness determination
in the hundreds of nanometers range, but below that its
accuracy is inferior to other techniques.
The transmission electron microscope (TEM) provides
the ultimate image resolution, down to atomic imaging.
The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) has a special advan-
tage in calibration: the lattice spacing of atoms can be used
as accurate internal calibration standards (Figure 2.3). The
drawbacks of the TEM are manifold: sample prepara-
tion is difﬁcult and time consuming, and only a very
small area is imaged. In the TEM each picture takes
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 16]
16
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 2.1
Optical microscope and scanning electron microscope (SEM) views of a spiral antenna bolometer. Courtesy
Leif Gr¨onberg, VTT
Figure 2.2
SEM: left, a 5 μm minimum linewidth stress test structure, courtesy Lauri Sainiemi Aalto University; right,
100 nm nanobridges, courtesy Nikolai Chekurov Aalto University
hours, but minutes with the SEM and seconds with an
optical microscope.
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) is a collection of
techniques which use a sharp nanoneedle tip on a soft
cantilever to scan the sample (Figure 2.4), while the in-
teraction of the needle tip with the surface is measured.
This interaction can be physical distance, which is sensed
as a tunneling current (between the metal surface and
metal tip in the scanning tunneling microscope, STM),
or magnetic, capacitive, chemical or many other interac-
tions. The STM can have atomic resolution. It is a research
tool for surface science, but its relative, the atomic force
microscope (AFM), which has nanometer resolution, is a
favorite metrology tool in microfabrication. In the AFM
the force in question is the repulsive force between atoms
at very short distances. Because this repulsive force is
universal, many materials can be used for tips, and sili-
con and silicon nitride are standard choices, with silicon
for cantilevers. Either constant force mode or constant
height mode can be used. The former is slow and suitable
for hard materials, the latter better for rapid scanning.
Cantilever deﬂection is measured (usually optically) to
0.01 nm, and the piezoelectric stage covers a scan area
of 5 × 5 μm typically. The AFM is popular as a surface
characterization tool but it is also very good for measuring
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 17]
Micrometrology and Materials Characterization
17
Polycrystalline 
silicon
27 Å oxide
3.13 Å
(100) silicon
substrate
Figure 2.3
High-resolution transmission electron mic-
rograph
of
single
crystal
silicon/amorphous
silicon
dioxide/polycrystalline silicon structure. Reproduced from
Buchanan (1999) by permission of IBM
lateral and vertical dimensions in the micrometer and
nanometer range.
2.2 Lateral and Vertical Dimensions
For device lateral dimensions, 10% deviation is usually
accepted as a fabrication tolerance. Measurement preci-
sion should be 10% of that variation, that is 10 nm for
1 μm structures. For 100 nm structures this translates to
1 nm, which is very difﬁcult indeed to obtain.
Linewidth is often known as a critical dimension (CD).
All major CD measurements rely on scanning, where an
optical slit or aperture, a laser or electron beam spot or
a mechanical stylus is scanned over the line. Linewidth
measurement depends on edge detection in all these meth-
ods. This has both inherent and microstructure-related
limitations. The signal from the edge is not a sharp delta
function, even in the case of a perfectly vertical side-
wall. Beam spot and mechanical stylus alike have ﬁnite
dimensions which blur line edge detection. Both elec-
tromechanical stylus systems and AFMs can be used.
The former have a tip radius of curvature of 1–10 μm,
the latter 1–10 nm. Stylus instruments are often called
proﬁlometers, but, as shown in Figure 2.5, they do not
necessarily provide any information about proﬁles!
Film thicknesses range from one atomic layer to
hundreds of micrometers, and no single method can
cover such a thickness range. Conductive and dielectric
ﬁlms must often be measured by different techniques
even though scanning probe methods are quite universal:
a step is formed by etching and a probe tip scans the
step. Z-scale precision can be 1 nm or even down to 1 ˚A
(0.1 nm), but in most practical cases surface roughness
sets the lower limit for step height/ﬁlm thickness
measurement.
Commonly used optical thickness measuring methods
are ellipsometry and reﬂectometry. In ellipsometry the
change in polarization is measured and the amplitude ratio
of two different polarizations is computed. Film thick-
ness can be obtained when the optical constants of the
ﬁlm are known. Ellipsometry can be used to measure
those constants too, but then additional measurements are
needed: for example, multiple angles or multiple wave-
lengths must be used. Ellipsometry works best for ﬁlm
thicknesses below the measurement wavelength (633 nm,
most commonly) because periodicity makes interpretation
(a)
(b)
60
nm
3 µm
40
20
0
Figure 2.4
(a) AFM cantilever tip scanning the topography; (b) AFM micrograph of a single electron transistor, repro-
duced from Timofeev et al. (2009) by permission of A Timofeev. Copyright 2009 by The American Physical Society
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 18]
18
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 2.5
Scanning linewidth measurement, with scan
proﬁle shown below. Feature dimensions can be measured
but no information is obtained on sidewall angle because
the measurement instrument tip/spot itself has non-zero size
of thick-ﬁlm thicknesses difﬁcult. The low end is just
a few nanometers, but for very thin ﬁlms uncertainty is
introduced because optical constants are not really con-
stants, but depend on ﬁlm thickness.
In reﬂectometry a wavelength scan is made (e.g.,
300–800 nm) and this is ﬁtted to a reﬂection model.
Reﬂectometry can measure ﬁlms from a few nanometers
up to 50 μm thick.
X-ray reﬂection (XRR) can be used to measure very
thin ﬁlms. Unlike optical methods, XRR is insensitive to
changes in ﬁlm refractive index. Measurement time, how-
ever, is minutes, or even hours, compared to seconds for
optical tools. XRR is amenable only to surfaces with a
roughness no more than a nanometer and thickness less
than a hundred nanometers. There are many such applica-
tions in microtechnology: for example, CMOS gate oxides
on single crystal silicon are thin and extremely smooth.
2.3 Optical Techniques
In addition to microscopy, optics has many attractive
qualities
for
monitoring
microfabrication:
optical
measurements
are
mostly
quick,
non-contact
and
accurate. Lasers can be focused down to micrometer
spots, and rapidly scanned over the full wafer, proving
both local and global information. Surface roughness,
particles and defects can be measured by scatterometry
(Figure 2.6). Laser light is scattered from the wafer
surface, and multiple detectors measure the reﬂected and
scattered light. Directly reﬂected (specular) light gives
bright field
detector
laser
backscatter 
detector
dark field 
detector 
Figure 2.6
Scatterometry measurement with three differ-
ent detectors
information on surface steps and mounds, backscattered
light contains information on subsurface defects and
diffuse scattering (by the dark-ﬁeld detector) is indicative
of surface particles and microroughness. A general way
to obtain more information in optical measurements is
to use two different wavelengths (in laser systems) or
to scan wavelengths, and to use multiple incidence and
detection angles. In scatterometry varying the incidence
and detection angles reveals differences between pits and
particles for example.
Optical measurements provide information on layer
thicknesses (ellipsometry, reﬂectometry, interferometry)
and on optical properties of thin ﬁlms and surface layers
(refractive index, absorption coefﬁcient). They can mea-
sure step heights (optical proﬁlometry), surface planarity
and wafer curvature (interferometry), and membrane
vibrations
(interferometry,
vibrometry,
holography).
Interferometry is useful for both static measurements of
membrane planarity and cantilever curvature, as well
as dynamic properties. Optical probing can be used to
measure vibration ﬁelds under real operating conditions
without disturbing the device. In this way, the mechanical
vibration ﬁeld can be measured, revealing, for example,
unwanted vibration modes or energy leakage from
a resonator. Optical measurements can thus provide
valuable feedback to reﬁne simulations and the design of
vibrating MEMS structures (Figure 2.7).
Optical measurements can provide a wealth of informa-
tion on materials properties. For example, amorphous and
crystalline phases have different optical properties. Porous
material optical properties can be gauged by modeling the
material as a composite of solid and air (or liquid, if the
pores are ﬁlled with toluene, for example). Multilayer thin
ﬁlms can be measured, but increased reliance on modeling
makes the results somewhat inaccurate.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 19]
Micrometrology and Materials Characterization
19
P (a.u.)
A (dB)
0.4
0.3
−60
−65
−70
−75
−80
−85
0.2
0.1
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.7
Scanning laser interferometer measurement of a vibration mode in a MEMS resonator: (a) light power image
of the resonator; (b) relative vibration amplitude ﬁeld at 68 MHz; (c) instantaneous surface deﬂection. Courtesy Kimmo
Kokkonen and Lauri Lipi¨ainen, Aalto University
Optical excitation is used to generate charge carriers
in semiconductors, and measuring these provides infor-
mation about electrical properties. Laser pulse generated
local heating causes acoustic waves in solids which will
be reﬂected from material interfaces, which is utilized in
thickness measurements. Similarly, thermal pulses pro-
vide information on changes in material properties, for
example amorphization caused by ion implantation.
2.4 Electrical Measurements
A number of electrical measurements can be used to char-
acterize substrates and deposited thin ﬁlms: namely, re-
sistivity, conductivity type, carrier density and lifetime,
mobility, contact resistance or barrier height. Resistivity
(ρ) depends on charge, carrier mobility (μ) and carrier
number (n), as follows:
ρ =
1
nqμ
(2.1)
This equation has a catch, however, because mobility
(μ) decreases with increasing carrier concentration (n)
and experimental data is needed to correct for this. Car-
rier concentration is measured either by mercury probe
capacitance–voltage (Hg-CV) measurement or by surface
photovoltage (SPV). In the Hg-CV method the capaci-
tance of the depletion region in a mercury semiconductor
Schottky diode is measured. This method is accurate but
slow and there is the danger of mercury contamination,
although no mechanical damage.
Resistivity is an important property of conducting lay-
ers but resistance is the property that can be measured
easily. For a rectangular piece of conducting material, re-
sistance is given by
R = ρL
WT
(2.2)
where ρ is the resistivity, L the length, T the thickness
and W the width. If we consider a square piece of conduc-
tor, L = W, we can then deﬁne sheet resistance, Rs, as
Rs ≡ρ/T
(2.3)
Rs is in units of ohms, but it is usually denoted by ohms/
square to emphasize the concept of sheet resistance. The
resistance of a conductor line can now be easily calculated
by breaking down the conductor into n squares: R = nRs
(Figure 2.8). Sheet resistance is independent of square
size. Sheet resistances of doped semiconductor layers will
be discussed in Chapter 14.
Measurement of Rs can be done in several ways:
direct measurement necessitates the fabrication of a
metal line (lithography and etching steps), but the result
follows easily:
Rs = R/n = V/nI
(2.4)
The four-point probe (4PP) method uses two outer probe
needles to feed current through the sample and two inner
needles to measure voltage, as shown in Figure 2.9.
In the case of a large and thick substrate, resistivity is
given by
ρ = 2πs V
I
(2.5)
T
L
W
Figure 2.8
Conceptualizing metal line resistance: four
squares with sheet resistance Rs in series gives resistance
as R = 4Rs
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 20]
20
Introduction to Microfabrication
needle spacing, s 
Iin        V         V     Iout
Figure 2.9
The four-point probe measurement set-up with
identically spaced needles
In the case of a thin ﬁlm of thickness T on an insulating
substrate (e.g., Al ﬁlm on SiO2), the resistivity is given by
ρ = π
ln 2
V
I T = 4.53V
I T
or
Rs = 4.53V
I
(2.6)
When the sample size is 15 times larger than the probe
spacing, resistivity is correct to within 1%. For smaller
samples, geometric correction factors need to be applied.
Thickness has to be measured independently, for
example
by proﬁlometer. Alternatively, sheet
resis-
tance can be used to calculate thickness once thin-
ﬁlm resistivity is known (bulk values cannot be used for
thin-ﬁlm resistivities, as will be discussed in Chapter 5).
If
depth
information
of
carrier
concentration
is
needed, spreading resistance proﬁling (SRP) can be used
(Figure 2.10). Angle lapping is used to produce a bevel,
and resistance is probed along the bevel down to the
substrate. An accurate bevel angle is needed to convert
data into a thickness proﬁle, and the layer-by-layer
resistance data must be converted to resistivity by rather
complex models. SRP is difﬁcult and expensive but it
provides data that is not available from other methods.
Many electrical test structures have been devised for
conductive ﬁlms and doping structures. These are fast
measurements, ideally suited for wafer mapping: sheet
resistance measurement requires four pads for probe
needles, and electrical linewidth measurement similarly.
Contact chains make do with two pads but generally
four-pad measurements, with separate feeds for current
and voltage measurements, eliminate contact resistance
parasitics. A combined six-pad structure (Figure 2.11)
can be used to measure both sheet resistance Rs and
electrical linewidth.
In the six-terminal structure, current Ic is driven
through terminals 2 and 3 and voltage drop Vc is mea-
sured across terminals 5 and 6. Sheet resistance Rs is
given by
Rs = π
ln 2
Vc
Ic
(2.7)
Bridge resistance Rb is the voltage drop between termi-
nals 4 and 5, V45, divided by current I13 driven through
terminals 1 and 3. Linewidth W is then given
W = Rs · L
Rb
(2.8)
Assuming a rectangular cross-sectional proﬁle usually
holds fairly well for plasma-etched lines. Line length L
is ﬁxed on the photomask, and if L ≫W, minor inaccu-
racies in lithography (e.g., corner rounding) can be
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1E + 13
1E + 14
1E + 15
1E + 16
1E + 17v
1E + 18
1E + 19
1E + 20
1E−03
1E − 02
1E − 01
1E + 00
1E + 01
1E + 02
1E + 03
1E + 04
RHO
CC
p+ wafer, 300 µm
n+ epilayer, 6 µm
n− epilayer, 45 µm
Figure 2.10
Spreading resistance proﬁling (SRP): two-point electrical measurements on a beveled sample. Resistance
and carrier concentration proﬁles of n−/n+ epi on p+ substrate. Courtesy Atte Haapalinna, Okemtic
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 21]
Micrometrology and Materials Characterization
21
L
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 2.11
Electrical six-terminal test structure for sheet
resistance and linewidth
ignored. Diffusion can be measured similarly, but the
assumption of the proﬁle needs to be accounted for.
Electrical test structures are implemented in test chips
on the wafer, or, alternatively, they can be imbedded in
the scribe lines between chips. Test structures for wafer
fabrication measurements can thus be discarded after the
fabrication is completed. This saves area because the dic-
ing saw requires a margin of about a hundred micrometers
between the chips anyway, as shown in Figure 1.20.
2.5 Physical and Chemical Analyses
One special aspect of materials in microfabrication is their
extreme purity: impurities are speciﬁed even in parts per
trillion (ppt, 10−12 relative abundance). This is a relief in
some cases because background signals are very low, but
if the impurities themselves need to be measured, then we
face some tough challenges.
Elemental concentrations are often needed: nitrogen in
TiN thin ﬁlms (50% for stoichiometric ﬁlm), copper in
aluminum (0.5–4% Cu), phosphorus in oxide (5% by
weight), boron in silicon wafers (1 × 1016 cm−3), oxygen
in silicon (10–20 ppma, parts per million atoms), sodium
impurities in tungsten sputtering target (ppb, parts per
billion), or iron in silicon (ppt). These different concen-
tration levels mean that different analytical methods must
be employed.
Elemental detection can be accomplished with many
methods quite readily, but quantiﬁcation is often difﬁcult.
Comparative results are often presented: treatments A, B,
C vs. reference sample. Treatments might represent new
plasma CVD oxide processes and thermal oxide used as
a reference, or different thermal treatments are compared
to the as-deposited sample as a reference.
Measurement and characterization of microstructures
differ from macroscopic structures and bulk materials in
many respects. Small analysis areas and volumes limit the
available methods and sensitivities. The signal-to-noise
Table 2.1
Physical and chemical analytical methods
Incoming species Outgoing species and method name
Ions
Ions: SIMS (Secondary Ion Mass
Spectrometry)
Ions: RBS (Rutherford Backscattering)
Electrons
Electrons: AES (Auger Electron
Spectroscopy)
X-rays: EDX (Energy Dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy)
X-ray photons
Electrons: XPS (X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy)
X-rays: XRD (X-ray Diffraction)
X-rays: XRF (X-ray Fluorescence)
X-rays: TXRF (Total reﬂection X-ray
Fluorescence)
X-rays: GXRR (Grazing incidence
X-ray Reﬂection)
ratio (S/N) is proportional to the square root of the num-
ber of atoms probed:
S/N ∝

number of atoms probed ∝R · √z
(2.9)
where R is the probing radius and z is the depth of
analysis (cylinder volume ∝R2z). Equation 2.9 explains
why no single method can fulﬁll all microcharacteri-
zation needs.
A large number of techniques are available for chemi-
cal and physical analyses. We can excite the sample with
electrons, photons or ions, and measure electrons, pho-
tons or ions ejected from the sample. Table 2.1 collects
some of the main methods, classiﬁed according to excita-
tion/emission species. The list is by no means exhaustive;
you can ﬁnd many more techniques in a dedicated book.
Unfortunately, most methods are limited to certain ele-
ments only. The only exception is SIMS, which can detect
every element from hydrogen to uranium. Auger spec-
troscopy cannot detect hydrogen, helium or lithium due
to a fundamental limitation of the three electron Auger
processes, but all other elements are detectable. X-ray
methods are insensitive to light elements: depending on
X-ray window design, boron (m = 11) can be detected,
but sometimes ﬂuorine (m = 19) and sodium (m = 23)
are the lightest detectable elements.
2.5.1 Analysis area and depth
Optical methods cover a wide range of analysis areas:
sometimes micrometer laser spots or large areas from
lamp illumination, or scanning a wafer by laser beams.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 22]
22
Introduction to Microfabrication
X-rays cannot be focused, and X-ray methods require
typically rather large areas, in the millimeter range. Ion
beams can be focused to submicron spots in focused ion
beam (FIB) equipment, but most applications use broad
beams, in the millimeter range. Electron beam excitation
is the most accurate, and when combined with electron de-
tection, the smallest possible analysis volume is obtained.
Analysis depths vary a lot. Some methods are sensitive
to a few atomic layers only, while others extend to a mi-
crometer or so. Electrons have very small mean free paths
in solids, so only electrons from the top few nanometers
can escape and be detected, therefore electron spectro-
scopies are very surface sensitive. X-rays penetrate deep
into matter, and the volume probed is much larger. Ion
penetration depth is easily varied by changing energy. In
all cases the incident angle can be used to modify the pen-
etration depth: glancing angle incidence leads to surface
sensitive analysis when total reﬂection takes place.
Diffusion depths and ﬁlm thicknesses are often on the
order of a micrometer. Analysis techniques that extend
this deep would be very useful, but only a few exist.
Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) has a typ-
ical analysis depth of around a micron (for helium ion
energy of 2 MeV). Electron beams also penetrate by about
a micrometer into solids, and generate a signal from that
depth. A combination of surface erosion and surface sen-
sitive analysis is commonly adopted for top micrometer
analysis: the ion beam removes material and the newly
formed surface is probed by AES or SIMS.
Analysis must be done not only on microfabricated
structures themselves but also on defects and non-
idealities which are smaller than the device dimensions.
If the chemical composition or structure of defects has to
be identiﬁed, this is even more demanding than analysis
of regular microstructures. Contaminants often come in
quantities too small for even the best analytical methods.
Vacancies and other point defects are smaller than the
resolution of even the best microscopic methods. Indirect
methods must be used, like carrier lifetime measurements
(defects act as traps for charge carriers), positron annihi-
lation spectroscopy (PAS) (positron lifetime is longer in a
material with voids) or photoluminescence (identiﬁcation
of defects by their recombination radiation) or Raman
spectroscopy (structural defects, implant damage, local
stresses shifting photon energy).
2.5.2 Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS)
In SIMS the surface to be analyzed is bombarded by
ions which knock atoms from the surface. Some of these
are ionized, and subsequently mass analyzed, giving their
identity. SIMS is thus a surface sensitive technique, but
another important SIMS application is depth proﬁling: an
ion beam erodes the surface and layers beneath the sur-
face become available to analysis. When the erosion rate
is known, SIMS data provides information on atomic con-
centrations as a function of depth (Figure 2.12).
SIMS measurement is slow and expensive, but it is
the accepted standard for dopant depth distribution mea-
surement (even though we are most often interested in
electrically active dopants, whereas SIMS only counts
atoms). SIMS offers nanometer depth resolution and 106
dynamic range.
2.5.3 Rutherford Backscattering (RBS)
RBS is based on elastic recoil collisions. Helium ions (al-
pha particles) penetrate matter and slow down, but one ion
Concentration (cm−3)
0
200
400
600
800
Depth (Å)
5 keV
1 keV
(a)
1022
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
Concentration (cm−3)
1022
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
0
200
400
600
800
Depth (Å)
5 keV
1 keV
(b)
Figure 2.12
SIMS data of arsenic ion depth distribution inside silicon. Two different ion implantation energies have
been used: (a) arsenic depth distribution immediately after implantation; (b) after 1050 ◦C, 10 s heat treatment. Reproduced
from Plummer and Grifﬁn (2001) by permission of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 23]
Micrometrology and Materials Characterization
23
2000-keV He Backscattering yield
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
0
500
1000
1500
Energy
Yield
Si substrate
Ta
20 nm
Cu
100 nm
Si
Cu
Ta
Figure 2.13
RBS spectrum of Si/Ta/Cu (20 nm/100 nm) sample. Even though the tantalum is beneath the copper, its
signal is at a higher energy because tantalum is so much heavier. Courtesy Jaakko Saarilahti, VTT
in a million experiences 180◦elastic recoil and bounces
back toward the surface, slows down on the way, and ﬁ-
nally emerges from the solid to reach the detector. All
these steps can be handled by calculations and RBS is a
quantitative method. Elastic recoil from heavy atoms is
more pronounced, and RBS is ideally suited for heavy
atoms like arsenic, tantalum, copper and tungsten.
Signal energy is sometimes confusing because it de-
pends not only on the depth from where it originates, but
also on the mass of the atom that caused backscattering.
In Figure 2.13 a tantalum layer beneath copper has been
measured by RBS. The silicon signal is weak because sil-
icon is a light atom and it is deep beneath the copper and
tantalum. Copper is the topmost layer, but because it is
lighter than tantalum, its peak is lower in energy.
RBS detectivity depends on the matrix: elements lighter
than the matrix are not readily detectable. Oxygen and
nitrogen analyses on top of silicon wafers are therefore
difﬁcult for RBS. Mass separation between neighboring
elements is poor in RBS, therefore silicon, aluminum
and phosphorus cannot readily be resolved. RBS detec-
tion limits are around 1020 cm−3 (0.5%), but with heavy
elements RBS can detect concentrations even down to
1017 cm−3 (0.001%).
2.5.4 Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES)
In Auger measurement an electron beam (3–5 keV) hits
the surface and an inner core electron is ejected. The va-
cancy left behind is ﬁlled by an electron from an outer
shell, which gives off excess energy during transition.
Another outer shell electron receives this energy, and es-
capes. The energy of the escaping electron is determined
by the atomic energy levels and can be uniquely iden-
tiﬁed. This third electron is called the Auger electron.
The escape depth of low-energy Auger electrons is on
the order of a nanometer only, which makes AES a truly
surface sensitive technique. In Figure 2.14 residues from
TiW etching are analyzed by AES: etching is incomplete
As received
Si
Ti
C
W
N
O
Si
(a)
(b)
N
O
Sputter etched 
to remove 100 Å
Figure 2.14
Auger analysis of silicon dioxide surface:
(a) evidence of titanium and tungsten residues; (b) after
sputter etching has removed 100 ˚A (10 nm) surface layer,
the sample has been reanalyzed and found to be free of Ti
and W. Reproduced from Schaffner (2000) by permission
of IEEE
because both tungsten and titanium are detected on the
surface (and carbon, but carbon is a very common con-
taminant). Etching 100 ˚A (10 nm) or more removes all
traces of tungsten and titanium.
With the aid of sample erosion techniques (similar to
SIMS), AES can be transformed into a depth proﬁling
technique: after surface analysis, sputtering removes some
material, and Auger measurement of the newly formed
surface is carried out. This is continued until the desired
sample depth is probed. An example of an Auger depth
proﬁle is shown in Figure 7.11.
2.5.5 Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX)
When the electron energy is high enough to ionize an
atom, X-rays can be generated in the recombination pro-
cess. Electron beams can be focused down to 5 nm spots
and devices can be probed for localized analysis. The
electron beam diverges as it interacts with the matter.
The scattering of electrons spreads the beam over a vol-
ume much larger than the beam spot on the surface, as
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 24]
24
Introduction to Microfabrication
Low-energy 
secondary 
electrons
Backscattered 
electrons
Escape 
depth
Higher-energy 
inelastically 
scattered 
electrons
0−50 eV
Energy
0
Eo
Eo
Figure 2.15
Finely focused electron beam hits the sample surface, and low-energy secondary electrons escape from
the surface only, but backscattered and inelastically scattered electrons contribute to the signal deep inside the sample.
Reproduced from Schaffner (2000) by permission of IEEE
shown in the Figure 2.15. Auger electrons which originate
at the very surface are unaffected by this spreading, but
X-rays and backscattered electrons generated deep inside
the sample can escape and reach the detector.
The radius of the X-ray signal is given by
Rx(μm) = 0.04 · V 1.75
ρ
(2.10)
where acceleration voltage V is in kilovolts and density
ρ in g/cm3. Analysis radius R is given by
R =

R2x + d2
(2.11)
where d is beam spot diameter.
This analytical radius of EDX (also known as electron
microprobe analysis, EMPA) can be orders of magnitude
bigger than the electron beam spot size.
EDX can detect elemental concentrations at the 1%
level. Examples of suitable analytical tasks include phos-
phorus determination in CVD oxide (5% wt typical) or
copper concentration in aluminum ﬁlm (0.5–4% Cu typ-
ical). EDX is most often connected to a SEM which is
used to image the area of interest ﬁrst and then subjected
to elemental analysis by EDX. If the sample is made thin,
on the order of 100 nm, electron scattering effects can
be eliminated. This is utilized in the TEM and electron
energy loss spectroscopy (EELS).
2.5.6 X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
XPS is closely related to AES in two ways: low-energy
electrons are analyzed, and because their escape depth
is so small, the method is surface sensitive, but XPS
excitation is by X-rays. This has important ramiﬁcations
for the analysis area: X-ray spots are fairly large, in the
hundred micrometer range, and large areas are needed
for analysis.
Primary X-rays (a few kilovolts) eject electrons from
the sample. The energy of the ejected electrons is re-
lated to their binding energy, and this enables not only
elemental identiﬁcation but also chemical bond identiﬁca-
tion. The electron energy is slightly different depending on
bonding, so for example C–O, C–F and C–C bonds can
be distinguished. The other name for XPS, ESCA (Elec-
tron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis) emphasizes this
important feature of XPS. Figure 2.16 shows a XPS anal-
ysis of platinum etching in Cl2/CO. Initially the surface
is of course covered by platinum, with a trace amount of
carbon (from atmospheric contamination). After partial
etching some chlorine is detected, indicating that chlorine
is active in the surface reaction. After overetching, all
traces of platinum and chlorine disappear and only silicon
and oxygen from the underlying SiO2 ﬁlm are detected.
2.5.7 X-ray Diffraction (XRD)
Structural information such as crystal orientation, texture
and grain size is important in a number of cases. The
resistivity of metal ﬁlm can increase by an order of mag-
nitude upon phase change, and the initial state, amorphous
and
polycrystalline,
affects
thin-ﬁlm
polycrystalline
silicon ﬁnal grain size after annealing. Piezoelectric
properties are very sensitive to crystal structure, and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 25]
Micrometrology and Materials Characterization
25
Intensity (a.u.)
1000
800
600
Binding Energy (eV)
Before etching
After partial etching
After over-etching
O(KVV)
400
Pt4p
Pt4p
C1s
C1sCl2p
Si2s
O1s
Si2p
Pt4d
Pt4d
Pt4f
Pt4f
200
0
Figure 2.16
XPS analysis of platinum etching. Repro-
duced from Kim and Woo (1998), Copyright 1998, Amer-
ican Chemical Society
80
70
Si
Si
(400) Si
(002) AIN
(111) AI
(004) AIN
60
2 Theta (degrees)
Intensity (a.u.)
50
40
30
Figure 2.17
Aluminum nitride thin ﬁlm on aluminum thin
ﬁlm on silicon wafer – crystallinity checked by XRD. Re-
produced from Naik et al. (1999) by permission of ECS,
The Electrochemical Society
XRD is used to measure crystallinity (Figure 2.17). XRD
provides structural information of aluminum nitride
crystal. Auger could indicate that aluminum and nitrogen
are present in 1:1 ratio, but it does not indicate whether
AlN crystals are present: amorphous AlN also has 1:1
elemental ratio. TEM also provides similar crystallinity
information, but TEM analysis area is only tens on
nanometers,
whereas
XRD
gives
an
average
over
hundreds of micrometers. TEM requires tedious sample
preparation while XRD needs none.
2.5.8 X-ray Fluorescence (XRF)
Each
element
gives
off
characteristics
X-rays,
as
discussed above for the electron beam-excited case. But
X-ray excitation can be used, too. This is a very simple
yet powerful analytical technique throughout science and
engineering. It is a bulk analytical method, with limited
use in microfabrication. Its variant, total reﬂection XRF
(TXRF), however, is very important. X-rays hit the wafer
at a grazing angle (almost parallel to the wafer surface)
and penetrate only a few atomic layers. Therefore the
ﬂuorescence signal they excite concerns surface atoms
only. TXRF can measure surface impurities at the
1010 cm−2 level.
2.5.9 Other methods
Thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS; also known
as
Temperature
Programmed
Desorption)
analyses
desorption
products
upon
sample
heating
using
a
mass spectrometer. TDS can identify and quantify the
desorbed specie. If the material from wafer surface can
be dissolved in acid, atomic adsorption spectroscopy
(AAS), and many other standard methods of chemical
analysis become available.
2.6 Practical Issues with
Micrometrology
Many analytical methods can produce accurate results
only at the expense of great time and effort: for instance,
TEM can image individual atoms but the analysis time
is days (it consists mostly of tedious sample preparation
but also complicated analysis). TEM analysis costs about
$1000–2000 per sample if bought as a service.
Monitoring must be preferably so fast that whole
wafer mapping can be performed to check for uniformity.
Mapping measurement also requires that the analytical
equipment can handle whole wafers. Many optical and
electrical measurements are suitable for mapping, but
most physical and chemical methods require the wafer to
be broken into ca. square centimeter pieces.
Uniformity can be deﬁned across the wafer (within-
wafer
non-uniformity,
WIWNU),
wafer-to-wafer
(WTWNU) and lot-to-lot. The deﬁnitions for uniformity
are given by
U = max −min
2 × average
and
U = max −min
max + min
(2.12)
The former is applied when ﬁve measurements are taken,
one at the wafer centre and four at 90◦from each other
at half-radius; the latter when the four points are at
wafer edges.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 26]
26
Introduction to Microfabrication
A uniformity of 5% with 6 mm edge exclusion was
long accepted as a typical process performance nowadays
3% with 3 mm exclusion might be required. Some
processes are inherently better, for example thermal
oxidation,
ALD
and
photoresist
spinning
routinely
produce better than 1% uniformity. On the other hand,
CMP is notoriously non-uniform, with 10% considered as
good uniformity.
2.6.1 Contact vs. non-contact measurements
Measurements can be divided into two categories: con-
tact and non-contact (non-invasive). Both laser-induced
thermal pulses and a four-point probe can be used to
monitor ion implant dose, but 4PP makes physical con-
tact with the wafer by metal (tungsten) needles, and the
wafer is deemed contaminated – it is not allowed to con-
tinue to high-temperature steps. Linewidth measurement
by SEM is non-contact, as opposed to the stylus proﬁler
or AFM, which make contact with the wafer. Because full
wafers are analyzed in a linewidth SEM, only top view
pictures are possible, and no cross-sectional information
can be obtained.
2.6.2 Blanket vs. patterned wafer analysis
Both in R&D and in production, analytical methods are
bound by a number of practical constraints related to the
number of data points, measurement spot size and speed
of measurement. Blanket wafer measurements are simple
to perform and many basic studies in ﬁlm deposition, dif-
fusion, ion implantation, polishing or bonding can be done
on blanket wafers, but in many cases structured wafers are
indispensable. Linewidths and spacings need to be identi-
cal to product wafers, but they must be more accessible to
probing, by optical or electron beams, or by mechanical
probes. Test structure size needs to be matched to de-
sign complexity: if the product chip has 1 million contact
holes, how should this be extrapolated from a 1000-hole
test structure?
2.6.3 Destructive vs. non-destructive analysis
Equipment and labor costs of measurements range from
a few cents to a few dollars per wafer, but if the mea-
surement is wafer destructive, its cost is at least the wafer
cost, or $10–100 per sample. Many physical analysis sys-
tems require samples of about 1 cm2, and the wafer has to
be broken, for example for RBS, AES or XPS analysis.
If cross-sectional information is needed, wafer breakage
is also then necessary.
2.6.4 Standards and reference materials
Calibration standards (with traceability to NIST, the
National Institute of Standards and Technology) and
reference materials (which are supplier certiﬁed) are
available
for
all
major
wafer-level
measurements:
namely, ﬁlm thickness and step height, dimensions,
electrical resistivity and particles. Reference materials
are sufﬁcient for daily work but they must be calibrated
regularly against traceable standards. The standards and
references are silicon wafers with dedicated test patterns
for the quantities in question. A single wafer can provide
a series of standards, like different resistivity windows
or step heights.
2.6.5 Failure analysis and reverse engineering
Analytical methods are needed not only during fabrica-
tion, but also after wafer processing has been completed.
When circuits are found to malfunction, either in test-
ing or after ﬁeld return, the causes must be identiﬁed.
Hard errors, that is consistent failures, are much easier
to locate and understand than soft errors, that is intermit-
tent failures, which may take place only under certain
operating conditions (e.g., above a certain temperature
or frequency). As in wafer-level analysis, non-destructive
methods are tried ﬁrst and destructive ones only afterward.
In reverse engineering, a chip is “disassembled” step
by step, and the structures, materials and functions are
recorded (see Figure 28.6 for IC metallization stripped of
all dielectric ﬁlms). This is practiced for example for com-
petitive intelligence or patent infringement examination.
Methods like electron beam-induced current (EBIC) and
voltage contrast SEM can be used to probe the electrical
functions of a circuit.
2.7 Measurements Everywhere
No microfabrication process works without measure-
ments, either in the research phase, or in manufacturing.
Measurement needs change when processes evolve from
novelty to routine, but there are some constants, such
as the need to be able to measure ever ﬁner details:
for example, not only linewidth, but also line edge
roughness; and not only ﬁlm thickness, but also interface
quality; and not only membrane deﬂection statically but
at megahertz frequency.
It is not unusual to ﬁnd that no analytical method is
able to do the job: either the quantity involved or the
analysis area is too small. Sometimes it is possible to
use devices themselves as measuring instruments. Device
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 27]
Micrometrology and Materials Characterization
27
performance degradation is attributed to minute effects
which are not amenable to direct physical measurements.
MOS transistors are sensitive to metal contamination at
levels below analytical detection limits (in the 109 cm−3
range). Microscopic vacuum cavities are created by wafer
bonding or deposition, and no pressure gauge is small
enough to probe these cavities, but the mechanical quality
factor Q of microfabricated mechanical resonators in the
cavities is indicative of cavity pressure.
2.8 Exercises
1. The sheet resistance of typical aluminum metallization
is 0.03 ohms/square. What is the aluminum thickness?
2. The resistance of copper lines 200 μm long was mea-
sured as 40 ohms. From the copper deposition pro-
cess we know that the thickness is 300 nm. What is
the linewidth?
3. AFM scan area is 1 × 1 μm, which corresponds to
512 × 512 pixels. What must the AFM tip radius be
so that resolution is tip limited?
4. Estimate
the
analytical
radius
of
an
electron
microprobe (EMPA).
5. Can RBS be used to measure dopant proﬁles?
6. If an electron beam is focused to a 15 nm spot, and
at least 100 Auger events (electrons) must be col-
lected to get a signal, what is the detection limit of an
Auger microprobe?
7. SIMS raw data consists of ion counts vs. erosion
time. How can these be converted to concentration vs.
depth data?
8. What
is
the
acceleration
voltage
of
an
atomic
resolution TEM?
References and Related Reading
Bubert, H. and H. Jenett (eds) (2002) Surface and Thin Film
Analysis, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.
Buchanan, M. (1999) Scaling the gate dielectric: materials, in-
tegration and reliability, IBM J. Res. Dev., 43, 245.
Bunday, B.D.
et al. (2007) Value-added metrology, IEEE
Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 20, 266–277.
Diebold, A.C. (1994) Materials and failure analysis methods
and systems used in the development of and manufacture of
silicon integrated circuits, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B12, 2768.
Holmgren, O. et al. (2009) Analysis of vibration modes in a
micromechanical square-plate resonator, J. Micromech. Mi-
croeng., 19, 015028.
Kim, J.H. and S.I. Woo (1998) Chemical dry etching of
platinum using Cl2/CO gas mixture, Chem. Mater., 10,
3576–3582.
Naik, R.S.
et al. (1999) Low-temperature deposition of
highly textured aluminum nitride by direct current mag-
netron sputtering for applications in thin-ﬁlm resonators,
J. Electrochem. Soc., 146, 691–696.
Plummer, J.D. and P.B. Grifﬁn (2001) Material and process
limits in silicon VLSI technology, Proc. IEEE, 89, 240.
Runyan, W.R. and T.J. Schaffner (1998) Semiconductor Mea-
surements and Instrumentation, McGraw-Hill.
Schaffner, T.J. (2000) Semiconductor characterization and an-
alytical technology, Proc. IEEE, 88, 416.
Schroder, D.K. (1998) Semiconductor Material and Device
Characterization, 2nd edn, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Tiggelaar, R.M. et al. (2009) Stability of thin platinum ﬁlms
implemented in high-temperature microdevices, Sens. Actu-
ators, A152, 39–47.
Timofeev, A.V.
et al. (2009) Electronic refrigeration at the
quantum limit, Phys. Rev. Lett., 102, 200801.
Yu, G.-Q., S.-H. Lee and J.-J. Lee (2002) Effects of thermal
annealing on amorphous carbon nitride ﬁlms by r.f. PECVD,
Diamond Relat. Mater., 11, 1633–1637.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 28]
3
Simulation of Microfabrication Processes
Microfabrication processes consist of tens or hundreds
of steps which take weeks or months to complete, and
development cycles easily become very long. Simula-
tion is one way to shorten this time. Simulation accuracy
is strongly dependent on the details of the process to
be simulated, and even a simple simulator can be ex-
tremely valuable if it saves enough experimentation time
and effort. Simulators can provide meaningful trend data
and comparisons between different process options, even
though accuracy might be less than perfect. Simulators
can be used to explore possibilities and narrow down op-
tions before experimental work is begun. Simulation can
provide information which is not experimentally available
or difﬁcult to measure. For instance, there is no dopant
proﬁling method with sub-10 nm resolution in both verti-
cal and lateral directions, and therefore simulation is the
de facto method for 2D dopant distribution analysis.
3.1 Simulator Types
There are two breeds of process simulators: integrated
packages that can be used to simulate the whole fabrica-
tion process with many different steps in sequence; and
dedicated simulators for speciﬁc process steps. Dedicated
simulators are available for almost all processes, ranging
from ion implantation damage production to lithography
defect modeling, to crystal structure prediction of de-
posited ﬁlms. A silicon anisotropic wet etching simulator
can use crystal lattice information (bond energies and
densities) to predict which atoms will be removed by the
etchant. Dedicated simulators are more detailed, more
accurate and more computationally intensive. A basic
principles diffusion simulation would start from lattice
parameters, interatomic potentials, vacancy production
and annihilation rates and atom–defect interactions,
and provide diffusion data as an output. Integrated
simulation packages
use simpler models, but offer
seamless stitching of different process steps into whole
processes. For instance, macroscopic phenomenological
diffusion models based on Fick’s equations are used.
Bulk silicon process steps, that is high-temperature steps
that affect the dopant distribution inside silicon, epitaxy,
diffusion, implantation and oxidation, can be analyzed
by solving the relevant diffusion equations.
Etching and deposition produce the topography on a
wafer. This build-up of topography is difﬁcult to simulate
because it involves physics (e.g., plasma generation) and
chemistry (e.g., surface reactions) at many time scales
and physical sizes. Film deposition simulators depend
on atom arrival angles which are not physical constants
like diffusivities, but parameters sensitive to experimen-
tal conditions. Etching reactions are complex interactions
between the chemical contributions (spontaneous etching,
free energy considerations) and physical processes (e.g.,
ion bombardment-enhanced desorption). Topography pro-
cess simulators are usually semiempirical: some important
model parameters are extracted from experiments without
fundamental physical validation.
Even though simulation is fast, building a simulator
is slow and tedious. It is not possible to build simula-
tors for all possible new materials, processes and devices
because calibration data needs to be available, and it is
readily available only for those materials, processes and
devices that are widely studied and used. In this sense the
predictive power of process simulation remains poor.
3.2 Levels of Simulation
Process simulation, device simulation and circuit simu-
lation together are termed TCAD, for technology CAD,
in contrast to the more established ECAD, or electronic
simulations, which involves logic and system simulations.
Process simulation deals with physical structures, namely
atoms and their distributions; device simulation deals with
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 29]
30
Introduction to Microfabrication
Process simulation 
-structures 
-dopant profiles 
-layer thicknesses 
           = => input to device simulation
Device simulation 
-electrical, mechanical, thermal, optical behavior 
-current-voltage, force-displacement, potential-flow
            = => input to circuit simulation
Circuit simulation 
           -output signal and noise 
           -rise time, speed, delays
Figure 3.1
Levels of simulators
currents and potentials in devices; and circuit simulation is
used to study larger circuit blocks (Figure 3.1). The dopant
concentrations produced by a process simulator are used
as input for the device simulator, and device simulator
results form the starting material for circuit simulation.
Circuit simulation is the most advanced of the three,
and process simulation is the least developed. Device
simulators for CMOS today are predictive because CMOS
device physics is well understood. Of course, conti-
nuous scaling to smaller linewidths means that new
phenomena must be implemented regularly into process
and device simulators.
MEMS simulators must deal with a lot more varied phe-
nomena (e.g., electrical, mechanical, thermal, magnetic,
optical, etc., phenomena). MEMS fabrication simulators
include silicon etching simulators, which take mask de-
sign as input and produce silicon 3D shape as output. Most
device simulators, however, are FEM simulators which
use drawn geometry as a starting point, instead of process
simulator output.
3.3 The 1D Simulators
A 1D simulator treats matter as layers, and the simulation
outputs are layer thicknesses and dopant distributions in
the vertical direction (Figure 3.2). Such 1D simulation has
been used since the 1970s when SUPREM from Stanford
University emerged. Diffusion, ion implantation, oxida-
tion and epitaxy are treated. Two additional, non-physical
process steps are included, namely ﬁlm deposition and
etching, but these are just geometrical steps, like “add
500 nm of undoped oxide on silicon” or “remove top
50 nm of silicon by etching.” These steps are needed
for more realistic models of surfaces and interfaces,
but they do not reveal anything about the deposition or
etching processes.
Over the years more layers and more realistic models
have been added to 1D simulators. For instance, some
simulators can handle the oxidation and doping of poly-
crystalline silicon. Polycrystalline materials require more
inputs than single crystals, for example grain size and tex-
ture, and assumptions of grain boundary diffusion vs. bulk
diffusion among others. ICECREM (from Fraunhofer In-
stitute IISB, http://www.iisb.fraunhofer.de) is an advanced
1D simulator. It can simulate the following processes:
• epitaxy
• oxidation
• diffusion
• ion implantation.
Additionally, the following steps can be used to generate
geometry:
1. Deposition of undoped oxide ﬁlms (protective capping
layers).
2. Deposition of doped oxide ﬁlms (diffusion sources).
3. Etching (removal of oxide and silicon).
n+ emitter 
p base 
n epi 
n+ buried layer 
p substrate 
Figure 3.2
Cross-section of a npn bipolar transistor and its 1D simulation model of dopant concentrations along the
cut line
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 30]
Simulation of Microfabrication Processes
31
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
1014
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Depth (µm)
Concentration (cm−3)
0.00
0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00 1.20
Depth (µm)
(a)
(b)
Concentration (cm−3)
16:55:19
23-AUG-:3
Phosphorus
Arsenic
Boron
Boron
SiO2
18:32:02 12-FEB:3
Oxthi = 0.4236 
Figure 3.3
A 1D simulation (ICECREM) of (a) arsenic (50 keV energy) and boron (50 keV) ion implantation into
silicon, dose 1015 ions/cm2, and (b) dry oxidation of BF2+ implanted silicon (20 keV, 1015 ions/cm2)
ICECREM
models
can
account
for
a
number
of
important real-life effects like high phosphorus concen-
tration in diffusion, implantation through the oxide and
oxidation-enhanced diffusion (OED). These features will
be discussed in the relevant chapters on basic processes.
ICECREM output consists of diffusion proﬁles, oxide
thicknesses,
sheet
resistances
and
junction
depths.
Sensitivity analysis can be carried out to study both
process parameter and model parameter changes.
A typical simulator input ﬁle begins with the substrate
deﬁnition (crystal orientation <100> or <111>, doping
type and level/resistivity). The grid is deﬁned next: that
is, the depth into silicon that needs to be simulated (e.g.,
down to 5 μm), division of matter into layers (e.g., 10 nm
thick) and concentrations that need to be calculated (con-
centrations vary between 1021 cm−3, limited by dopant
solubility, and 1015 cm−3, which is a typical substrate
doping level). Process steps are then deﬁned in sequence,
followed by output commands. Model parameters can be
modiﬁed by the user, but default parameters are good for
initial simulations and novice users. Simulation examples
in the chapters on epitaxy, oxidation, diffusion and im-
plantation are discussed using ICECREM.
A 1D simulator output can visualize dopant depth dis-
tributions and ﬁlm thicknesses, as shown in Figure 3.3.
There are two important points in concentration curves:
the maximum concentration and its depth, and the junction
depth where substrate dopant level and diffused dopant
levels match. Junction depths range from tens of nanome-
ters to many micrometers.
3.4 The 2D Simulators
A 2D simulation is indispensable because a 1D simulation
of more slices cannot predict 2D proﬁles. This is illus-
trated in Figure 3.4 for a simple 5 μm linewidth MOS
transistor: the 1D simulation produces accurate doping
proﬁles and oxide thicknesses along lines A, B and D,
but it cannot produce any meaningful results for C (where
implanted dopant spreads laterally under the mask) or E
(where oxidation occurs under a protective nitride layer).
The 1D results for A, B and D are valid for 5 μm tran-
sistors, but as the device is scaled to smaller linewidths,
more and more 2D effects arise, and a 2D simulator will
be needed for proﬁles along B and D as well.
The 2D diffusion simulators take into account oxide
and polysilicon structures on top of silicon, and produce
dopant proﬁles that extend under the gate and masking
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 3.4
Vertical proﬁles of a MOS transistor: ﬁlm
thicknesses and dopant distributions along lines A, B and
D can be simulated with a 1D simulator, but proﬁles along
C and E require 2D simulation
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 31]
32
Introduction to Microfabrication
2.0 × 1019
n-type:
1.5 × 1019
1.0 × 1019
5 × 1018
25 nm
25 nm
Source
1.5 nm
tox =
Gate
Drain
y =
y = −0.4V
1.2 V
0.8 V
0.4 V
0
0
5 × 1018
1.0 × 1019
p-type
Figure 3.5
A 2D simulation: dopant concentration proﬁles of a CMOS transistor with a gate length of 25 nm. Reproduced
from Taur et al. (1998) by permission of IEEE
layer, as shown in Figure 3.5, for example. The structures
above the silicon surface are usually not simulated
but simply drawn geometries. They are tools to add
realism, not unlike the deposition and etching steps in
1D simulators.
The 2D simulators are about cross-sections of structures
where 1D ones were only about layers. A 2D simula-
tion enables topography simulation: in a 1D simulation
it is not possible to study the deposition of ﬁlms over
patterns, neither are cross-sections relevant. Continuum
simulator SAMPLE and atomistic simulator SIMBAD are
compared in Figure 3.6 for metal sputtering. In both cases
metal is deposited over a trench, and thickness of metal
on sidewalls and trench bottom is predicted. A continuum
simulator which predicts thicknesses from atom arrival
angle distribution and surface mobility considerations is
useful but the result is geometric only. An atomistic sim-
ulator can show crystal structure, and reveal differences
in ﬁlm quality on horizontal and vertical walls.
2D simulation is computationally intensive, and 2D
simulators usually have a 1D simulation tool imbedded
in them, for quick and easy initial 1D tests. Savings in
computational time can be orders of magnitude. A grid, or
simulation mesh, in a 1D simulator is regular and easy to
generate, but in 2D simulators mesh generation is much
more difﬁcult. In order to reduce computational time, a
dense grid is used where abrupt changes are expected, and
a sparse grid where gradients are not steep. Instead of a
rectangular grid, triangular grids are often employed.
3.5 The 3D Simulators
When scaling to smaller and smaller dimensions contin-
ues, 3D simulation becomes mandatory. Narrow but long
transistors can be simulated by a 2D simulator, but a nar-
row and short transistor with similar dimensions in both
the x- and y-directions really needs 3D treatment. Again,
complexity and time of simulation increase drastically in
the 2D case. If a layer 1 μm deep is simulated in a 1D
simulator with 10 nm grid spacing, 100 layers need to be
calculated. A similar grid size in 2D simulation requires
100 × 100 squares (104), and in 3D simulation it equals
106 cubes. Roughly speaking, if 1D simulation takes sec-
onds, 2D takes minutes and 3D hours.
However, a 10 nm grid is no good for 3D simulation
because this simulation is used especially for 100 nm de-
vices and the like, and perhaps a 1 nm grid is used. But
the question is not just computational: additional physi-
cal models need to be developed, because more and more
atomistic models must be used, and continuum approxi-
mation fails due to the atomic nature of matter. In order
to take advantage of 3D process simulation, 3D device
simulators must be used, just like 2D process simulators
feed into 2D device simulators. Advanced device simula-
tors must similarly account for the fact that electric current
is not a continuous variable but a stream of charged pack-
ets of 1.6 × 10−19 C.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 32]
Simulation of Microfabrication Processes
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6
Continuum and atomistic metal step coverage simulation: (a) SAMPLE 2D simulation of metal deposition
0.5 μm thick into a trench 1 μm wide and 1 μm deep; only ﬁlm thickness is simulated; (b) SIMBAD: sputtered tungsten
into a trench with prediction of columnar grain structure. Reproduced from Dew et al. (1991) by permission of AIP
3.6 Other Simulation Needs
in Microfabrication
Simulation needs extend from the atomic scale to reactor
scale. At a meter scale, simulation is needed to predict gas
ﬂows and temperature distributions inside a reactor; at the
centimeter level it can be used to study uniformity across
the wafer; at the micrometer scale, simulation is needed
to predict doping proﬁles and step coverage; and atomic-
level simulation is needed to understand the details of
ﬁlm growth and diffusion. For thin-ﬁlm deposition such
a simulator would produce a relation between process pa-
rameters and ﬁlm properties. At the present time, such
multiscale simulation remains a faraway goal.
Optical lithography simulation is a self-contained
regime in process simulation. Its main output is a resist
proﬁle with optics, resist photochemistry and develop-
ment as the main modules. It will be discussed in Chapter
10. Tool simulation will be brieﬂy discussed in Chapter
31 and deposition simulation in Chapter 7.
3.7 Exercises
These
exercises
require
a
simulator,
for
example
ICECREM or SUPREM, but any 1D simulator will
do. ICECREM can be obtained free of charge from:
icecrem@iisb.fraunhofer.de.
1. How much difference is there between the oxidation
rates of boron-, phosphorus- and arsenic-doped wafers
when all have identical doping levels?
2. Use a 1D simulator to ﬁnd the step height resulting
from oxidation of phosphorus-doped silicon depicted
below:
Phosphorus implant
Thermal oxidation
3. How does thermal oxide thickness on a phosphorus-
doped wafer change with dopant concentration?
4. What energy must phosphorus ions have to pass
through 200 nm oxide?
5. Compare your simulator to other simulators for ion
implantation of arsenic into silicon:
E
Dose
Simulator
Range
Peak
(keV)
(cm−2)
( ˚A)
concentration
(cm−3)
40
1.4 × 1013
TRIM
332
6.0 × 1017
40
1.4 × 1013
PREDICT
268
3.8 × 1018
40
1.4 × 1013
CUSTOM
270
4.6 × 1018
90
7.2 × 1014
TRIM
636
8.6 × 1018
90
7.2 × 1014
PREDICT
603
9.9 × 1019
90
7.2 × 1014
CUSTOM
530
1.2 × 1020
6. Calculate the oxide thickness for 10, 100, 1000 and
10 000 minutes of oxidation at 1100 ◦C.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 33]
34
Introduction to Microfabrication
References and Related Reading
Bechtold, T., E.B. Rudnyi and J.G. Korvink (2005) Dynamic
electro-thermal simulation
of
microsystems – a
review,
J. Micromech. Microeng., 15, R17–R31.
Dabrowski, J., E.R. Weber and J. Dabrowski (eds) (2004) Pre-
dictive Simulation of Semiconductor Processing: Status
and Challenges, Springer.
Dew, S.K. et al. (1991) Modeling bias sputter planarization of
metal ﬁlms using ballistic deposition simulation, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., A9, 519–523.
Ho, C.P. et al. (1983) VLSI process modeling – SUPREM III,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 30, 1438.
Law, M. (2002) Process modeling for future technologies, IBM
J. Res. Dev., 46, 339–346.
Lorentz, J. et al. (1996) Three-dimensional process simulation,
Microelectron. Eng., 34, 85.
Taur, Y.
et al. (1998) 25 nm CMOS design considerations,
International Electron Devices Meeting, p. 789.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 34]
4
Silicon
The ﬁrst transistor was made of polycrystalline germa-
nium in 1947. Electron mobility in germanium is higher
than in silicon, and germanium was readily available.
However, silicon, with its larger band gap, was favoured
because of smaller leakage currents. Initially there was
no consensus whether single crystalline or polycrystalline
material was better, but the rapid development of sin-
gle crystal silicon growth in the 1950’s soon dominated
the market. The real breakthrough came when the bene-
ﬁcial role of silicon dioxide was recognized: it provided
passivation of semiconductor surfaces, and it resulted in
improved transistor reliability. When it was further no-
ticed that the SiO2 layer could act as a diffusion mask
and as isolation for integrated metallization, the way was
open for the invention of the integrated circuit.
Steady increases in wafer size from half an inch have
continued up to this day, with wafers of 300 mm diameter
now in production, and the ﬁrst samples of 450 mm diam-
eter being readied in 2009. For other substrates smaller
sizes are still widely used and when new materials like
silicon carbide (SiC) or gallium nitride (GaN) are intro-
duced, crystal growth and wafer yield are so low that only
small ingots and small wafers make sense.
Silicon is the basis of microelectronics, with over 90%
of the semiconductor market. MEMS are largely based
on silicon wafers, and silicon is used everywhere in mi-
crotechnology because of its availability and excellent
properties, even though sometimes only a fraction of those
properties are utilized. Over 80% of solar cells are made
of crystalline silicon today, but thin-ﬁlm cells are rapidly
gaining popularity. Flat-panel displays are made on glass
panels but the transistors controlling the pixels in active
matrix LCDs are made of polycrystalline silicon.
Note on Terminology
Single crystal silicon (SCS for short) is known by
many names. Some people prefer the term monocrys-
talline silicon, though the abbreviation mc-Si refers to
multicrystalline silicon! As short forms, c-Si is used
for crystalline silicon and a-Si for amorphous silicon,
while polycrystalline silicon is known simply as poly.
In the solar cell industry crystalline silicon is sometimes
called X-Si.
4.1 Silicon Material Properties
Silicon material properties are an excellent compromise
between performance and stability. An energy gap of
1.12 eV makes silicon devices less prone to thermal noise
than germanium devices with a 0.67 eV gap. Silicon is
transparent in the infrared (above 1.1 μm wavelength)
which means that it can used as an optical material at
1.55 μm telecom wavelength applications.
Silicon source gases can be puriﬁed to extremely
high degrees of purity. Silicon resistivity ranges from
10 000 Ohm-cm (dopant concentration 1012 cm−3) to
0.0001 Ohm-cm (dopant concentrations and 1021 cm−3),
Figure 4.1. There are slight differences between different
dopants but the limits are the same: solid solubility sets
the upper dopant concentration limit and materials purity
(of silicon itself and of materials used in the fabrication
process) sets the lower limit.
Silicon is strong: its Young’s modulus (elastic modulus)
can be as high as 190 GPa for the <111> orientation
and less for other orientations, but it is at least 132 GPa.
Young’s modulus (E) is the ratio of stress (σ) to strain
(ε, elongation):
E = σ/ε
(4.1)
It is important in assessing for example thermal stresses
that the wafers experience during processing.
The excellent mechanical properties of silicon have
been utilized since the 1960s in micromechanical pres-
sure and force sensors which rely on bending beams and
diaphragms. Piezoresistive detection depends on doped
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 35]
36
Introduction to Microfabrication
0.0001
Dopant concentration (cm−3)
Resistivity (ohm-cm)
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100 000
1.E+12
1.E+13
1.E+14
1.E+15
1.E+16
1.E+17
1.E+18
1.E+19
1.E+20
1.E+21
p-type
n-type
Figure 4.1
Silicon resistivity can be varied over eight orders of magnitude by doping
resistors, and capacitive detection relies on the ability to
micromachine shallow air gaps on the order of 1 μm. Both
are standard processes in silicon microfabrication.
Silicon is as strong as steel but this fact is disguised
by two factors: most of us do not have experience of
steel plates 0.5 mm thick; and, since silicon is brittle, the
breakage pattern is therefore different from the ductile
fracture of multicrystalline steel. Silicon is almost ideally
elastic (obeying Hooke’s law) up to the yield point, and
after that a catastrophic failure takes place. Most metals
and oxides obey Hooke’s law initially, but then deform
plastically before fracture. The yield strength of silicon is
7 GPa at room temperature, different steel varieties have
yield strengths of 2–4 GPa, while the yield strength of
aluminum is only 0.17 GPa. Fracture strain (elongation
before breakage) for single crystal silicon is 4%, an ex-
ceptionally large value. More silicon properties are listed
in Table 4.1.
4.2 Silicon Crystal Growth
4.2.1 Puriﬁcation of silicon
Silicon
wafer
manufacture
is
a
multistep
process
which begins with sand puriﬁcation and ends up with
ﬁnal polishing and defect inspection. Silica sand, SiO2, is
reduced by carbon, yielding 98% pure silicon according
to the reaction
SiO2 + 2 C ⇒Si + 2 CO (g)
(4.2)
This material is known as metallurgical grade silicon
(MGS). MGS is converted to gaseous trichlorosilane
SiHCl3 (boiling point 31.8 ◦C) according to the reaction
Si + 3 HCl ⇒SiHCl3 + H2 (g)
(4.3)
The main impurities in MGS (Fe, B, P) react to form
FeCl3,
BCl3
and
PCl3/PCl5.
Trichlorosilane gas is
puriﬁed by distillation during which FeCl3 and PCl3/PCl5
are removed as high-boiling-point contaminations and
BCl3 as low-boiling-point contamination. Trichlorosilane
is converted back to solid silicon by the decomposition
of SiHCl3 on hot silicon rods by the reaction
2 SiHCl3 + 2 H2 (g) ⇒2 Si (s) + 6 HCl (g)
(4.4)
This material is of extremely high purity and is known
as electronic grade silicon (EGS). It is a polycrystalline
material which will be used as a source material in single
crystal growth.
4.2.2 Czochralski (CZ) crystal growth
In CZ growth a silica crucible (SiO2) is ﬁlled with un-
doped electronic grade polysilicon. Dopant is introduced
by adding pieces of doped silicon (for low doping con-
centration) or elemental dopants P, B, Sb or As (for high
doping concentration). The crucible is heated in a vacuum
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 36]
Silicon
37
Table 4.1
Properties of silicon at 300 K
Structural and mechanical
Atomic weight
28.09
Atoms, total (cm−3)
4.995 × 1022
Crystal structure
diamond (FCC)
Lattice constant ( ˚A)
5.43
Density (g/cm3)
2.33
Density of surface atoms (cm−2)
(100) 6.78 × 1014
(110) 9.59 × 1014
(111) 7.83 × 1014
Young’s modulus (GPa)
190
(111) crystal orientation
Yield strength (GPa)
7
Fracture strain
4%
Poisson ratio, ν
0.27
Knoop hardness (kg/mm2)
850
Electrical
Energy gap (eV)
1.12
Intrinsic carrier concentration (cm−3)
1.38 × 1010
Intrinsic resistivity (ohm-cm)
2.3 × 105
Dielectric constant
11.8
Intrinsic Debye length (nm)
24
Mobility (drift) (cm2/V-s)
1500 (electrons)
475 (holes)
Temperature coeff. of resistivity (K−1)
0.0017
Thermal
Coefﬁcient of thermal expansion (◦C−1)
2.6 × 10−6
Melting point (◦C)
1421
Speciﬁc heat (J/kg-K)
700
Thermal conductivity (W/m-K)
150
Thermal diffusivity
0.8 cm2/s
Optical
Index of refraction
3.42
λ = 632 nm
3.48
λ = 1550 nm
Energy gap wavelength
1.1 μm
(transparent at larger wavelengths)
Absorption
>106 cm−1
λ = 200–360 nm
105 cm−1
λ = 420 nm
104 cm−1
λ = 550 nm
103 cm−1
λ = 800 nm
<0.01 cm−1
λ = 1550 nm
to about 1420 ◦C to melt the silicon. A single crystalline
seed of known crystal orientation is dipped into the silicon
melt. Silicon solidiﬁes into a crystal structure determined
by the seed crystal. Figure 4.2 describes the crystal puller.
A thin neck is quickly drawn to suppress defects which
develop because of the high-temperature difference be-
tween the seed and the melt, and then the pulling rate is
lowered. Both the ingot and the crucible are rotated (in
opposite directions), ingot rotation at about 20 rpm, cru-
cible rotation at about 10 rpm. Molten silicon is very ﬂuid,
and the rotations induce ﬂows in the crucible; temperature
differences are also a source of convection currents. Much
engineering has gone into understanding the behavior of
molten silicon.
Ingot diameter is determined by ingot pull rate. The
pulling rate is limited by heat conduction away from the
crystallization interface, and therefore large-diameter in-
gots have lower pulling rates. While an ingot of 100 mm
diameter can be pulled at 1.4 mm/min, the 200 mm ingot
pull rate is 0.8 mm/min. Typical pulling time is 30 hours
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 37]
38
Introduction to Microfabrication
vacuum vessel
argon gas
seed crystal
neck
solidified ingot
silicon melt
silica crucible
graphite susceptor
graphite heaters
Figure 4.2
Czochralski crystal pulling: silicon (melting point 1421 ◦C) solidiﬁes as it is pulled up. Pulling speed
(mm/min), ingot rotation speed (20 rpm) and crucible counter-rotation speed (10 rpm) together determine ingot diameter
(corresponding to ingot lengths of 2 m), not including
heating and cooling, which add another 30 hours to the
process, for 200 mm ingots. A ﬁnished ingot is seen in
Figure 4.3.
Ingot length is determined by the yield strength of the
silicon neck and crucible size. The thin neck is not perfect
material because it has defects arising from thermal shock,
and torsional forces act on it during rotation (Figure 4.3).
Silicon yield strength is signiﬁcantly lower at high
temperatures, but 300 mm ingots can weigh up to 300 kg.
Figure 4.3
Ingot: narrow neck, shoulder and body
Not all polysilicon can be utilized: about 10% of original
polysilicon remains in the crucible. Crucibles cannot be
reused and are extremely expensive disposable objects.
EGS is extremely pure, for instance boron, phosphorus
and iron levels can be as low as 0.01–0.02 ppb. How-
ever, the crucible is a source of impurities, and for boron,
sodium and aluminum it is the crucible and not EGS that
determines ingot purity. If synthetic silica is used for cru-
cibles, much higher purity CZ ingots can be pulled.
There is inevitable contamination of the growing sil-
icon crystal from the materials that are essential to the
growth set-up: the silica crucible is slightly dissolved dur-
ing the crystal growth process, and therefore oxygen is
always present in CZ silicon. Oxygen concentrations are
5–20 ppma. Carbon from graphite is present at concentra-
tions below 1 ppm.
4.2.3 Dopant incorporation
Impurities are incorporated from the melt into the ingot,
but different dopants have widely different segregation
coefﬁcients. The segregation coefﬁcient is deﬁned as
k0 = concentrationsolid
concentrationliquid
(4.5)
All dopants and metallic impurities are enriched in the
melt, with oxygen as perhaps the only material which is
incorporated preferentially into the silicon solid phase.
Because dopant segregation coefﬁcients are less than
unity (Table 4.2), excess dopant is needed in the melt,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 38]
Silicon
39
Table 4.2
Segregation of dopants and impurities at
silicon melt/solid interface
Dopants
Others
Boron
k0 = 0.8
Iron
k0 = 6.4 × 10−6
Phosphorus
k0 = 0.35
Copper
k0 = 8 × 10−4
Arsenic
k0 = 0.3
Nickel
k0 = 1.3 × 10−4
Antimony
k0 = 0.023
Gold
k0 = 2.25 × 10−5
Gallium
k0 = 0.0072
Oxygen
k0 = 1.25
Aluminum
k0 = 0.002
Carbon
k0 = 0.07
compared to the ﬁnal ingot. This can be calculated from
k0 values easily using Equation 4.6. As pulling advances,
the melt volume decreases, dopant concentration in the
melt increases and therefore dopant concentration Cs in
the ingot increases along its length:
Cs = k0C0 (1 −X)k0−1
(4.6)
where C0 is the initial dopant concentration in the melt,
X is the fraction solidiﬁed and k0 is the segregation
coefﬁcient.
The concentration of oxygen in the ingot decreases
as pulling advances because its segregation coefﬁcient is
above unity. There is another reason, too: as the melt is
consumed, there is less contact between the silica crucible
and melt and less dissolution of oxygen. Ingot resistiv-
ity and oxygen concentration will thus vary, and if tight
speciﬁcations are set, not all of the ingot will be within
the speciﬁcations.
Because the crystal is rotated during growth, there are
also radial non-uniformities in the ingots. One source for
these is simply cooling rate: the edges cool faster than
the centre (because of radiation at 1400 ◦C) and therefore
any process that depends on cooling rate will be affected.
For instance, vacancies and many other defects show a
radial distribution.
Because molten silicon is electrically conductive,
magnetic ﬁelds can be used to control melt behavior.
Magnetic ﬁelds reduce local temperature ﬂuctuations and
thermal convection currents, which leads to more stable
melt and consequently to more uniform growth. Magnetic
Czochralski (MCZ) growth enables better control of oxy-
gen levels in the crystal, probably because it suppresses
ﬂows that distribute oxygen from the crucible. At least
a more uniform melt enables other process parameters,
like argon gas ﬂow, to be varied over a larger range.
4.2.4 Float zone crystal growth
If high-resistivity silicon is needed, ﬂoat zone (FZ) crystal
growth is used. In the FZ method a polysilicon ingot is
placed on top of a single crystal seed. The polycrystalline
ingot is melted by an external RF coil, and the solidifying
silicon copies the crystal structure of the seed. The coil
is moved up, the melted zone advances upward, and the
single crystal solidiﬁes along the ingot.
The highest FZ silicon resistivities are on the order
of 20 000 ohm-cm, compared to 1000 ohm-cm for CZ.
Because there is no silica crucible, there is much less
oxygen (1016 cm−3, compared to 1018 cm−3 for CZ) and
metal contamination from the crucible is also eliminated.
FZ wafers, however, are mechanically weaker than CZ
wafers because oxygen mechanically strengthens silicon.
FZ wafers are available only in smaller diameters,
150 mm maximum, with 200 mm FZ demonstrated but
not used in device manufacturing. When doped FZ
silicon is made, dopants are introduced by ﬂushing the
melt zone with gaseous dopants like phosphine (PH3)
or diborane (B2H6). High-resistivity FZ is often doped
via neutron transmutation doping (NTD) according to
the reaction
n + 28Si ⇒29Si ⇒29P + e−
(4.7)
A silicon nucleus captures a neutron, and the newly
formed nucleus decays by β-decay. This doping method
explains why high-resistivity silicon (5–20 kohm-cm) is
available only in n-type.
4.3 Silicon Crystal Structure
Silicon has a cubic diamond lattice structure. The unit
cell can be thought of as two interleaved face-centered
cubic (FCC) lattices with their origins at (0,0,0) and (1/4,
1/4, 1/4). The distance between two atoms is (√3/4)a,
and radius (√3/8)a, where a is the unit cell edge length,
5.430 95 ˚A. As shown in Figure 4.4 there are 18 atoms to
R
R
a
R
R
R
R
Figure 4.4
Silicon lattice: the unit cell consists of eight
atoms. Reproduced from Jenkins (1995) by permission of
Prentice Hall
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 39]
40
Introduction to Microfabrication
(100)
(110)
(111)
Figure 4.5
Some important silicon crystal planes with their Miller indices
be considered: eight at vertices (they are shared between
eight unit cells and therefore contribute one atom to the
unit cell); six face atoms are shared between two neigh-
boring unit cells and contribute three atoms; and there are
four atoms fully inside the unit cell. The volume frac-
tion of the space ﬁlled by silicon atoms is 34%, very low
compared to hexagonal close packing, which ﬁlls 74% of
the space. This open structure leads to fast diffusion of
dopants (and impurities) in silicon.
Miller indices deﬁne the planes of a crystal. The plane
that deﬁnes the faces of the cube (see (Figure 4.5)) inter-
sects axes 1, 2, 3 at (1, ∞, ∞), respectively. The Miller
index of a plane is given by the reciprocal of these
intersects, namely (1,0,0). The planes tying edges are
designated (1,1,0) and diagonal planes (1,1,1). The set of
six equivalent planes (the six faces of the cube) together
are designated {100}. There are twelve (1,1,0) and eight
(1,1,1) planes. The unit vectors can also be negative:
they are designated with a bar, e.g. (1,1,1).
Fourfold symmetry of (100) and sixfold symmetry of
(110) and (111) (Figure 4.6) will become apparent in
anisotropic wet etching of silicon (to be discussed in
Chapter 20).
The angles between the planes can be calculated from
the scalar product of the normal vectors:
a · b = |a| |b| cos(a, b)
(4.8)
Visual examination shows that (100) and (110) planes
meet at 45◦and all the other angles can be calculated
easily when negative unit vectors are accounted for: 110
is (−1,1,0). The angle between (111) and (100) planes is
calculated from 1 =
√
3 cos α, giving α = 54.7◦.
In order to become familiar with silicon crystal struc-
ture, the paper fold model (Figure 4.7) can be handy.
Copying the model on an overhead transparency and glu-
ing it together will result in a 26-gon which visualizes
the crystal planes nicely. It will be indispensable when
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.6
Silicon crystal viewed from different angles: (a) face view (100); (b) edge view (110); (c) vertex view (111).
Courtesy Ville Voipio, Aalto University
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 40]
Silicon
41
(110)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(010)
(110)
(110)
(101)
(100)
(001)
(101)
(100)
(001)
(110)
(010)
(011)
(011)
(101)
(011)
(101)
(011)
Figure 4.7
Fold-up paper model of silicon crystal planes. Courtesy Hiroshi Toshiyoshi
crystal plane-dependent etching of silicon is discussed in
Chapter 20.
Two crystal orientations are widely used in microfab-
rication: <100> and <111>. The former is the main
material for CMOS, MEMS and solar cells; the latter for
bipolar transistors, power semiconductor devices and radi-
ation detectors which rely on epitaxial deposition. Wafers
for special applications can also be cut to other index
planes, like (311) and (511).
4.4 Silicon Wafering Process
Silicon ingots are transformed into wafers by a multistep
process which includes mechanical, thermal and chemical
treatments, and many cleaning and inspections steps.
Some 200 million silicon wafers are produced annually.
The main steps in the wafering process are listed
in Table 4.3.
The silicon crystal orientation is determined by the seed
crystal. After the ingot has cooled down, it is ground
to exact diameter and cut into 50 cm stocks, which are
measured for crystal orientation by X-ray diffraction. A
ﬂat (Figure 1.20) or a notch is then ground into the ingot
to establish orientation. The ﬂat or notch of a <100>
wafer is oriented along the [110] direction.
The ingot is then sawn into slices. These slices are for
example 600 μm thick when the ﬁnal target thickness of
the wafers is 400 μm. The wire saw is made of kilometers-
long continuous wire (diameter 80–250 μm) which uses
Table 4.3
Silicon wafering process
• Ingot diameter grinding
• Ingot crystal orientation by XRD
• Flat grinding
• Sawing ingot into wafers
• Lapping
• Edge contouring
• Laser marking
• Etching
• Donor annealing
• Final polishing
• Inspections
mechanical abrasion and a chemically active slurry to cut
through the ingot. In practice multiwire saws are used to
increase throughput (Figure 4.8). Thousands of wafers can
be cut in a single process 12 hours long.
The surface of a <100> wafer is a (100) plane with
[100] surface normal vector, usually cut as precisely as
practical (Figure 4.9). Sometimes wafers are intentionally
miscut, for example by 3◦. The silicon surface resulting
from such a miscut is shown in Figure 4.10 (top). In a
perfectly cut wafer an atomically ﬂat surface would result,
but in a miscut wafer atomic terraces are formed. The
terrace length depends on the miscut angle. If the wafer
is additionally off-oriented (the ﬂat is not exactly along
[110]), kinks will be created, as shown in Figure 4.10
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 41]
42
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 4.8
Multiwire saw. Courtesy Jorma Koskinen
[110]
[100]
Figure 4.9
A <100> silicon wafer is cut so that one of
the (100) planes deﬁnes the wafer surface; the vector normal
to the surface is in the direction [100] and the ﬂat is along
the direction [110]
d
Figure 4.10
Miscut wafer surface in atomistic view (top);
miscut and off-orientation wafer with kinks along terrace
edges (bottom). Reproduced from Butt et al. (2006), by per-
mission of Wiley-VCH GmbH
Figure 4.11
HRTEM micrograph of silicon lattice. Cour-
tesy Young-Chung Wang, FEI Company
(bottom). These will act as preferential sites for deposited
atoms to attach to, as will be discussed in Chapters 6
and 7. A high-resolution TEM micrograph (Figure 4.11)
of a silicon lattice reveals the atomic planes and terraces,
and nicely shows the difference between single crystalline
silicon and the amorphous oxide on top of it.
Flats and notches are used by automatic wafer han-
dlers to orient wafers inside equipment. In lithography
ﬂats enable patterns to be aligned to crystal planes. This
latter aspect is especially important in micromechanics
where crystal plane-dependent anisotropic etching is a
major technique (Chapter 20).
The next step is lapping: waviness and taper from saw-
ing are removed by lapping. In this step the wafers are
rotating between two massive steel plates in an alumina
slurry. Lapping ensures parallelism of wafer surfaces. The
surface roughness is about 0.1–0.3 μm after lapping. The
edges of the wafers are then rounded (Figure 4.12a) in or-
der to prevent chipping of silicon during wafer handling
and to eliminate water marks during drying steps. Wafer
breakage often starts from a crack at the edge and, be-
cause silicon is brittle, the crack propagates through the
whole wafer. Sometimes the edges are polished in order
to improve mechanical strength.
Wafers are marked by laser scribing. Subsequent clean-
ing steps remove the silicon dust generated by marking.
Alphanumeric or bar code marking enable wafer identity
tracking during processing, and back tracing to the wafer-
ing process and to the ingot, ensuring total traceability.
Etching is then used to remove lapping damage: both al-
kaline (KOH) and acidic (HF–HNO3) etches can be used.
Roughness is reduced somewhat by acid etching, but not
by alkaline etching. The SEM micrograph in Figure 4.12b
shows the back of a wafer after alkaline etching.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 42]
Silicon
43
(a)
(b)
10µm 2000X
Figure 4.12
(a) Different edge roundings (b) Back of an alkaline etched (non-polished) silicon wafer in SEM. Repro-
duced from Abedrabbo et al. (1998), copyright © 1999 by permission of Elsevier Science Ltd
Thermal donors are charged interstitial oxygen com-
plexes which behave like n-type dopants. An annealing
step at 600–800 ◦C destroys thermal donors and stabilizes
wafer resistivity.
Final polishing with 10 nm silica slurry in alkaline so-
lution removes about 20 μm of silicon and results in a root
mean square (RMS) surface roughness of 0.1–0.2 nm. The
formulas for calculating roughness are given in Equations
4.9a–c below. Surface height z is measured over a sam-
pling distance L, and RMS roughness is calculated in
Equation 4.9c using mean height as a reference plane:
σ 2 = 1
L
L

0
(z −m)2 dx
standard deviation
(4.9a)
m = 1
L
L

0
z dx
mean height
(4.9b)
σ =




 1
L
L

0
z2 dx
RMS roughness
(4.9c)
Inspection
and
cleaning
steps
constitute
a
major
fraction of all wafering steps. Wafers are measured
for mechanical and electrical properties. Contactless
measurements, for example capacitance, optical and
eddy current methods, are preferred because contact
methods introduce contamination and damage. Wafers are
speciﬁed for particle cleanliness. Laser light scattering
can be used to measure particle size distributions down
to 60 nm, but even the unaided eye can detect particles
larger than about 0.3 μm because of their scattering under
intense light (e.g., from a slide projector).
Wafers are speciﬁed for a number of electrical, mec-
hanical, contamination and other properties as agreed be-
tween the wafer supplier and customer. The speciﬁcations
in Table 4.4 are an example of fairly standard 100 mm
wafers. Wafer speciﬁcations for ICs and MEMS are dis-
cussed in more detail in Chapters 26 and 30, respectively.
Thickness refers to wafer centre point thickness only,
and other numbers are needed to account for thickness
Table 4.4
Basic speciﬁcations for 100 mm wafers for
integrated circuits and microsystems
IC
MEMS
Growth method
CZ
CZ
Type/dopant
P/boron
P/boron
Orientation
100
100
Off-orientation
0.0 ± 1.0◦
0.0 ± 0.2◦
Resistivity
16–24 ohm-cm
1–10 ohm-cm
Diameter
100.0 ± 0.5 mm
100.0 ± 0.5 mm
Thickness
525 ± 25 μm
380 ± 10 μm
Front side
Polished
Polished
Back side
Etched
Polished
Flat orientation
<110> ± 1◦
<110> ± 0.2◦
Oxygen level
13–16 ppma
6–10 ppma
Particles
<20 at 0.3 μm
20 at 0.3 μm
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 43]
44
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 4.13
Thickness
and
total
thickness
variation
(TTV). Wafer ﬂattened to chuck; that is, back-side reference
Table 4.5
Resistivity vs. dopant concentration
Dopant
Short
Concentration
Resistivity
level
(cm−3)
(ohm-cm)
Lightly
doped
n−, p−
1013–1015
>10
Moderately
doped
n, p
1015–1018
10–0.1
Highly
doped
n+, p+
1018–1020
0.1–0.001
Very highly
doped
n++, p++
>1020
0.001
variation and geometric distortions (Figure 4.13). Total
thickness variation, TTV, is deﬁned as the difference
between the maximum and minimum values of thickness
encountered in the wafer. Wafers come in standard sizes
and thicknesses, for example 100 mm and 525 μm, or
200 mm and 725 μm. In IC fabrication or many thin-ﬁlm
devices, wafer thickness is not an issue, but in bulk
MEMS applications through-wafer etching is standard,
and it depends critically on wafer thickness control.
The resistivity of silicon can be varied over many
orders of magnitude, but typical wafers come with dopant
concentrations of 1015 to 1018 cm−3, corresponding to
resistivities of 0.1–10 ohm-cm. Resistivity ranges and
shorthand designations for them are listed in Table 4.5.
EGS puriﬁcation, CZ crystal growth and the multistep
wafering process produce high-quality silicon wafers, but
the process is energy intensive and expensive. Silicon for
solar cells needs to be considerably cheaper. That topic
will be discussed in Chapter 37.
4.5 Defects and Non-Idealities in Silicon
Crystals
Even though silicon wafer fabrication results in wafers
with extremely well-deﬁned properties, some defects are
bound to be found. These defects can be classiﬁed ac-
cording to their origin into three categories:
1. Grown-in defects from crystal pulling.
2. Defects resulting from wafering.
3. Process-induced defects.
The ﬁrst two classes are the responsibility of the wafer
manufacturer and the third class requires wafer and de-
vice manufacturer co-operation because process-induced
defects depend on the starting material. For instance, heat-
ing and cooling rates, and maximum temperatures expe-
rienced by the wafers, determine how the defects in the
wafers will behave, or how new defects are generated.
Defects are further classiﬁed into point defects (e.g.,
vacancies, empty lattice sites), line defects (e.g., stacking
faults, extra rows of atoms in an otherwise perfect crys-
tal), area defects (e.g., dislocation loops) and bulk defects
(e.g., precipitates). The main types of defects are shown
in Figure 4.14.
There are many sources for vacancies: some result from
imperfections of crystal growth, and some are created
during wafer processing; for example, ion implantation
doping of silicon involves high-energy ion collisions in
silicon, and ions displace silicon atoms from their lat-
tice sites, creating vacancies. Some vacancies are always
present because of statistics: above absolute zero, lat-
tice vibrations displace atoms and create vacancies and
interstitials. This becomes signiﬁcant for silicon around
900 ◦C, which is the temperature where diffusion becomes
fast enough to be technologically relevant.
Haze is deﬁned as light scattering from surface defects,
for example scratches, surface roughness or crystal
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
Figure 4.14
Defects in single crystalline material: a, for-
eign interstitial; b, dislocation; c, self-interstitial; d, precip-
itate; e, stacking fault (external); f, foreign substitutional;
g, vacancy; h, stacking fault (internal); i, foreign substi-
tutional. Reproduced from Green (1995) by permission of
University of New South Wales
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 44]
Silicon
45
Table 4.6
Sources of non-idealities in silicon wafers
EGS polysilicon
Dopants (B, P) and other impurities
(C, metals)
Czochralski
growth
Impurities from quartz
Oxygen from quartz
Carbon from graphite and SiC
Vacancies and interstitials
Precipitates
Dislocations
Wafering process
Contamination from tools
Mechanical distortions
Wafer processing
Contamination
Crystallinity defects
Precipitation
Mechanical distortions
Dislocations
defects. Haze measurement is by done by scatterometry,
where the whole wafer is scanned, in contrast to rough-
ness measurement, which is local area only, for instance
a 5 × 5 μm area by a AFM.
Table 4.6 lists some non-idealities found in silicon
wafers and their most common sources. Some of these
can be avoided or limited to acceptable levels by
careful choice of processing conditions, including wafer
cleaning, temperature ramp rates and materials that make
contact with the wafers, for instance wafer boats in
furnaces. Defects will be discussed in more detail in
Chapter 22.
4.6 Advanced Wafers
ICs are made in the thin surface layer of a silicon wafer,
while many MEMS devices extend throughout the wafer.
Lithography is carried out also on the back side of the
MEMS wafer and double side polished (DSP) wafers are
then needed. While single side polished (SSP) wafers ex-
hibit for example 0.5 μm RMS roughness on the back
side, that of the DSP wafer is nearly as perfect as the
front side, but not completely, because it is attached to a
holder during front-side polishing and some damage from
the holder remains.
Bulk micromechanics relies on crystal plane-dependent
etching: silicon (100) planes etch 100 times faster than
(111) planes, offering intriguing structuring possibilities.
These will be discussed in Chapter 20. Most surface mi-
cromachining (Chapter 29) is done on SSP silicon wafers,
even though device functionality is determined by thin
ﬁlms deposited on top of silicon wafers, and other sub-
strates could be used. Because most of the processing
p+ substrate wafer
p− epitaxial layer 
n-type handle wafer
p-type device wafer
SiO2
Figure 4.15
Epitaxial wafer with p-epitaxial layer on p+
substrate; and silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer with a p-
type device layer and n-type handle wafer, separated by an
oxide layer
equipment in microtechnology has been developed for
silicon processing, compatibility favors silicon use even
when silicon properties per se are not required.
Epitaxy is a process for growing more crystalline
silicon on top of a silicon wafer, with doping level
and/or dopant type different from the substrate wafer
(Figure 4.15). Multilayer structures with many layers of
different doping levels and types are equally easy to make.
This will be discussed in more detail in Chapters 6 and 22.
Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers can be made for
example by bonding a silicon wafer to an oxidized
wafer. SOI wafers offer the possibility to optimize
processes on top and bottom wafers separately, as shown
in Figure 4.15. It is also possible to reduce process steps
and minimize leakage currents because pn junctions can
be eliminated. Advanced wafers will be discussed in
Chapter 22.
The more special wafers naturally cost more. Double
side polishing adds 50% to the price, epitaxy can double
the wafer price and SOI can cost anything from three to
ten times the price of a basic bulk wafer. The price also
goes up with wafer size: 100 mm wafers cost $10 and
200 mm wafers (with four times the silicon area compared
to 100 mm) cost $40; 300 mm wafers are more expen-
sive per cm2, and 450 mm wafers are only available in
test quantities, so prices will not stabilize before volume
production starts.
4.7 Exercises
1. Estimate the silicon lattice constant from atomic mass
and density.
2. Consider an Olympic swimming pool ﬁlled with golf
balls and one squash ball. If golf balls represent silicon
atoms, and the squash ball represents a phosphorus
atom, what would the resistivity of a silicon piece be
with a similar doping level?
3. Electronic grade polysilicon is available with 0.01 ppb
phosphorus concentration. What is the highest ingot
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 45]
46
Introduction to Microfabrication
resistivity that can be pulled from such a starting
material?
4. If 50 kg of ultrapure polysilicon is loaded into a CZ
crystal puller, how much boron should be added if the
target doping level of the ingot is 10 ohm-cm?
5. Convert CZ and FZ silicon maximum resistivities
1000 ohm-cm and 20 000 ohm-cm into dopant con-
centrations.
6. If wafer resistivity speciﬁcations are 5–10 ohm-cm
(phosphorus), calculate the fraction of the ingot that
yields wafers within this speciﬁcation.
7. Calculate the RMS roughness for the three surfaces
shown
below.
Compare
RMS
to
peak-to-valley
roughness.
References and Related Reading
Abedrabbo, S. et al. (1998) Perspectives on emissivity mea-
surements and modeling in silicon, Mater. Sci. Semicond.
Process., 1, 187–193.
Bullis, W.M. (2000) Current trends in silicon defect technol-
ogy, Mater. Sci. Eng., B72, 93–98.
Butt, H.-J., K. Graf and M. Kappl (2006) Physics and Chem-
istry of Interfaces, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.
Green, M.A. (1995) Silicon Solar Cells, Centre for Photo-
voltaic Devices and Systems, Sydney.
Hahn, P.O. (2001) The 300 mm silicon wafer – a cost and tech-
nology challenge, Microelectron. Eng., 56, 3–13.
Hull, R. (1999) Properties of Crystalline Silicon, IEE
Publishing.
Irwin, J. (1962) Resistivity of bulk silicon, Bell. Syst. Tech. J .,
41, 387.
Jenkins, T. (1995) Semiconductor Science, Prentice Hall.
Lindroos, V. et al. (2010) Handbook of Silicon Based MEMS
Materials and Technologies, Elsevier.
Markov, I.V. (2003) Crystal Growth for Beginners: Fun-
damentals of Nucleation, Crystal Growth, and Epitaxy,
World Scientiﬁc.
Petersen, K. (1982) Silicon as a mechanical material, Proc.
IEEE, 70, 420. Reprinted in W. Trimmer (ed.), Microme-
chanics and MEMS: Classic and Seminal Papers to 1990,
IEEE Press, 1997.
Porrini, M. et al. (2005) Measurement of boron and phos-
phorus concentration in silicon by low-temperature FTIR
spectroscopy, Appl. Phys., A81, 1187–1190.
Shimura, F. (1997) Semiconductor Silicon Crystal Technol-
ogy, Academic Press.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 46]
5
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
Thin ﬁlms are needed to make metal wires and to insulate
those wires, to make capacitors, resistors, inductors, mem-
branes, channels, nozzles, mirrors, beams and plates, and
to protect those structures against mechanical and chem-
ical damage. Thin ﬁlms have roles as permanent parts
of ﬁnished devices, but they are also used intermittently
during wafer processing, as protective ﬁlms, as sacriﬁcial
layers, and as etch and diffusion masks.
A great many solid materials are available as thin ﬁlms:
aluminum, gold, copper, tungsten and nickel are routinely
used in microfabrication. Oxides of silicon, aluminum,
hafnium and tantalum are used, as are nitrides of sili-
con and titanium. Diamond-like and Teﬂon-like ﬁlms offer
special properties, as do various alloys like PtMn, TiW,
SiGe and CoFe.
The same thin ﬁlm can serve in many different
functions: for example, silicon nitride is the traditional
passivation ﬁlm in integrated circuits, providing both
chemical endurance and mechanical scratch protection.
But silicon nitride is also used as a mask for oxidation
(because oxygen diffusion through nitride is practically
nil), as a capacitor dielectric (nitride dielectric constant
is higher than that of silicon dioxide), as a suspended
membrane (because nitride stress can be made small and
tensile), and as optical material (with refractive index
matching nicely between silicon and air). Similarly,
silicon is used not only for its electronic properties,
but also for its mechanical strength (micromechanics),
optical absorption at visible wavelengths (solar cells,
photodetectors), low absorption in the infrared (waveg-
uides for 1.55 μm optical telecom applications), high
Seebeck coefﬁcient (thermoelectric devices) and high
thermal conductivity (uniform temperature distribution in
micro-hotplate sensors).
This chapter deals with the most common deposition
processes for thin ﬁlms, with the basic characteristics
which make thin ﬁlms different from the bulk, as well
as some important applications.
5.1 Thin Films vs. Bulk Materials
In thin ﬁlms at least one dimension of the material is
small, the thickness. For narrow lines, two dimensions
are small, and for dots all three dimensions are small.
This gives rise to the prominence of surface effects like
surface scattering of electrons, leading to size-dependent
resistivity or, at very small dimensions, to quantum ef-
fects. The size scale for quantum effects is estimated by
Debye lengths, which are of the order of 10–100 nm at
room temperature.
The density of thin ﬁlms is often very low compared
to bulk materials. Sputtered tungsten ﬁlms can have a
density as low as 12 g/cm3 compared to a bulk value of
19.5 g/cm3 and evaporated gold can have a density as
low as 3 g/cm3 but then it was optimized for infrared
absorption. Usually porosity should be avoided as it leads
to long-term instability: water vapor can adsorb in the
pores, and high surface area makes the ﬁlms reactive:
such ﬁlms oxidize and corrode readily.
Many thin-ﬁlm properties, resistivity, dielectric con-
stant, coefﬁcient of thermal expansion and refractive in-
dex are thickness dependent. Additionally, the ﬁlm prop-
erties depend on deposition processes in profound ways.
The example in Table 5.1 gives resistivities of sputtered
molybdenum ﬁlms prepared under slightly different pro-
cess conditions in different sputtering systems. In addition
to thickness dependence, three other facts emerge from
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 47]
48
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 5.1
Resistivity of sputtered molybdenum
Thickness
Underlayer
Conditions
Resistivity
(μohm-cm)
Bulk
–
–
5.6
Thin ﬁlm,
50 nm
SiO2
System 1, 20 ◦C
17
Thin ﬁlm,
300 nm
SiO2
System 1, 20 ◦C
12
Thin ﬁlm,
300 nm
TiW
System 1, 20 ◦C
9
Thin ﬁlm,
300 nm
SiO2
System 2, 20 ◦C
15
Thin ﬁlm,
300 nm
SiO2
System 3, 150 ◦C
9
Thin ﬁlm,
300 nm
SiO2
System 3, 450 ◦C
8
30
35
40
45
50
2 q (deg.)
Intensity (a.u.)
b (002)
bcc (110)
b (202)
b (410)
bcc (110)
Tantalum on TaNx
Ta/TaNx = 158/5(nm)
Rs = 0.97Ω/
Tantalum on SiO2
Ta = 144 (nm)
Rs = 10.5Ω/
Figure 5.1
X-ray diffraction (XRD) of tantalum thin
ﬁlms: crystal structure and resistivity depend on the un-
derlying material. Reproduced from Ohmi (2001) by per-
mission of IEEE
this table: thin-ﬁlm resistivity is always more than that
of the bulk material; different deposition systems result
in very different thin-ﬁlm properties; and the underlying
material has a major effect on ﬁlm properties.
In Figure 5.1 the tantalum thin-ﬁlm structure (as mea-
sured by X-ray diffraction) and resistivity are similarly
seen to depend on the underlying layer: tantalum ﬁlm on
tantalum nitride is low resistivity, while tantalum on ox-
ide has a resistivity an order of magnitude higher. The
difference is due to the different crystalline phase, which
is due to the different underlying layer.
Structure depends on ﬁlm thickness, and it may be that
very thin ﬁlms (e.g., 50 nm) are amorphous, yet thicker
ﬁlms (e.g., 200 nm) are polycrystalline. This is shown
in Figure 5.2 for SrTiO3 ﬁlm. XRD peaks indicative of
1200
1000
800
(100)
(110)
530 nm er = 94
220 nm er = 52
90 nm er = 26
(200)
600
400
200
0
20
30
40
2q (°)
Counts
50
60
Figure 5.2
Thickness dependence of SrTiO3 ﬁlms by
XRD. The 90 nm thick ﬁlm is amorphous but thicker
ﬁlms are polycrystalline. Dielectric constant depends on
structure, which depends on thickness. Reproduced from
Vehkam¨aki et al. (2001) by permission of Wiley-VCH
crystallinity only appear for thicker ﬁlms. The dielectric
constant εr is also a strong function of thickness.
Thin ﬁlms can be amorphous, polycrystalline or single
crystalline (epitaxial) as deposited. Epitaxial ﬁlms remain
single crystalline during annealing; polycrystalline ﬁlms
experience grain growth and sometimes phase transitions
into other crystal structures; amorphous ﬁlms either stay
amorphous or crystallize (into a polycrystalline material,
and under very special conditions to single crystalline
material). Silicon dioxide, silicon nitride and aluminum
oxide are exceptional amorphous ﬁlms because they
remain amorphous in all typical microfabrication pro-
cesses. Pictured in Figure 5.3 are SEM cross-sections of
Al2O3 and SrTiO3 ﬁlms: aluminum oxide is amorphous
and strontium titanate is polycrystalline.
Films prepared by different sputtering systems are
different, and ﬁlms prepared by two completely different
deposition processes will differ even more. Copper ﬁlms
made by sputtering, evaporation, electroplating or CVD
can have a factor of two differences in resistivity or
grain size.
5.2 Physical Vapor Deposition
The general idea of physical vapor deposition (PVD) is
material ejection from a solid target material, transported
in a vacuum to the substrate surface where ﬁlm deposition
takes place. Atoms can be ejected from the target by
various means: resistive heating, electron beam heating,
ion bombardment or laser beam bombardment (known as
laser ablation). All aluminum ﬁlms in microfabrication
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 48]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
49
(b)
(a)
Figure 5.3
SEM
micrographs
of
thin-ﬁlm
structure:
(a) amorphous aluminum oxide, reproduced from Ritala
et al. (1999) by permission of Wiley-VCH; (b) polycrys-
talline strontium titanate, reproduced from Vehkam¨aki et al.
(2001) by permission of Wiley-VCH
are deposited by PVD, and PVD is used for copper, re-
fractory metals and for metal alloys and compounds like
TiW, WN, TiN, MoSi2, ZnO and AlN.
5.2.1 Evaporation
Evaporation of elemental metals is fairly straightforward:
hot metals have high vapor pressures and in a high
vacuum the evaporated atoms will be transported to
the substrate.
Typical deposition rates in evaporation are 0.1–1 nm/s,
which is very slow.
Evaporation systems are either high vacuum (HV) or
ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) systems, with the best UHV
deposition systems with 10−11 torr base pressures, and
10−12 torr oxygen partial pressures. In (ultra)high vacuum
the atoms do not experience collisions, and therefore they
take a line-of-sight route from source to substrate. The
mean free path (MFP) is the measure of collisionless
transport, and below about 10−4 torr the MFP is larger
than the size of a typical deposition chamber (for more
discussion on vacuum science and technology, refer to
Chapter 33). Low deposition temperature combined with
line-of-sight transport means that evaporated ﬁlms will
not coat sidewalls of holes and ridges well, even though
ﬁlm quality on planar surfaces is good.
There are very few parameters in evaporation that can
be used to tailor ﬁlm properties. Atoms arrive at ther-
mal speeds, which results in basically room temperature
deposition. There is no bombardment in addition to the
thermalized atoms themselves, which bring very little en-
ergy to the surface. Substrate heating can be done to
improve ﬁlm quality. This works because impurities are
desorbed and adsorbed atoms can diffuse and ﬁnd ener-
getically favorable lattice sites.
Low-melting-point metals, such as gold and aluminum,
can easily be evaporated, but refractory metals require
more sophisticated heating methods. Localized heating by
an electron beam (Figure 5.4) can vaporize even tungsten
(m.p. 3650 K), but deposition rates are, however, very
low. Additionally, X-rays will be generated, which can
damage sensitive devices.
Evaporation of alloys and compounds is tricky: the
component with higher vapor pressure will evaporate
more readily, and it can happen that the minority atoms
in the starting material end up as the majority atoms in
the thin ﬁlm. Most compounds decompose when heated,
therefore evaporation of compounds is limited to a few
special cases, like silicon dioxide.
It is possible that the molten metal reacts with the cru-
cible because temperatures are very high, even though this
electron
beam gun
wafer
crucible
Figure 5.4
Electron beam evaporation: heated metal va-
porizes and the evaporated atoms are transported in high
vacuum to the substrate wafer
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 49]
50
Introduction to Microfabrication
wafer
target
Figure 5.5
Sputtering: argon ions knock atoms out of a
target, and the ejected atoms travel in a vacuum and deposit
on the wafer
is being minimized by the use of refractory materials for
crucibles: namely, Mo, Ta, W, graphite, BN, SiO2 and
ZrO2. Some crucible material can be incorporated into
ﬁlm also in the case of electron beam misalignment: if
a misaligned e-beam hits the crucible, crucible material
will be evaporated and incorporated in the deposited ﬁlm.
5.2.2 Sputtering
Sputtering (Figure 5.5) is the most important PVD
method. Argon ions (Ar+) from a glow discharge plasma
hit the negatively biased target and eject typically one
target atom. The ejected target atoms will be transported
to the substrate wafers in a vacuum. These atoms are
energetic and hit the substrate with considerable energy,
which has both beneﬁcial and detrimental effects on the
growing ﬁlm. Typical sputtering rates are 1–10 nm/s,
signiﬁcantly
higher
than
in
evaporation.
Sputtering
of nonconductive ﬁlms necessitates use of RF ﬁelds
to prevent charging of the target. Further discussion
on sputtering systems technology can be found in
Chapter 33.
Because sputtering pressures are quite high, 1–10 mtorr
(cf. evaporation 10−6 torr), sputtered atoms will experi-
ence many collisions before reaching the substrate. In a
process called thermalization, the high-energy sputtered
particles (5 eV corresponds to about 60 000 K!) collide
with argon gas (T = 300 K) and cool down. Thermal-
ization occurs also in other species present in the plasma,
namely the reﬂected neutrals (some argon ions are neutral-
ized upon target collision). These neutrals provide energy
to the substrate. Thermalization reduces the energy of
particles reaching the substrate and it reduces the ﬂux
of particles to the substrate. Lower ﬂux means lower de-
position rate.
In contrast to evaporation, the energy ﬂux to the sub-
strate wafer can be substantial. This has both beneﬁcial
and detrimental effects: loosely bound atoms (both ﬁlm
forming atoms as well as unwanted impurities) will be
knocked out, improving adhesion and making the ﬁlm
denser. But energies that are too high can cause damage
to the ﬁlm, the substrate and underlying structures (thin-
oxide breakdown because of high voltages). There will
always be some argon trapped in the ﬁlm, but its effect
can usually be neglected because argon is a noble gas
and therefore non-reactive. Incorporation of residual oxy-
gen or nitrogen is much more pronounced because they
are reactive and form oxides and nitrides.
Sputtering yield is the number of target atoms ejected
per incident ion. Sputtering yields of metals range from
about 0.5 (for carbon, silicon and refractory metals Ti,
Nb, Ta, W) to 1–2 for aluminum and copper, to 4 for sil-
ver at 1000 eV argon ion energy. Refractory metals have
low sputtering yields, which is the fundamental reason for
lower deposition rates. In practice, there is another reason
which further lowers the deposition rate: refractory metals
tend to have higher resistivity and thus lower thermal con-
ductivity, which means that high sputtering powers cannot
be applied to refractory sputtering targets. For heavy met-
als like tungsten and tantalum, sputtering yields are higher
with xenon and krypton: these heavy gases transfer energy
more efﬁciently to similar mass target atoms. However,
argon is almost exclusively used.
If oxygen is added to the sputtering atmosphere inten-
tionally (usually together with argon), oxide ﬁlms will
result. The method is called reactive sputtering. In similar
vein, nitrogen additions lead to nitrides. This is the way
for example that Ta2O5 and TiN are made by sputtering.
5.3 Chemical Vapor Deposition
In chemical vapor deposition (CVD) the source materi-
als are brought into the reactor in the gas phase, they
are activated in the plasma, diffuse to the wafer surface,
and react there to deposit ﬁlm. Byproducts are desorbed
and pumped away as shown in Figure 5.6. Deposition
rates are temperature dependent according to the Arrhe-
nius equation (Equation 1.1), but they are on the order of
0.1–10 nm/s.
Common CVD processes include
SiH4 (g) ⇒Si (s) + 2 H2 (g)
∼600 ◦C
(5.1)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 50]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
51
SiCl4 (g) + 2 H2 (g)
⇒Si (s) + 4 HCl (g)
∼1200 ◦C
(5.2)
SiCl4 (g) + 2 H2 (g) + O2 (g)
⇒SiO2 (s) + 4 HCl (g)
∼900 ◦C
(5.3)
3 SiH2Cl2 (g) + 4 NH3 (g)
⇒Si3N4 (s) + 6 H2 (g)
+ 6 HCl (g)
∼800 ◦C
(5.4)
CVD processes depend on both chemical reactions and
ﬂow dynamics. There are two main cases: high ﬂow rate
supplies enough reactants and ﬁlm deposition is limited
by slow surface chemical reactions (termed “surface re-
action limited”); or fast surface reaction consumes source
gas rapidly and the deposition rate is limited by gas sup-
ply. This is termed “mass transport limited” or “diffusion
limited”. These two cases will be discussed in more detail
in Chapter 34.
Silicon deposition (Equation 5.1 or 5.2) on a single
crystalline silicon wafer can result in a single crystalline
thin ﬁlm. This is termed epitaxy and it is an important
special case of thin-ﬁlm deposition. The next chapter is
devoted to epitaxial deposition. Most deposition processes
lead to amorphous or polycrystalline ﬁlms.
Silicon dioxide can be deposited by many reactions,
Equations 5.3, 5.5, 5.6 and 5.7, for example:
SiH4 (g) + 2 N2O (g)
−→SiO2 (s) + 2 H2 (g) + 2 N2 (g)
(5.5)
SiH4 (g) + O2 (g) −→SiO2 (s) + 2 H2 (g)
(5.6)
Si(OC2H5)4 −→SiO2 (s) + gaseous byproducts (5.7)
The simple reaction in Equation 5.6 is, however, prob-
lematic. Silane and oxygen can already react in the gas
phase, which means that solid oxide particles are formed
in the gas stream. These will then ﬂoat around the reac-
tor and sporadically deposit on the wafers. In the nitrous
oxide process, oxide is formed by a surface reaction,
therefore particle contamination is reduced (but in both
cases oxide is formed on the reactor walls, and these ﬁlms
will be a source of ﬂakes and particles if the reactor is not
cleaned regularly).
The names for CVD oxides are unfortunately many.
LTO, for low-temperature oxide, refers to oxide deposited
by the reaction in Equation 5.6. The low deposition
temperature of 425 ◦C is desirable in many cases. HTO
obviously stands for high-temperature oxide (Equation
5.3), but the difference is deeper: different source gases
are used, and the resulting ﬁlm quality is much better
at high temperatures. TEOS (Equation 5.7) is the name
of the precursor molecule tetraethoxysilane Si(OC2H5)4,
but it is used as the name for the resulting oxide too
(deposited at 700 ◦C, resulting in high-quality oxide).
Sometimes the name USG is used: it stands for undoped
silica glass. However, there are no metals in USG, so it
is not glass in the traditional sense (see Chapter 19 for
glass microprocessing).
The addition of POCl3 gas to the source gas ﬂow leads
to phosphorus-doped oxide deposition. The resulting ﬁlm
is called PSG, for phosphorus-doped silica glass. A few
gas phase
convection
diffusion through
boundary layer
surface processes
(adsorption, film
deposition,
desorption)
Figure 5.6
CVD: source gas molecules adsorb and react on surface to form a ﬁlm, and the reaction products are
desorbed, diffused and pumped away
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 51]
52
Introduction to Microfabrication
percent of phosphorus (5 atomic % maximum) modiﬁes
the oxide in many ways. Phosphorous getters sodium ions
which are detrimental to MOS transistors, and therefore
PSG is used as a passivation layer in integrated circuits.
In MEMS PSG is used as a sacriﬁcial layer because its
etch rate in hydroﬂuoric acid is much faster than that of
undoped CVD oxide. Phosphorus also lowers the glass
transition temperature of PSG, making it possible to ﬂow
PSG at about 1000 ◦C. If both boron and phosphorus
are added, we get BPSG. This oxide ﬁlm ﬂows at about
950 ◦C, resulting in smoothly sloping walls.
CVD tungsten is deposited in two steps. The silane
reduction step (Equation 5.8) deposits a thin nucleation
layer over every surface in the system and high-rate blan-
ket deposition with hydrogen reduction (Equation 5.9) is
used to achieve the desired total thickness:
WF6 (g) + SiH4 (g) ⇒W (s) + 2 HF + H2 (g)
+ SiF4 (g)
(5.8)
WF6 (g) + 3 H2 (g) ⇒W (s) + 6 HF (g)
(5.9)
This process is able to ﬁll holes and trenches (Figure 5.19)
and is very important in multilevel metallization (to be
discussed in Chapter 28).
5.4 PECVD: Plasma-Enhanced CVD
Because high temperatures cannot be used in many
cases, for example when oxide needs to be deposited on
aluminum (m.p. 650 ◦C), one has to ﬁnd new solutions.
New source gas chemistries which enable lower depo-
sition temperatures is one way to go. Another solution
is to enhance source gas decomposition and reactions
by plasmas. This results in deposition rates similar to
thermal CVD, 0.1–10 nm/s, at much lower temperatures,
typically around 300 ◦C, enabling deposition on most
metals, for instance. Unfortunately lower deposition
temperature results in less dense ﬁlms.
A simple parallel-plate diode reactor for PECVD is
shown in Figure 5.7. Wafers are placed on a heated bottom
electrode, the source gases are introduced from the top,
and pumped away around the bottom electrode. The op-
erating frequency is often 400 kHz, which is slow enough
for ions to follow the ﬁeld, which means that heavy ion
bombardment is present. At 13.56 MHz only the elec-
trons can follow the ﬁeld, and the ion bombardment effect
is reduced.
In thermal CVD, pressure, temperature, ﬂow rate and
ﬂow rate ratio are the main variables. In PECVD there is
additionally the RF power that can be varied. In advanced
400 kHz power
showerhead
electrode for gas
introduction
plasma
wafer
heated electrode
pumping system
Figure 5.7
Schematic PECVD system
PECVD reactors, RF power can be applied to both elec-
trodes, and the two power sources can supply different
frequencies, duty cycles and power levels. The ratio of
13.56 MHz power to kilohertz power is important for ﬁlm
stress tailoring. PECVD shares many beneﬁcial features
of both thermal CVD and sputtering.
Whereas thermal oxide or LPCVD nitride is stoichio-
metric SiO2 and Si3N4, with ratios 1:2 and 3:4 of atoms,
many other (PE)CVD ﬁlms are non-stoichiometric: for
example, plasma nitride is best described as SiNx (x ≈
0.8). Amorphous silicon, a-Si, or more speciﬁcally desig-
nated as a-Si:H, is made by PECVD, the overall reaction
being the same as that of LPCVD silicon (Equation 5.1).
Hydrogen is incorporated into deposited ﬁlms up to 30
at. %. Hydrogen release during annealing has to be con-
sidered: it has both beneﬁcial and detrimental effects.
PECVD can be used to deposit mixed oxides, nitrides
and carbides, as well as doped oxides just like thermal
CVD. A mixture of silane, nitrous oxide and ammonia
will result in oxynitride, SiOxNy, with varying ratios
of nitrogen and oxygen, covering the whole range of
compositions (and material properties) between oxide
and nitride.
Silicon carbide is deposited via the reaction
SiH4 (g) + CH4 (g) −→SiC (s) + 4 H2 (g)
(5.10)
Carbon is deposited by the reaction (resembling silicon
deposition, Equation 5.1)
CH4 (g) −→C (s) + 2 H2 (g)
(5.11)
Depending
on
the
exact
process
conditions,
many
allotropes of carbon can be made. Non-conducting
hydrogenated carbon ﬁlms resemble diamond in some,
but not all, respects, and they are known as diamond-like
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 52]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
53
carbon, DLC. Films with less hydrogen have sp3 bonds
similar to diamond, and they are referred to as ta-C,
tetrahedral amorphous carbon. If intense plasma or a
hot ﬁlament is used, highly reactive atomic hydrogen is
produced. In this case it is possible to grow polycrys-
talline diamond ﬁlms. Under different CVD conditions
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are made. The important factor
for CNT deposition is the presence of metallic catalyst
particles, for example iron or nickel.
5.5 ALD: Atomic Layer Deposition
In ALD, ﬁlm is deposited one atomic layer at a time,
offering ultimate thickness control. ALD works in pulsed
mode: chemical bonds are formed between precursor
gas molecules and the surface atoms. Once all possible
reaction sites are occupied, no more reactions can
take place (Figure 5.8). A purging nitrogen pulse then
removes all unreacted precursor molecules. A pulse of
second precursor is then introduced. It reacts with the
ﬁrst reacted layer, the surface saturates similarly, and
unreacted precursor gases are purged away. Repetition
of successive reactant and purge pulses leads to ﬁlm
deposition
in
a
layer-by-layer
fashion.
The
ability
of ALD to coat over steps is excellent because all
surfaces are coated alike. Figure 1.7 shows ALD alumina
and titanium multilayer ﬁlms deposited over steps.
This ability to coat steep topographical features is
increasingly in demand as both ICs and MEMS are made
more 3D.
As an example of the ALD process, hafnium dioxide
deposition is discussed. HfO2 is a material with a high
Figure 5.8
ALD: ﬁrst pulse of precursors saturate wafer
surface, and extra precursors are purged away by a nitrogen
pulse; second precursor gases react with ﬁrst layer, and
reaction products are purged away
dielectric constant and is being used as the gate oxide in
advanced CMOS. Hafnium chloride reacts with surface
hydroxyl groups to form Hf–O bonds. The second
precursor is water, and the oxygen in water reacts with
the hafnium to form Hf–O bonds again, with hydrogen
chloride formed as a byproduct. The overall reaction for
hafnium dioxide deposition is given by Equation 5.12.
The notation (ad) emphasizes that the reactions take
place between adsorbed molecules on the surface, not in
the gas phase:
HfCl4 (ad) + 2 H2O (ad) ⇒HfO2 (s) + 4 HCl (g)
(5.12)
ALD is free of one of the main mechanisms of irrepro-
ducibility in CVD: homogeneous gas phase reactions.
Because only one gas is introduced at a time, there
cannot be gas phase reactions between precursors.
The layer thickness is given by the number of pulses
times the monolayer thickness. In theory one monolayer
per pulse is deposited, but in many cases sub-monolayer
growth is seen. One explanation is steric hindrance: large
precursor molecules take up space, so it is simply im-
possible for another precursor molecule to come close
enough, and some surface atoms will not react with pre-
cursor molecules. This is depicted in Figure 5.9. It can
also be noted that not all surface sites are reactive enough
for the ALD reaction to take place.
Both monolayer and sub-monolayer deposition are self-
limiting. Practical growth rates range are around 1 ˚A/cycle
(0.1 nm/cycle): for Al2O3 deposition they are 1.1 ˚A/cycle
and for TiN, 0.2 ˚A/cycle. When thickness/cycle numbers
are translated into deposition rates, one has to take into
account the ﬂushing cycles between the pulses. Over-
all rates of a few nanometers per minute are typical for
ALD. This is slow: for example, the LPCVD rate of
polysilicon is typically 10 nm/min. But there are many
applications where ﬁlms of a few nanometers are needed,
for example CMOS gate oxides and diffusion barriers in
copper metallization.
a
b
Figure 5.9
Sub-monolayer deposition in ALD: (a) non-
reactive surface site; (b) steric hindrance by a large pre-
cursor molecule prevents another precursor molecule from
approaching the reactive site
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 53]
54
Introduction to Microfabrication
5.6 Electrochemical Deposition (ECD)
5.6.1 Electroplating/galvanic deposition
Electroplating takes place on a wafer that is connected
as a cathode in metal ion-containing electrolyte solution.
The counter-electrode is either passive, like platinum, or
made of the metal to be deposited (Figure 5.10).
Electroplating can be very simple: copper is deposited
on the cathode according to the reduction reaction,
Equation 5.13, while at the anode copper is dissolved
into the electrolyte solution:
At cathode
Cu2+ + 2 e−−→Cu(s)
electrolyte solution: CuSO4
At anode
Cu −→Cu2+ + 2 e−
(5.13)
Gold is plated in a two-step process (Equation 5.14) with
the second, charge transfer reaction, as the rate limiting
step:
Au(CN)2−⇐⇒AuCN + CN−
AuCN + e−⇒Au (s) + CN−
(5.14)
Electroplating rates vary a lot but are generally in the
range of 0.1–10 μm/min. Deposited mass is calculated
from
mass = αItM
nF
(5.15)
where I is the current, t the time, M the molar mass, n
the species charge state, α the deposition efﬁciency and
F the Faraday constant, 96 500 coulombs.
w
a
f
e
r
a
n
o
d
e
Cu++
Cu++
Cu++
Cu++
SO4
−−
SO4
−−
SO4
−−
Figure 5.10
Electroplating: CuSO4 electrolyte ionizes to
produce Cu++ and SO42+ ions, copper ﬁlm deposits at the
cathode
Noble metals can be deposited at 100% efﬁciency (α =
1.00). In less noble metal deposition hydrogen evolution
makes α smaller, and for some non-metals like phospho-
rus co-deposition with cobalt (Co:P 12%, a soft magnetic
material), α can be as low as 0.2. Other typical electro-
plated metals include nickel and iron–nickel (81% Ni,
19% Fe, Permalloy). Many metals have no plating pro-
cesses available: aluminum, titanium, tungsten, tantalum
and niobium cannot be plated.
Three transport processes are active during ECD:
diffusion at the electrodes due to local depletion of the
reactant via deposition; migration in the electrolyte; and
convective transport in the plating bath. The last is con-
nected to electrochemical cell design, and it is affected
by factors such as stirring, heating, recirculation and
hydrogen evolution.
Macroscopic current distribution is determined by the
plating bath electrode arrangement and wafer and bath
conductivity. Electrical contact to the wafer also needs
careful consideration. Microscopic (local) current distri-
bution depends on pattern density and pattern shapes. The
third scale in ECD is the feature scale: potential gradients
inside structures are important, especially when deep and
narrow grooves are ﬁlled.
In practice the plating solutions are complex mixtures
of electrolytes, salts (for conductivity control), modiﬁers
for ﬁlm uniformity and morphology improvement, as well
as surfactants. Accelerators (brighteners) are additives
that modify the number of growth sites. Suppressors are
additives for surface diffusion control. Taken together,
these additives increase the number of nucleation sites
and keep the size of each nucleation site small, which
drives smooth growth. Pulsed plating can also be
used in balancing nucleation and grain growth: high
overpotential and low surface diffusion favor nucleation,
and the opposite conditions favor grain growth. Many
plating solutions are proprietary. Plating baths are rather
aggressive solutions, and photoresist leaching into the
plating bath or adhesion loss are real concerns for
reproducible plating.
5.6.2 Plating on structured wafer
Electroplating onto a photoresist pattern easily produces
elaborate
microstructures,
like
the
gears
shown
in
Figure 5.11. The process is described in Figure 5.12. A
conductive seed layer is sputtered on the wafer. This
seed layer, also known as the plating base or ﬁeld metal,
can be very thin, tens of nanometers. Photoresist is
exposed and developed, and metal plating then follows.
Photoresist is then removed and the seed metal is etched
away, resulting in metallic microstructures.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 54]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
55
Figure 5.11
Nickel gear structures (50 μm high) made by
electroplating. Reproduced from Guckel (1998) by permis-
sion of IEEE
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.12
Resist masked plating (LIGA, for Lithogra-
phy and Galvanic plating): (a) seed layer deposition and
lithography; (b) plating; (c) resist stripping; (d) seed layer
removal
The seed layer needs to be removed after plating,
otherwise it would electrically short all metallized
structures. Often the deposited metal itself can act as
an etch mask for seed layer removal because the seed
layer is always very thin compared to the plated metal;
in many cases the seed layer thickness is less than the
plating thickness variation. Thickness uniformity of
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13
(a) Overplating; (b) backplating
plated metals is about 5–10%, so that 50 nm seed layer
thickness is less than thickness ﬂuctuations of plated
metal 1 μm thick. Electroplating is suitable for extremely
small structures, too: modern IC metallization is done by
electroplating copper into trenches narrower than 100 nm
wide and 200 nm high. Electroplating can ﬁll trenches
500 μm deep and 5 μm wide (aspect ratio 100:1).
Usually plating is allowed to proceed till resist top
surface level but not above. It is, however, possible
to overplate, and to form mushroom-shaped structures
(Figure 5.13). After resist stripping, such a mushroom
can be annealed (reﬂown) to form a ball-like bump.
Bumps of Sn–Pb and In are used for ﬂip-chip packaging.
Alternatively, plating can be continued until metal fronts
touch. Removal of resist underneath results in free-
standing metal bridges, or in ﬂuidic channels, depending
on design details. The applications can be in RF circuits
as air bridges or as cooling channels for high-power
electronics.
5.6.3 Electroless deposition
Electroless deposition depends on a reduction reaction in
an aqueous solution which contains metal salts and a re-
ducing agent. Metal deposition takes place as a result of
metal ion reduction. The surface needs to be suitable for
electroless deposition and this is achieved by exposing
it to a catalyst, such as PdCl2. This reducing agent starts
the reduction reaction which then continues locally. Selec-
tive deposition is thus possible. Gold, nickel and copper
are the usual metals to be deposited by the electroless
method. The major advantage of electroless deposition
compared to electroplating is elimination of the need to
make electrical contacts to the wafer.
Copper electroless deposition chemistries traditionally
use sodium hydroxide in the plating bath, but sodium is
a contaminant in transistors. Alternative pH adjustment
can be done with TMAH (tetramethyl ammonium hy-
droxide). Copper sulfate CuSO4 in formaldehyde (HCHO)
and EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid) complex-
ing agent are the basic constituents of the bath. Surfactants
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 55]
56
Introduction to Microfabrication
(polyethylene glycol) and stabilizers (2,2′-dipyridyl) can
be added. The reaction is described by
CuEDTA2−+ 2 HCHO + 4 OH−
⇒Cu + H2 + 2 H2O + 2 HCOO−
+ EDTA4−
(5.16)
The deposition rate is on the order of 100 nm/min.
The electroless deposition set-up is extremely simple.
Selectivity, however, is difﬁcult to maintain. Hydrogen
evolution and incorporation into the ﬁlm are a problem
because hydrogen is mobile; carbon incorporation is
another problem.
Gold can be deposited from KOH, KCN, KBH4,
KAu(CN)2 mixture at rates exceeding 5 μm/min, even
though much lower rates are usually used. Temperatures
for electrochemical deposition processes range from
room temperature to 100 ◦C.
5.7 Other Methods
5.7.1 Spin coating
Spin coating is a very widely used method for resist
spinning and increasingly for other materials as well, for
example spin-on-glasses (SOGs) and polymers (known
together as spin-on-dielectrics, SODs) are usually spin
coated. Spin coating will be discussed in Chapter 9 in
more detail, but brieﬂy the material is dissolved in a suit-
able solvent, dispensed on a wafer and spun at high speed
(e.g., 1000–5000 rpm), see Figure 9.3. Polymeric ﬁlms
can replace inorganic ﬁlms, especially when thick ﬁlms
are needed. Thicknesses up to 1000 μm can be made by
spin coating; inorganic ﬁlms made either by CVD or by
PVD cannot usually be thicker than a few micrometers.
Spin-coated ﬁlms ﬁll cavities and recesses because they
are liquids during spin coating. This is advantageous for
ﬁlling gaps and smoothing, but if a uniform thickness over
the topography is desired, spinning is not ideal. Room
temperature spinning is always accompanied by baking
(in the range 100–250 ◦C).
5.7.2 Self-limiting methods
After a fashion resembling ALD, monolayer thick poly-
mer ﬁlms are made by covalently bonding the molecule to
a surface. Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) are made
this way. The molecules have a reactive group at one end
and a non-reactive group at the other end. In Figure 5.14
the reactive group is the trichloro group (SiCl3) and the
polymer chain consists of a chain of 18 carbon atoms (oc-
tadecane, or C-18) with methyl group (CH3) at the other
end. Silicon reacts with hydroxyl groups on the silicon
surface, forming strong Si–O bonds, and HCl is released.
When all hydroxyl groups on the surface have reacted,
no more reactions can take place: there are no more re-
active sites available once the surface is covered by one
molecular layer.
Another SAM is shown by Equation 5.17, where ﬂu-
orinated SAM reacts to form a hydrophobic (Teﬂon-like)
layer on the surface:
F3C–(CF2)n–Si–OH + HO–Si (surf)
−→F2C–(CF2)n–Si–O–Si (surf) + H2O
(5.17)
           Si
Cl               Cl
            Cl
Figure 5.14
Self-assembled monolayer of octadecane trichlorosilane (OTS) on a silicon surface
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 56]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
57
Fluorinated SAMs have applications in microﬂuidics,
and they are used as antisticking layers in imprinting
(Figure 1.9): the non-stickiness of the ﬂuorinated surface
makes detachment of the molded piece from the mold
master easier.
5.8 Thin Films Over Topography:
Step Coverage
Deposition on a patterned substrate introduces new
considerations as ﬁlm must go over steps. These new
considerations include the following: atoms arriving in a
line-of-sight manner (as in evaporation) and diffusively
(as in CVD) will penetrate into grooves and cavities very
differently; if there is energetic bombardment present in
the process (as in sputtering and PECVD), it will affect
horizontal and vertical surfaces differently. And then
there is simple geometry: on a horizontal free surface
the angle of arrival of atoms is 180◦, in convex corners
it is 270◦, and in the bottom concave corners it is only
90◦, as depicted in Figure 5.15. This leads to pronounced
deposition at step corners, termed cusping, and reduced
deposition in concave (bottom) corners.
If the arriving atoms have high surface diffusivity (e.g.,
because of high deposition temperature as in thermal
CVD) they can move around and ﬁnd energetically
favorable positions and ﬁlm thickness will be uniform
over steps. If the deposition reaction is surface controlled
as in ALD, it will naturally follow the existing geometry.
Step coverage is deﬁned as the ratio of ﬁlm thickness
on the sidewall (A) to ﬁlm thickness on the top horizon-
tal surface (H ), Equation 5.18a. Bottom coverage can be
deﬁned similarly, Equation 5.18b. These are depicted in
Figure 5.15. That is,
step coverage = A/H
(5.18a)
bottom coverage = B/H
(5.18b)
Thermal
CVD
processes
(including
TEOS,
HTO,
nitride, LPCVD poly and CVD-W) have very good step
coverage, as shown in Figure 5.16a. This kind of 100%
step coverage is termed conformal. ALD has also 100%
step coverage, even in sharp corners, as shown for TiN
ﬁlm in Figure 5.6b. PECVD step coverage is highly
process dependent: in Figure 5.16c oxide step coverage
is ca. 50% but in 5.16d only 25%. In Figure 5.16e
PECVD oxide step coverage of an overhang structure is
shown: ca. 30% has been achieved even in the shadow
areas. Overhang coverage is possible in ﬂow systems, but
90°
270°
180°
B
A
H
Figure 5.15
Top, arrival angles of depositing species at
different positions; bottom, step coverage, A/H , and bottom
coverage, B/H
beam-like deposition systems sputtering and evaporation
cannot cover overhangs. Sputtering step coverage is
highly variable, but generally it is in the 20–50% range.
Simulated examples are shown in Figures 3.6 and 7.17.
Step coverage in evaporation is very poor.
Conformal deposition is no guarantee that ﬁlm quality
on the sidewalls is equal to that of planar areas. In sputter-
ing and PECVD particle bombardment hits the horizontal
surfaces, densifying the ﬁlm, and the sidewalls are much
less dense material, and the ﬁlm on the sidewall will etch
much faster than the ﬁlm on horizontal surfaces.
Step coverage is usually not a major problem for low-
aspect-ratio structures, for, say, a hole 1 μm wide, 0.5 μm
deep hole, but at 1:1 and higher aspect ratios, step cov-
erage deteriorates rapidly. It is important to remember
that on real microdevices there are always structures of
various shapes and spacings, and ﬁlm deposition over all
these spaces needs to be considered. It is far too simple to
consider one size or depth only. It has to be remembered
that aspect ratio is a dynamic variable: a contact hole that
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 57]
58
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
(e)
(d)
(c)
Figure 5.16
Step coverage: (a) conformal coverage in CVD; (b) confrmal coverage in ALD; (c) PECVD TEOS oxide
with 50% step coverage; (d) PECVD with 25% coverage; (e) PECVD oxide over an overhang structure. Figures a, c and
d from ref. Cote; (b) courtesy Kai-Erik Elers; (e) courtesy Oxford Plasma Technology
has 1:1 aspect ratio initially turns into a 2:1 aspect ratio
hole as deposition proceeds, and just before closure the
aspect ratio approaches inﬁnity.
Good step coverage in metallization in essential for re-
liability. Even though metal ﬁlm will be continuous even
with, say, 10% step coverage, current density will increase
dramatically at the thinnest point, causing a major relia-
bility problem.
5.9 Stresses
Thin ﬁlms are under either compressive or tensile stresses
when deposited on the wafers. Stresses consist of extrinsic
stresses, caused by thermal expansion mismatch between
the ﬁlm and the substrate, and of intrinsic stresses which
depend on ﬁlm microstructure and the deposition process.
Stress at room temperature is the sum of intrinsic and
extrinsic stresses.
Stresses in thin ﬁlms cause the wafer to curve, as shown
in Figure 5.17. Thin ﬁlm can be imagined as a spring,
where tensile stress equals spring elongation. If this elon-
gated spring is attached to a much more massive wafer
in its elongated, tensile state, it will still try to return to
its original size, and in doing so it will bend the wafer. A
ﬁlm under tensile stress will result in a concave shape for
a wafer + ﬁlm combination. A compressively stressed
ﬁlm will try to return to its shape, too, and the ﬁlm +
wafer will end up with a convex shape. If tensile stress is
too high, the ﬁlm will crack. And too high compressive
stresses lead to buckling.
Figure 5.17 gives a macroscopic depiction of stresses,
but the same reasoning works on the atomic level as well:
the germanium lattice constant is 4.2% larger than that of
silicon, and if germanium ﬁlm is deposited on silicon, it
has to be compressed to ﬁt. Conversely, if silicon ﬁlm is
deposited on germanium, it will be under tensile stress.
Extrinsic stresses can be estimated from thermal expan-
sion coefﬁcient differences by
σ =
Ef
(1 −ν)(αf −αs) · T
(5.19)
where the indices f and s refer to ﬁlm and substrate, re-
spectively, and E is Young’s modulus of the ﬁlm, ν the
Poisson ratio of the ﬁlm, α the coefﬁcient of thermal ex-
pansion (CTE) and T the temperature difference.
By convention, negative stresses are compressive.
In a ﬁrst approximation the temperature difference is
the difference between deposition and measurement
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 58]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
59
Figure 5.17
Tensile
stresses
(left)
and
compressive
stresses (right) in thin ﬁlms. Imagine a free ﬁlm stretched or
compressed to wafer size and attached to a massive wafer.
Next, imagine that the ﬁlms try to return to their original
shape. The wafer will curve as a consequence
temperatures, but the situation is really much more
complex because stress relaxation can occur during
high-temperature deposition.
The coefﬁcient of thermal expansion of silicon is 2.6 ×
10−6/◦C (at room temperature). The only other materi-
als used in microfabrication that have smaller coefﬁcients
are silicon dioxide, silicon nitride and diamond, which
have CTEs of 0.5 × 10−6, 2.4 × 10−6 and 1.1 × 10−6/◦C,
respectively. Oxide, nitride and diamond are therefore
the only materials that can develop compressive extrinsic
stresses over silicon substrates. The CTE of aluminum
is 23 × 10−6/◦C, which is fairly high, that of tungsten
4 × 10−6/◦C and polymers have CTE values in the range
of 30–100 × 10−6/◦C.
The bimetal thermometer is a classic example of
thermal
expansion
coefﬁcient
mismatch.
Bimorph
structures can be used as sensors and actuators in micro-
systems, but the initial shape has to be known. As shown
in Figure 5.18, SiO2/Al and SiO2/Ti cantilevers are bent
because of stresses in the structures, without external
sensing or actuation force. In a single material cantilever
(e.g., CVD polysilicon) stress gradients can lead to
similar bending.
Intrinsic stresses are caused by many mechanisms
which are not fully understood. Deposited polycrystalline
ﬁlms are not at their energy minimum. Especially, low
deposition temperature means that the arriving atoms do
not have enough energy to ﬁnd energetically favorable
positions, and the ﬁlm builds up without relaxation.
Voids and incorporated foreign atoms contribute to
intrinsic stresses. Bombardment during deposition has
a pronounced effect on many ﬁlm properties, including
stresses, because the bombardment pinches off loosely
bound atoms, resulting in a more uniform, less stressed
ﬁlm. Too high a bombardment, on the other hand, im-
plants atoms into the ﬁlm in a non-equilibrium way, and
compressive stresses build up. Crystallization and phase
transitions, and other processes which lead to volume
changes, such as outgassing, lead to stress changes.
Evaporated metal ﬁlms are usually under tensile
stresses (100 MPa to 1 GPa). Sputtered ﬁlms can be
under tensile or compressive stresses. Sputtering, with
ion bombardment during deposition, is a much more
complex process than evaporation, and stress tailoring
can be achieved by:
• bias power
• argon pressure
• sputtering gas mass
• temperature
• deposition rate.
Sputtered ﬁlm stress can be tailored by deposition
pressure: ﬁlms are usually under compressive stress if
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.18
(a) compressive stress in SiO2/Al cantilevers causes downward bending; (b) tensile stress in SiO2/Ti
cantilevers leads to upward bending. Reproduced from Fang and Lo (2000) by permission of Elsevier
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 59]
60
Introduction to Microfabrication
deposited at low pressure (about 1 mtorr in a magnetron
sputtering system) but turn to tensile stress as deposition
pressure is raised (to some 10 mtorr). This crossover
pressure increases with atomic mass. However, this is not
a universal solution, because pressure affects not only
ﬁlm stress but many other properties, like deposition rate
and ﬁlm density.
5.9.1 Stress measurement
Thin ﬁlm stresses are usually measured by methods
based on wafer curvature. Optical techniques or stylus
proﬁlometers
are
used
for
curvature
measurement.
Because silicon wafers have curvature (e.g., 30 μm),
it needs to be eliminated from the results. Therefore,
either of two approaches are used: measure wafer
curvature, deposit ﬁlm, measure composite curvature,
and deduct silicon wafer curvature; or else measure
composite curvature, etch thin ﬁlm away and measure
wafer curvature.
Film stress is given by the Stoney formula:
σ =
Es
6(1 −ν)
t2
s
tf
 1
R −1
R0

(5.20)
where ts is the substrate thickness, ν the Poisson ratio
of the substrate (0.27 for silicon), tf the ﬁlm thickness,
R the radius of curvature for the substrate+ﬁlm system
(negative when convex) and R0 the radius of curvature
for the substrate without ﬁlm (inﬁnite for a ﬂat wafer).
Wafers are about 1000 times thicker than ﬁlms, and
because all solids have similar elastic constants, wafer
stresses and strains are about 1000 times less than those
of thin ﬁlms. Thin-ﬁlm stresses are on the order of
10–1000 MPa (1000 MPa = 1010 dyn/cm2).
5.10 Metallic Thin Films
Metallic thin ﬁlms have various application in microfab-
ricated devices.
• Conductors: Resistivity is the main consideration: alu-
minum and copper are main choices for most applica-
tions, and gold is often used in RF devices, like inductor
coils, to minimize resistive losses. Doped silicon and
polycrystalline silicon can be used as conductors, but
their resistivity is very high compared with metals.
• Contacts to semiconductors: Ohmic (metal-like) and
Schottky (diode-like) contacts are possible. Aluminum,
itself p-type dopant in silicon, makes good ohmic con-
tact to p-type silicon. Platinum silicide is one candidate
for silicon Schottky contacts
• Capacitor electrodes: Capacitor electrodes need not
be highly conductive. The most important capacitor
electrode, the MOSFET gate, is chosen to be polycrys-
talline silicon because its interface with silicon dioxide
is stable, and its lithography and etching properties
are good.
• Plug ﬁlls: When vertical holes need to be ﬁlled with
a conducting material, CVD tungsten and electrodepo-
sition of copper are employed. Because distances are
short, it is rather step coverage than resistivity which
determines the choices.
• Resistors: Doped semiconductors, metals, metal com-
pounds and alloys can be used as resistors. Heating
resistors can be made of almost any material, but pre-
cision resistors are difﬁcult to make.
• Adhesion layers:
Noble metals like gold and plat-
inum do not adhere well to substrates, and therefore thin
(10–20 nm thick) “glue” layers of titanium or chromium
are needed.
• Barriers: Barriers are needed to prevent unwanted re-
actions between thin ﬁlms or diffusion of unwanted
atoms. Amorphous metal alloys and compounds like
tungsten nitride W:N, titanium–tungsten TiW, TiN and
TaN are used as barriers between metals and silicon.
• Mechanical materials:
Aluminum, nickel and TiAl
alloys are materials for micromechanical free-standing
beams and cantilevers, in e.g. micromirrors and res-
onators. Films like TiN can be used as mechanical stiff-
ening layers to prevent mechanical changes in the un-
derlying, softer ﬁlms, like aluminum.
• Optical materials: In image sensors metals act as light
shields, and chromium is used in photomasks to block
light. TiN is often deposited on top of aluminum to
reduce reﬂectivity, because lithography is difﬁcult of
highly reﬂecting surface. Transparent conductors like
indium doped tin oxide (ITO; InxSnyO2) are needed in
displays and light emitting devices.
• Magnetic
materials:
Nickel
and
nickel
alloys,
Ni:Fe, are used for magnetic structures in microac-
tuators. Cores of microtransformers are also made
of these materials, which are usually deposited by
electroplating.
• Catalysts and chemically active layers:
Chemical
sensors, microreactors and fuel cells use ﬁlms like
palladium and platinum as catalysts.
• Electron emitters: Vacuum microemitter tips are often
made of molybdenum because of its high melting point
and low work function.
• Infrared emitters and other IR components: Heated
wires emit infrared, and porous metallic ﬁlms, like alu-
minum black, act as IR absorbers. Metallic meshes act
as IR ﬁlters and aluminum is used as an IR mirror.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 60]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
61
Table 5.2
Properties of metals
Metal
Resistivity
Resistivity thin
CTE (ppm)
Thermal conductivity
Melting
bulk (ohm-cm)
ﬁlm (ohm-cm)
(W/cm-K)
point (◦C)
Al
3
3–4
23
2.4
650
Cu
1.7
2–4
16
4
1083
Mo
5.6
10–20
5
1.4
2610
W
5.6
10–100a
4.5
1.7
3387
Ta
12
20–200a
6.5
0.6
3000
Ti
48
100–200
8.6
0.2
1660
Co
6.2
10–20
12.5
0.7
1500
Ni
6.8
10–20
13
0.9
1455
Cr
13
20–40
6
0.7
1875
Pt
10
20–100
9
0.7
1769
Au
1.7
2–3
14
3
1064
aTungsten and tantalum can exist in two different phases which have different resistivities; a minor change in sputtering
conditions can result in either phase.
• Sacriﬁcial layers: Many devices require free-standing
structures. These must be fabricated on solid ﬁlms,
which will subsequently be etched away. Copper is
often used as a sacriﬁcial material under nickel or gold.
• Protective coatings: Sometimes the role of the top-
most layer is simply to protect the underlying layers
from the ambient: from etching agents or environmen-
tal stressors. Nickel and chromium are used as masks
for etching.
• X-ray components:
Masks for X-ray lithography
require high atomic mass materials which effectively
block X-rays. Tungsten, gold and lead are prime
candidates. X-ray mirrors are made by alternating
heavy (tungsten, molybdenum) and light materials
(carbon or silicon) with layer thicknesses in the
nanometer range.
• Bonding layers: Gold and tin layers are used in eutec-
tic bonding. Tight, hermetic bonds can be obtained at
fairly low temperatures when eutectic alloys are formed.
• Bonding pads: Wires have to be attached to chips, and
this is best achieved with soft metals like aluminum and
gold, while hard metals like tungsten or chromium are
unsuitable for wire bonding, and also difﬁcult to probe
by probe needles.
Deposition process greatly inﬂuences the choice of metals.
Not all materials are amenable to all deposition meth-
ods, and the resulting ﬁlm properties (resistivity, phase,
texture, adhesion, stress, surface morphology) are closely
connected with the details of the deposition process, and
may well be idiosyncratic with the equipment. Reproduc-
ing results that have been obtained with another piece of
equipment can be a nightmare.
5.10.1 Properties of metallic thin ﬁlms
Low resistivity is required of metals in thin-ﬁlm form.
Thin-ﬁlm resistivity is usually much higher than bulk
resistivity. Aluminum, copper and gold thin-ﬁlm resistiv-
ities are close to bulk values; for most others thin ﬁlms,
resistivities are factor of two higher. Important microfab-
rication metals are listed in Table 5.2. Resistivities are
strongly deposition process dependent, as was shown in
Table 5.1, and the tabulated values should be used as
guidelines with every deposition process being character-
ized individually. It should also be borne in mind that
thermal conductivity similarly depends on the details of
deposition process and ﬁlm thickness.
Alloys and compounds TiW, TiNx and TaNx have
resistivities that are even more strongly deposition
process dependent than simple metals, and the exact
composition will also have a profound effect. Resistivities
of TiW, TiNx and TaNx are usually in the range of
100–500 μohm-cm.
Young’s moduli are the same order of magnitude for
all metals, from 100 GPa for soft metals to 600 GPa for
refractory metals. Many metal properties are related to
the melting point. High melting point equals high bond
strength, and a stable atomic arrangement in solids. This
translates to a high current density tolerance.
5.11 Polysilicon
Polysilicon (polycrystalline silicon) is deposited in a low-
pressure CVD process (LPCVD, at around 1 torr pres-
sure) by the silane decomposition reaction according to
Equation 5.1. A TEM micrograph of polycrystalline sili-
con on oxide is shown in Figure 2.3. Deposition at 630 ◦C
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 61]
62
Introduction to Microfabrication
leads to polycrystalline ﬁlms with a grain size of about
100 nm. Between 580 and 600 ◦C grain size decreases and
deposition at about 570 ◦C results in an amorphous ﬁlm
(a-Si). Because deposition rate is governed by the Arrhe-
nius law, the rate drops dramatically, to a few nanometers
per minute.
In a CVD process we can add dopant gases to the gas
feed, so dopants are incorporated in the deposited ﬁlm.
Diborane, B2H6, dopes the ﬁlm p-type and POCl3 results
in n-type polysilicon. In situ boron doping increases
deposition rate while phosphorus doping reduces it. Both
dopants make the process more difﬁcult to control, in
terms of uniformity and reproducibility. Quite often poly
is deposited undoped, and doped afterward. The doping
methods include thermal diffusion (Chapter 14) and ion
implantation (Chapter 15), just like the doping of single
crystalline silicon. Polysilicon can be oxidized at high
temperatures (more on this in Chapter 13). After all, it
is silicon.
High doping levels of 1021 cm−3 result in a polysili-
con resistivity of about 500 μohm-cm, or 50 ohm/square
for ﬁlm thicknesses of 100 nm. Polysilicon can be used to
make conductive wiring when temperatures are too high
for metal wires. Obviously the resistance of polysilicon
is much higher than that of metallic conductors, but for
short wires it is acceptable. Electron mobility in polysili-
con is an order of magnitude less than in single crystalline
materials, 10–50 cm2/V-s. The polysilicon interface with
thermal oxide is well characterized and polysilicon is the
“Metal” in MOS transistors. The MOS transistor is a ca-
pacitor, and the rather high resistivity of polysilicon is not
a major disadvantage.
Poly (625 ◦C ﬁlm) and a-Si (570 ◦C ﬁlm) differ in
their surface smoothness, and many differences remain
even when the ﬁlms are processed further. Amorphous
silicon will crystallize when heated above about 600 ◦C,
but then grain size will be different from poly that
was polycrystalline to begin with. The resistivity of the
originally amorphous ﬁlm will be lower than that of
poly, and stresses will be different (see Figure 25.9).
Polysilicon can be used as a mechanical material just
like single crystal silicon. Its mechanical constants are
similar to single crystalline material: Young’s modulus
is about 160 GPa for both while the yield strength of
poly is 2–3 GPa vs. about 7 GPa for single crystalline. The
thermal conductivity of polysilicon is 0.2–0.3 W/cm-K vs.
1.57 W/cm-K for single crystal material, and the coefﬁ-
cients of thermal expansions are identical. But CVD depo-
sition offers possibilities for realizing multilayer structures
which cannot be made in single crystal material.
5.11.1 Amorphous silicon
Amorphous silicon can mean different things to differ-
ent people. Taken literally, it is just the structure that
matters. Amorphous silicon can be made for instance by
sputtering. LPCVD amorphous silicon deposited at 570 ◦C
contains minor amounts of hydrogen, but the amount is
insigniﬁcant for most applications.
In solar cell and ﬂat-panel display manufacturing,
amorphous silicon is done by PECVD at low deposition
temperature. Lots of hydrogen is incorporated in the
ﬁlms,
and
thus
the
proper
name
is
hydrogenated
amorphous silicon, a-Si:H. In a-Si:H ﬁlms the hydrogen
content can be up to 30 at. % (and much less in wt %),
and they contain considerable amounts of oxygen and
carbon impurities (1019 cm−3). PECVD a-Si can be
doped in situ like LPCVD silicon, but resistivities are
higher than for poly of identical dopant concentration.
5.12 Oxide and Nitride Thin Films
Dielectric ﬁlms have, just like metallic ﬁlms, a plethora
of applications in microdevices. Table 5.3 classiﬁes
dielectric ﬁlm applications into three categories: as
structural parts in ﬁnished devices, as intermittent layers
during wafer processing, and as protective coatings for
ﬁnished devices. Surprisingly, many ﬁlms can serve all
these roles.
5.12.1 Properties of dielectric ﬁlms
Higher deposition temperature usually leads to denser
ﬁlms which have slower etch and polishing rates, and
are less susceptible to moisture absorption. In CVD,
and in PECVD in particular, ﬁlms can have HF etch
rates varying enormously depending on particular types
of equipment and process conditions (power, ﬂow rate
and ratios, temperature). As a rule of thumb, if the
thermal SiO2 etch rate is 100 nm/min, 300–1000 nm/min
is expected for (PE)CVD oxides. Densiﬁcation annealing
of CVD ﬁlms at high temperature can lower this by a
factor of two.
Silicon dioxide and nitride are the most widely used di-
electrics in microfabrication, but sometimes polymer ﬁlms
offer exceptional properties. One polymer, BCB, benzo
cyclo butadiene, is contrasted with oxide and nitride in
Table 5.4.
Films should be free of pinholes, small point-like de-
fects, otherwise they are useless as protective coatings.
For PECVD, values less than 0.1 pinholes/cm2 are good.
If the ﬁlm is less dense than the bulk, it can be either
because of porosity or because of pinholes.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 62]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
63
Table 5.3
Uses of dielectric thin ﬁlms in microtechnology
Function
Examples
Structural parts of ﬁnished devices
Intermetal insulation
SiO2, polymers
Gate oxides in MOS transistors
SiO2, HfO2
Capacitor dielectrics
SiO2, Si3N4, Ta2O5, BaSrTiO3
Tunnel oxide in EPROMs
SiO2
Spacers in MOS and bipolar transistors
CVD oxide, CVD nitride
Ion barriers
Al2O3, Si3N4
Gap ﬁll materials
Oxides, spin-on ﬁlms
Tunnel oxides in Josephson junction devices
AlOx, NbOx
Dielectric mirrors
CVD oxide, nitride, polysilicon
Micromechanical beams and plates
LPCVD nitride
Antireﬂective coatings
PECVD SiNx, SiO2
Heat sink for lasers and power devices
Diamond
Hydrophobic surfaces
PTFE, PDMS, other polymers
Microﬂuidic structures
Polymers, oxide, nitride, diamond
Microlenses
Polymers, spin-on glasses
Protective coatings against ambient in ﬁnal devices
Passivation layer and metal ion barrier
SiOx, SiOxNy
Humidity and scratch protecting barriers
PECVD SiNx, polyimide
Tribological coating (wear, friction)
Diamond, SiC
Corrosion-resistant coatings in harsh environments
Ta2O5, SiC
Sacriﬁcial and intermittent layers during wafer processing
Mask for thermal oxidation
Si3N4
Diffusion and ion implantation masks
SiO2, Si3N4
Dopant evaporation barrier
CVD oxide, SiNx
Etch stop layer
SiNx
Etch masks in bulk micromechanics
Oxide, Si3N4
Dopant sources
PSG, BSG
Sacriﬁcial layers in surface micromechanics
PSG, resist
Release layers
Teﬂon, SAMs
In
order
to
minimize
capacitances
(C = εA/L,
ε = εrε0) between metal layers, it is preferable to use
ﬁlms with a low dielectric constant (known as low-k or
low-ε materials). Polymeric materials (e.g., parylene),
modiﬁed CVD oxides (SiOxFy, SiOxCy) and porous
spin-on oxides are low-k materials with εr between 2
and 4. The topic of dielectric constant will be discussed
in connection with multilevel metallization for ICs in
Chapter 28.
Films with a high dielectric constant are required in
applications where high capacitance is needed. MOS tran-
sistors and DRAMs are capacitors, and in order to make
the capacitors smaller, area has been scaled down. To keep
capacitance constant, the capacitor dielectric thickness has
been scaled down. This approach cannot be continued
indeﬁnitely because of tunneling currents through thin
oxides. High-k dielectrics for CMOS will be discussed
in Chapter 26. Thin-ﬁlm dielectrics have a breakdown
ﬁeld in the range of 105–107 V/cm (10–1000 V/μm). This
issue is especially important for MOS transistors and ﬂash
memories which today have ﬁlm thicknesses in the sub-
10 nm range.
5.12.2 Measurements for dielectric ﬁlms
Thickness and refractive index are basic measurements
for lossless dielectric ﬁlms. Optical methods are accu-
rate, quick, non-contact and suitable for both research and
manufacturing control applications. Accuracy of measure-
ment is a fraction of a nanometer for both ellipsometry
and reﬂectometry.
Reﬂectometry assumes a known index of refraction,
but measures real thickness by ﬁtting reﬂections over a
wide wavelength range to the d −nf model. Thicknesses
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 63]
64
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 5.4
Properties of silicon dioxide, silicon nitride and BCB (benzo cyclo
butadiene)
SiO2
Si3N4
BCB
Resistivity (-cm), 25 ◦C
1016
1016
1019
Density (g/cm3)
2.2
2.9-3.1
1.05
Dielectric constant
3.8–3.9
6–7
2.65
Dielectric strength (V/cm)
12 × 106
10 × 106
3 × 106
Thermal expansion coefﬁcient (ppm/◦C)
0.5
1.6
52
Melting point (◦C)
1700
1800
350a
Refractive index
1.46
2.00
1.54
Speciﬁc heat (J/kg-◦C)
1000
700
2180
Young’s modulus (GPa)
87
300
2–3
Yield strength (GPa)
8.4
14
Stress in ﬁlm on Si (MPa)
200–400 Cb
1000 Tb
30 Tb
Thermal conductivity (W/K-m)
1.4
19
0.29
Etch rate in buffered HF (nm/min)
100
1
0
aGlass transition point.
bT = tensile, C = compressive.
from 10 nm to 50 μm can be measured, depending on the
equipment and algorithm.
Ellipsometry measures thickness and refractive index
in a single measurement because both the amplitude and
phase of reﬂected polarized light are measured. In the thin
limit ellipsometry is not accurate because optical constants
of very thin ﬁlms, below 10 nm, are not really constants,
though precision is very good. For thicker ﬁlms multiple
reﬂections and interference mean that the solution is pe-
riodic and additional information is needed as to which
period is in question. See Appendix C for an oxide and
nitride color chart which can be used as a quick thickness
monitoring method.
Ellipsometry needs a fairly large area for the measure-
ment (e.g., 100 × 100 μm) while reﬂectometer spots can
be as small as a few micrometers, which enables measure-
ment from the structures themselves, without a dedicated
test site. The easiest and quickest way to gauge thickness
is from interference colors. The accuracy of this approach
is about 10 nm, but the colors repeat at regular intervals,
and absolute thickness determination requires additional
information.
5.13 Polymer Films
Polymer ﬁlms can be deposited by a number of methods:
• spin coating
• dip coating
• sputtering
• evaporation
• CVD and PECVD
• self-limiting vapor phase and liquid phase reactions.
We will discuss polymer thin ﬁlms brieﬂy here; more
information can be found in Chapter 18. Polymer
ﬁlms can offer exceptional properties, like softness,
which may be required for low-pressure sensors or
sensitive cantilever sensors. Many sensors use polymers
as active parts of the devices: for example, capacitive
humidity sensors work on the principle that capacitance
changes when the polymeric capacitor dielectric absorbs
water.
Thin-ﬁlm
polymer
is
paramount
for
device
operation so that humidity rapidly penetrates the whole
ﬁlm. Polymers are also used as structural materials in
microsystems. Those structures can be thin or thick, up to
millimeters.
Widely used polymer materials in microfabrication
include
thermally
stable
aromatic
polymers
(BCB),
epoxies (SU-8) and polyimides (PI). All of these are
available as photoresists, too, acting in the negative
mode. Non-photoactive polyimides are also widely used.
Thermoplast polymers PMMA, PC and COC are used
in embossing/imprinting applications. Parylene is used
as a structural material, protective coating and thermal
insulator. Various ﬂuoropolymers are used to make hy-
drophobic surfaces. Perﬂuorinated ﬁlms like Teﬂon have
other uses, too, because of their exceptional properties,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 64]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
65
like low water absorption, low friction, extreme chemical
tolerance and very good electrical properties at high
frequencies.
Polymers are inferior to inorganic ﬁlms in terms of me-
chanical strength. Tensile strengths of polymers are in the
range of 100–400 MPa, and Young’s moduli on the or-
der of 1–10 GPa, compared to 50–500 GPa for inorganic
solids and elemental metals. Stresses in polymers are in-
herently low (<100 MPa) whereas stress minimization in
oxides and nitrides is quite a challenge. In addition to
normal process-related variation, polymer properties vary
from manufacturer to manufacturer, and the listed prop-
erties are indicative of some typical values only.
Polymers have thermal limitations: maximum usable
temperatures are often in the range of 100–200 ◦C,
but some exceptional polymers tolerate 400 ◦C. The
coefﬁcients of thermal expansion are in the range of
30–100 ppm/◦C vs. 1–20 ppm/◦C for elemental metal
ﬁlms and simple inorganic compounds, which is a
considerable mismatch.
Many of the thin-ﬁlm deposition methods described in
this chapter can be applied to polymer thin ﬁlms. Evap-
oration is used to deposit small organic molecules like
pentacene (C14H22) which will deposit as a conductive
thin ﬁlm and can be used as a channel material in organic
electronics (Figure 26.21). The same process conditions
and process performance apply for the evaporation as
of organics, as for any other material, for example 5 ×
10−7 mbar pressure and 0.1 nm/s deposition rate. Poly-
mers cannot be evaporated: they will decompose rather
than evaporate.
Parylene is deposited by thermal CVD. Layer thick-
nesses are similar to other CVD processes in the thin end,
but because of polymer softness, stress build-up is less,
and layers tens of micrometers thick can be made. These
were the traditional parylene applications in microtech-
nology: thick protecting layers for ﬁnished devices.
Today, the conformal deposition of thin ﬁlms, low depo-
sition temperature, basically room temperature, enable
novel applications.
Teﬂon, an insulator, must be sputtered in a RF system
(this applies to inorganic insulators as well). Deposition
rate tends to be low (e.g., 0.05 nm/s), but high-density,
pinhole-free ﬁlm can then be obtained. Polyimides,
polypropylene
and
polyethylene
have
also
been
sputter deposited.
Teﬂon-like perﬂuoropolymer ﬁlms (CF2)n can also be
plasma deposited. Fluorine-containing source gases CHF3
or C4F8 (which are readily available because they are
used to plasma etch silicon dioxide) are broken down in
plasma, and ﬂuoropolymer is deposited at wafer, at room
temperature. FTIR and XPS analyses will reveal the C–F
bonds, and also C–H bonds which indicate incomplete
ﬂuorination.
5.14 Advanced Thin Films
Thin-ﬁlm deposition is seldom the last process step. The
ﬁlms will be modiﬁed intentionally or unintentionally in
subsequent process steps. For example, all elevated tem-
perature steps will modify thin ﬁlms.
So far we have been dealing mostly with single layer
ﬁlms. But processes and structures can be made much
more functional and reliable by adopting multilayer ﬁlms.
In IC metallization multiple layers of metal are used for
various reasons: titanium improves adhesion, TiN acts as a
barrier between materials and prevents reactions, CVD-W
is used because it can ﬁll contact holes, etc. Dielectrics
are similarly used in double layer structures: passivation
is provided by PSG/nitride: phosphorus-doped oxide is
a good barrier for sodium ion diffusion, and nitride is
an excellent mechanical scratch-protective coating. These
are depicted schematically in Figure 5.19 and in the SEM
micrograph of Figure 5.20.
Al
SiO2
SiNx
W
Al
Ti/TiN
Ti/TiN
Figure 5.19
Cross-section of multilevel metallization:
double layer dielectric (SiO2/SiNx), triple layer plug ﬁll
metallization (Ti/TiN/W) and triple layer top metallization
(Ti/TiN/Al)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 65]
66
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 5.20
Contact
plug
ﬁlled
by
Ti/TiN/CVD-W.
Courtesy Brandon Van Leer, FEI Company
5.15 Exercises
1. What are the resistivities of the tantalum ﬁlms in
Figure 5.1?
2. If silane (SiH4) ﬂow in a single wafer (150 mm)
PECVD reactor is 5 sccm (cm3/min), what is the
theoretical maximum deposition rate of amorphous
silicon?
3. If the electroplating current density is 100 mA/cm2 in
nickel deposition, what will be the rate?
4. Calculate the wafer bow that a thin ﬁlm 100 nm thick
with 100 MPa stress induces on a silicon wafer 675 μm
thick and 150 mm in diameter. How about a 100 nm
thick ﬁlm of 500 MPa on a wafer 380 μm thick and
100 mm diameter wafer?
5. Draw schematic step coverages for (a) evaporated ﬁlms
and (b) ALD ﬁlms over the following steps:
6. Find out (from the scientiﬁc literature) typical deposi-
tion rates and ﬁlm thicknesses for the following pro-
cesses:
• evaporation of aluminum
• sputtering of tungsten
• CVD of tungsten
• PECVD a-Si:H
• PECVD of oxide
• electroplated copper
• ALD of aluminum oxide
• reactive sputtering of TiN.
References and Related Reading
Briand, D. et al. (1999) In situ doping of silicon deposited by
LPCVD, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 14, 173–180.
Cote, D.R. et al. (1999) Plasma-assisted chemical vapor depo-
sition of dielectric thin ﬁlms for ULSI semiconductor cir-
cuits, IBM J. Res. Dev., 43, (1–2), 5.
Datta, M. and D. Landolt (2000) Fundamental aspects and ap-
plications of electrochemical microfabrication, Electrochim.
Acta, 45, 2535–2558.
Doms, M. et al. (2008) Hydrophobic coatings for MEMS ap-
plications, J. Micromech. Microeng., 055030.
Ehrfeld, W. (2003) Electrochemistry and microsystems, Elec-
trochim. Acta, 48, 2857–2868.
Fang, W. and C.-Y. Lo (2000) On the thermal expansion co-
efﬁcients of thin ﬁlms, Sens. Actuators, 84, 310.
French, P.J. (2002) Polysilicon: a versatile material for mi-
crosystems, Sens. Actuators, A99, 3–12.
Grigoras, K., V.-M. Airaksinen and S. Franssila (2009) Coating
of nanoporous membranes: atomic layer deposition versus
sputtering, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 9, 3763–3770.
Guckel, H. (1998) High aspect ratio micromachining via deep
X-ray lithography, Proc. IEEE, 86, 1586.
Kamins, T. (1980) Structure and properties of LPCVD polysil-
icon ﬁlms, J. Electrochem. Soc., 127, 686–690.
Kamins, T. (1998) Polycrystalline Silicon for Integrated Cir-
cuits and Displays, 2nd edn, Springer.
Kim, M.-C. et al. (2004) Characterization of polymer-like thin
ﬁlms deposited on silicon and glass substrates using PECVD
method, Thin Solid Films, 447–448, 592–598.
Knez, M., K. Nielsch and L. Niinist¨o (2007) Synthesis and sur-
face engineering of complex nanostructures by atomic layer
deposition, Adv. Mater., 19, 3425–3438.
Leskel¨a, M. and M. Ritala (2002) Atomic Layer Deposition
(ALD): from precursors to thin ﬁlm structures, Thin Solid
Films, 409, 138.
Maier-Schneider, D. et al. (1996) Elastic properties and mi-
crostructure of LPCVD polysilicon ﬁlms, J. Micromech. Mi-
croeng., 6, 436–446.
Murarka, S.P. (1993) Metallization: Theory and Practice for
VLSI and ULSI, Butterworth–Heinemann.
Ohmi, T. (2001) A new paradigm of silicon technology, Proc.
IEEE, 89, 394–412.
Puurunen, R. (2005) Surface chemistry of atomic layer deposi-
tion: a case study for the trimethylaluminum/water process,
J. Appl. Phys., 97, 121301.
Ritala, M. et al. (1999) Perfectly conformal TiN and Al2O3
ﬁlm deposited by atomic layer deposition, Chem. Vapor De-
pos., 5, 7.
Ruythooren, W. et al. (2001) Electrodeposition for the synthe-
sis of microsystems, J. Micromech. Microeng., 10, 101.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 66]
Thin-Film Materials and Processes
67
Shacham-Diamand, Y. and V.M. Dubin (1997) Copper elec-
troless deposition technology for ultra-large-scale-integration
(ULSI) metallization, Microelectron. Eng., 33, 47.
Smith, D.L. (1995) Thin-ﬁlm Deposition: Principles and
Practice, McGraw-Hill.
Vehkam¨aki, M. et al. (2001) Atomic layer deposition of
SrTiO3, Chem. Vapor Depos., 7, 75.
Xia, L.-Q. et al. (1999) High temperature subatmospheric
chemical
vapor
deposited
undoped
silicate
glass,
J.
Electrochem. Soc., 146, 1181–1185.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 67]
6
Epitaxy
Epitaxy is a very special case of thin-ﬁlm deposition:
the deposited ﬁlm will be single crystalline. This can
only take place when special conditions are met. The
deposited layer registers the crystalline information from
the substrate. In order to do so properly, the crystal lat-
tices of the ﬁlm and the substrate must be identical or
closely matching. The simplest case is homoepitaxy: ﬁlm
and substrate are the same material, for example sili-
con deposition on silicon. Because crystal information
is “transmitted” across the substrate/ﬁlm interface, the
surface quality of the starting wafer is of paramount im-
portance. A residual ﬁlm a few atomic layers thick can
prevent epitaxy. Epitaxy reactors are therefore designed
with extreme cleanliness in mind, use the highest pu-
rity chemicals and are very delicate and expensive pieces
of equipment.
Epitaxy is a demanding process and high-quality epi-
taxial ﬁlms are difﬁcult to make. Epitaxial deposition can
fail partially and result in defective single crystalline ma-
terial, or it can fail completely and result in polycrystalline
or even amorphous ﬁlm. Whether the defective material is
usable for devices depends on the density and location of
those defects: if defects are conﬁned to substrate/ﬁlm in-
terface, and the deposited layer is mostly defect-free, the
material may be usable, but this depends on the device
operating principle and engineering judgment is needed
to decide on acceptable defect levels.
6.1 Heteroepitaxy
Epitaxy on dissimilar materials is termed heteroepitaxy,
with examples such as AlAs on GaAs, GaN on SiC and
SiGe on Si. The lattice constants of various semiconduc-
tors are shown in Figure 6.1. The AlxGa1−xAs system is
favorable because lattice constants of all GaAs and AlAs
alloys differ by less than 0.2%, and multiple layers of
AlAs/GaAs/AlAs type can be grown easily, with periods
down to atomic layer thickness, equipment limitations
allowing. Semiconductor lasers and solar cells can have
tens of layers grown epitaxially (Figure 6.2).
Heteroepitaxy of silicon–germanium is an important
application. Germanium is a group IV element like
silicon, and they have identical lattice structures, so one
basic requirement of epitaxy is fulﬁlled. Their lattice con-
stants are, however, different: that is, silicon 0.543 nm,
germanium 0.566 nm. Deposition of silicon with a small
concentration of germanium will result in a single
crystalline ﬁlm because the silicon lattice will hold
a small number of slightly larger germanium atoms
in place (Figure 6.3). Deposition of pure germanium
will result in a polycrystalline ﬁlm because the lattice
mismatch is too large to be accommodated.
There exists a critical thickness tc (which depends on
the SixGe1−x lattice constant and therefore germanium
fraction) below which mismatch can be accommodated
by elastic deformation, as shown in Figure 6.4. Below
the critical thickness the thin epilayer is strained to ﬁt
the silicon lattice, and above the critical thickness the
lattice relaxes via misﬁt dislocations, and the ﬁlm qual-
ity may become useless for device applications. In the
strained metastable region the epilayer is thermodynam-
ically unstable but kinetically prevented from ﬁnding a
relaxed state.
It is possible to increase the germanium content gradu-
ally, and ﬁnally SixGe1−x ﬁlms with 50% germanium can
be deposited epitaxially. SiGe ﬁlms are under compres-
sive stress, and if a silicon layer is deposited on SiGe, it
will be under tensile stress.
There are other applications of heteroepitaxy on silicon:
SiC on Si is intensely studied because SiC substrates are
expensive, and silicon substrates would be readily avail-
able, also in large diameters. Shown in Figure 6.5 is a
TEM micrograph of epitaxial oxide <Y2O3> on silicon.
As further proof of epitaxial ﬁlm quality, epitaxial sili-
con is grown on <Y2O3>. Obviously this has to be the
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 68]
70
Introduction to Microfabrication
AlP
GaP
AlAs
GaAs
AlSb
CdTe
InP
GaSb
Ge
Si
PbS
InAs
PbSe
InSb
HgTe
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
0.520
0.540
0.560
0.580
0.600
0.620
0.640
0.660
Lattice constant (nm)
Bandgap (eV)
Figure 6.1
Lattice constants and band gaps of various semiconductors
GaAS p = 2×1018 10 nm
InGaP p = 1×1018 300 nm
InGaP n = 2×1018 300 nm
GaAs n = 2×1018 250 nm
InGaP Undoped 12 nm
GaAs Undoped 8 nm
InGaP Undoped 100 nm
Buffer
i-region
Cap
× 30
InGaP Undoped 50 nm
Figure 6.2
Superlattice structure of a quantum well so-
lar cell with 30 periods of GaAs/InGaP. Reproduced from
Magnanini et al. (2008) by permission of Elsevier
Figure 6.3
Germanium epitaxy on silicon is impossible
because the lattice constants are too different. However, an
alloy SixGe1−x can be deposited because the silicon lattice
can accommodate some germanium atoms
case: if the two materials have matching lattices and clean
surfaces, epitaxy works both ways. Another example of
heteroepitaxy is the growth of high-temperature cuprate
superconductors on silicon: ﬁrst single crystalline YSZ,
yttria-stabilized zirconia, is grown on single crystalline
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 69]
Epitaxy
71
0
1
10
Critical thickness, nm
100
relaxed
strained
metastable
strained stable
1000
10
20
Ge content %
30
40
50
Figure 6.4
SixGe1−x epitaxy on silicon: thicknesses and
germanium concentrations refer to 600 ◦C growth. At higher
temperatures critical thickness is smaller
Figure 6.5
Epitaxial silicon on epitaxial yttrium oxide
on silicon, TEM cross-section. Reproduced from Borschel
et al. (2009), Copyright 2009, American Institute of
Physics
silicon, followed by CeO2 and ﬁnally by GdBaCuO
superconductor ﬁlm.
In silicon-on-sapphire (SOS), single crystal silicon
is deposited on single crystal sapphire. The lattices of
sapphire and silicon are different but if the sapphire
crystal is properly oriented the apparent lattice constant
is close enough to 0.543 nm of silicon. SOS was the ﬁrst
SOI technology, but it has largely been replaced by other
SOI technologies.
6.2 Epitaxial Deposition
Silicon epitaxy on silicon enables freedom in doping
level and doping-type tailoring. A lightly doped epitaxial
p-type layer (ρ ∼10 ohm-cm) can be grown on a heavily
p-doped substrate wafer (ρ ∼0.2 ohm-cm). These types
of wafers are used for microprocessors and other high-
performance logic circuits. An n-silicon epitaxial layer on
a p-substrate is used in many micromechanical devices
because of electrochemical etch stop (Chapter 20).
In a CZ ingot resistivity depends on the position in the
ingot as shown by Equation 4.6. Deposition of the epilayer
equalizes wafers in this respect. Epilayer uniformity (both
thickness uniformity and doping uniformity) is good, and
if very tight resistivity speciﬁcation is needed, epitaxial
wafers override bulk silicon wafers. Another beneﬁt of
epitaxy is the absence of oxygen and carbon, which are
always present in CZ silicon. About 20% of all starting
wafers sold are epiwafers. But epitaxy is also as a part of
device processing and this is extensively used in making
bipolar transistors, see Chapter 27.
Boron dopant atoms are smaller than silicon, and the
resulting boron-doped epilayer will be under tensile stress.
Arsenic atoms are larger than silicon, and an arsenic-
doped epilayer is under compressive stress. But dopant
atom concentrations are fairly small (1015–1017 cm−3
vs. 5 × 1022 cm−3 silicon atom density) and the effect
is minor.
Epitaxy depends on crystal information and the energy
of arriving atoms: they must have enough energy (sur-
face mobility) to ﬁnd energetically favorable sites on the
surface. All epitaxy processes use elevated temperature, to
give atoms surface mobility, and deposition rate also goes
up with temperature, but too high a deposition rate is no
good: there should be enough time for atoms to ﬁnd their
place on the crystal before the next layer is deposited.
CVD epitaxy of silicon with SiH4−xClx (x = 0–4)
source gases has been established since the 1950s. The
basic chemical reactions are identical to polysilicon
deposition (Equations 5.1 and 5.2). In the compound
semiconductor ﬁeld MOCVD (Metal Organic CVD, also
known as MOVPE for Vapor Phase Epitaxy) is common.
GaAs is deposited using precursors like GaCl5 and AsH3.
Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is a variant of evap-
oration. Instead of an open crucible, the source material
is heated in a Knudsen cell. This cell consists of a cru-
cible that is closed except for a small oriﬁce, and atoms
can escape from the cell only through the small oriﬁce.
The atom beam (in the molecular ﬂow regime, hence the
name MBE) emanating from the oriﬁce is much more
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 70]
72
Introduction to Microfabrication
15 nm
10 nm
10 nm
10 nm
50 nm
10 nm
Si wafer
Si90Ge10
Si85Ge15
Si
epi-
layers
500 µm
Figure 6.6
Thin heteroepitaxial Si1−xGex layers for high-
speed bipolar transistors. The hatched layers are graded
epilayers with constantly changing germanium content
stable than a beam evaporating from an open crucible.
This stability is tantamount to growing ﬁlms with atomic
layer thickness control.
In solid phase epitaxy (SPE) the solid ﬁlm registers
the crystalline structure from the underlying single crys-
talline substrate. Amorphous ﬁlms on single crystalline
substrates can thus be converted to single crystalline by
annealing. Nucleation is important: a single crystal should
be grown from one direction only. If there are many nu-
clei, the resulting ﬁlm will be polycrystalline. Of course
all the limitations of clean interfaces, matching lattice,
etc., still apply. Epitaxy from the liquid phase (LPE) is
also possible: both saturated solutions and melts can be
used as sources for epitaxial growth. LPE was the domi-
nant technology in the early days of III–V semiconductor
laser and LED fabrication, but it has largely been super-
seded by gas phase and vacuum systems.
The number and thickness of epilayers are practically
unlimited: in IGBT power transistors a moderately doped
n-layer is grown ﬁrst, followed by a thicker lightly doped
layer. Layer thicknesses in power semiconductors are for
example 50 μm (see Figure 2.10). In high-speed bipolar
transistors (heterojunction bipolar transistors, HBTs) very
thin epitaxial layers are used (in the tens of nanometers
range), to engineer the band gap and therefore emitter
performance (Figure 6.6).
6.3 CVD Homoepitaxy of Silicon
As an example of homoepitaxy, CVD silicon epitaxy is
described (epitaxial reactors and growth process details
are presented in Chapter 34). A reactor is heated to about
1200 ◦C under hydrogen ﬂow, which reduces native oxide,
so a clean silicon surface is obtained:
SiO2 (s) + H2 (g) ⇔SiO (g) + H2O (g)
(6.1)
Growth commences when silane gases of type SiHxCl4−x
(x = 0–4) are introduced into the reactor: Equation 6.2
for dichlorosilane (DCS) and Equation 6.3 for silicon
tetrachloride. Silane, SiH4, can also be used. Two main
differences to poly deposition are temperature and
substrate conditioning: higher temperature equals higher
deposition rate, higher surface mobility and therefore the
possibility to ﬁnd energy minimum sites on the surface:
SiH2Cl2 (g) ⇒Si (s) + 2 HCl (g)
T = 1150 ◦C
(6.2)
SiCl4 (g) + 2 H2 (g) ⇔Si (s) + 4 HCl (g) T = 1250 ◦C
(6.3)
Reaction 6.3 is reversible, and cleaning is possible with
HCl when the reaction proceeds from right to left (i.e.,
hydrogen chloride etching of silicon). Excessive etching
should be avoided because surface roughness tends to in-
crease in etching. Silicon tetrachloride can also be used
as silicon etchant:
SiCl4 (g) + Si (s) ⇒2 SiCl2 (g)
(6.4)
This reaction can be prevented when the SiCl4 fraction is
limited to below 27% (Figure 6.7), and in practice much
more dilute gases are used: a typical incoming gas consists
of 1% silane and 99% hydrogen.
The SiCl4 process temperature is, however, very high
and undesirable dopant diffusion takes place during epi-
taxy. The SiH4 reaction is better in this respect, but due to
the lower temperature, the deposition rate is lower. Low
temperature, and therefore minimal diffusion, are impor-
tant considerations when sharp interfaces must be made.
Trichlorosilane SiHCl3 (TCS) and dichlorosilane SiH2Cl2
(DCS) are good compromises.
Typical epitaxial deposition rates are 1–5 μm/min. They
depend on the silane gas chosen, on temperature and on
ﬂows. The deposition rate can be increased by operat-
ing at higher temperature, but at very high temperatures
polycrystalline, rather than epitaxial, ﬁlm results. At high
temperature the growth rate is so high that there is no time
for atoms to arrange themselves into a single crystalline
lattice. At low temperatures the ﬁlm atoms do not have
enough energy to diffuse and ﬁnd suitable lattice sites,
and polycrystalline ﬁlms result.
Perfectly ﬂat surfaces offer no preferred sites for atoms
to position themselves, and epi growth is therefore difﬁ-
cult. It can be aided by miscut wafers: instead of slicing
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 71]
Epitaxy
73
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 −1
 −20
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Mol fraction SiCl4 in H2
Silicon deposition in microns/min
Deposition temperature,
1270 °C H2 flow, one liter/min
Figure 6.7
Silicon deposition rate as a function of
SiCl4/H2 ﬂow ratio. Above about 2–3 μm/min the result-
ing ﬁlm is polycrystalline, not epitaxial. For SiCl4/H2
(1%/99%) the typical growth condition is 1 μm/min.
Reproduced from Theurer (1961) by permission of Elec-
trochemical Society Inc.
the ingot perfectly, a 3◦miscut for example is used (typ-
ical for <111> material speciﬁcations), see Figure 4.10.
Atomic steps so created act as nucleation sites for epi-
taxy. Arriving atoms can form more bonds at kinks, and
therefore they are more stably bound than atoms on ﬂat
areas. Newly arrived atoms therefore arrange themselves
regularly according to terraces determined by the crystal
structure, while on planar areas various island structures
can be formed randomly (Figure 6.8).
Substrate
Step
Adatom diffusing
along surface
Evaporation
Growth of
island
Atom arriving
at surface
Atom at
stable kink
position
Figure 6.8
Terrace step kink (TSK) growth model of epi-
taxy: growth proceeds at kinks, and adatoms on ﬂat sur-
face diffuse to energetically favorable positions at kinks.
Wafer miscut creates terraced structure. Reproduced from
Jenkins (1995)
The term epi-poly is sometimes used in microme-
chanics. It is an oxymoron: epitaxial ﬁlms are single
crystalline, and poly means polycrystalline. What is
meant is that a CVD epireactor has been used to deposit a
thick layer of silicon, using epi growth conditions which
enable deposition rates 1–5 μm/min versus 10 nm/min
for LPCVD poly at 625 ◦C. But the underlying ﬁlm is
amorphous
SiO2,
resulting
in
polycrystalline
ﬁlm.
Typical epi-poly thicknesses are 10–50 μm, compared to
0.1–2 μm typical of LPCVD polysilicon, which is used as
a CMOS gate and as a structural layer in surface MEMS.
Thick poly is a popular material in micromechanics,
combining some of the best sides of both polysilicon
thin ﬁlms and thick silicon layers.
6.4 Doping of Epilayers
Epilayer doping level and dopant type can be chosen
independently of the substrate. Gaseous dopants, PH3,
B2H6, AsH3, are added to source gas ﬂow, enabling
doping during epitaxy. Dopant concentration in the epi-
taxial ﬁlm can be varied over seven orders of magnitude
(1013–1020 cm−3). In many applications several epilayers
with different doping levels and/or types are grown
sequentially, or graded structures where the composition
or doping level changes in minor steps, for example
from Si to Si0.7Ge0.3 in tens of increments of germanium
concentration.
Epitaxial deposition need not be the ﬁrst process step:
doped silicon is also single crystalline silicon and epitaxy
on it works just as well. In bipolar transistor fabrication,
buried layer formation by diffusion is the ﬁrst step (see
Figure 3.2), followed by epitaxial deposition of a lightly
doped epilayer on top of a heavily doped buried layer.
Base and emitter diffusions will then be done in this
lightly doped epitaxial layer. Further discussion of epi-
taxy on structured wafers can be found in Chapter 27 on
bipolar technology.
Because of the high temperatures involved, dopant dif-
fusion will inevitably take place during epitaxy. If the
epilayer doping level is lower than that of the substrate,
the epilayer will be doped from the substrate through two
different mechanisms: (1) solid state diffusion across the
substrate/epilayer interface; and 2) dopant atom outdiffu-
sion from the substrate into the gas stream and subsequent
vapor phase doping, known as autodoping (Figure 6.9).
Autodoping depends on the volatility of dopants, with an-
timony (Sb) giving the least (the lowest vapor pressure,
with arsenic and boron somewhat higher, and phosphorus
the highest). Autodoping comes both from substrate itself
and from any doped regions that have been made in steps
preceding epitaxy.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 72]
74
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 6.9
Autodoping: in substrate autodoping, dopants
evaporated from heavily doped substrate add to intention-
ally added dopant; in lateral autodoping, dopants from heav-
ily doped regions lead to local doping variation
epilayer
concentration
90%/10% transition width
silicon substrate
Figure 6.10
Transition width at substrate/epilayer in-
terface; lightly doped epitaxial layer on heavily doped
substrate
The abruptness of the doping at the substrate/epilayer
interface depends on both deposition temperature and
time, as well as dopant type. The transition width can
be taken as the distance where doping concentration
drops from a 90% value to a 10% value (Figure 6.10).
Depending on whether the substrate or the epilayer is
more strongly doped, the transition can take place either
inside the epilayer or inside the substrate.
6.5 Measurement of Epitaxial
Deposition
At least three measurements must be carried out on epi-
taxial wafers: thickness, resistivity and surface quality.
Surface quality is assessed ﬁrst and foremost by optical
inspection: pyramids, mounds and hillocks scatter light
which can be detected by optical methods. A Nomarski
interference contrast microscope can detect surface height
differences and IR depolarization reveals stresses. Laser
scattering measures particles and microroughness. Optical
methods are fast, and 100% of wafers are inspected.
The thickness of epilayers can be measured by Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy: constructive and
destructive interference from reﬂections at the surface
and at the substrate/epilayer interface are detected. FTIR
spectroscopy requires, however, a highly doped substrate
(resistivity below 0.025 ohm-cm). On resistive substrates,
spreading resistance proﬁling (SRP) is used. SRP requires
sample beveling: that is, it is sample destructive – 1 wafer
in 25 or 1 in 100 is measured by SRP. Transition width
measurement can be done with SIMS but this is a time-
consuming measurement and is done for example once
for 1000 wafers.
SRP of course measures resistivity also, but simpler
and faster methods are
used for routine measure-
ments. Resistivity is measured by the mercury probe
capacitance–voltage method (Hg-CV method) for p/p
and n/n structures and by the four-point probe method
for n/p and p/n structures. In both methods a metal
contact is made on silicon, even though liquid mercury
drop contact is much more benign than tungsten needle
contact of 4PP. Wafers are not usable after metal probes.
Non-contact
measurements
would
be
much
better,
but most are rather cumbersome and require special
conditions to be fulﬁlled.
6.6 Simulation of Epitaxy
The epitaxy simulators currently used in process inte-
gration studies are not physically based. A true physical
simulator would use temperature, ﬂow rate and surface
reaction rate constants as inputs, and it would reproduce
growth rate and dopant distribution as the outputs. In-
stead, epitaxy simulators are really hybrids between ﬁlm
deposition and diffusion simulators: deposition rate and
temperature are given, and dopant proﬁle is calculated
from diffusion constants at the relevant temperature.
The input for epitaxy simulator requires:
• dopant type of wafer
• deposition rate and time
• deposition temperature
• dopant type and concentration in the ﬂow.
Such a semiempirical simulator can predict a dopant pro-
ﬁle across the substrate/epilayer interface, taking into ac-
count both outdiffusion from the substrate and diffusion
from the epilayer into the substrate.
Some estimates of gas phase dopant concentration and
the resulting epilayer doping are given below:
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 73]
Epitaxy
75
Dopant in gas phase
Dopant in epitaxial ﬁlm
10−10 bar
1015 cm−3
10−8 bar
1017 cm−3
10−6 bar
1019 cm−3
Dopant
partial
pressures
are
very
small
indeed
because epitaxy is carried out at atmospheric pressure.
Extreme dilution in hydrogen is used to incorporate such
dilute dopant ﬂows. Note that phosphorus and boron
incorporation into growing silicon is very strong: its
concentration in ﬁlm is much higher than its gas phase
concentration. Arsenic incorporated into epitaxial ﬁlm is
even more pronounced.
A 1D simulation of epitaxy is shown in Figure 6.11.
Epitaxial ﬁlms nominally 4 μm thick are deposited. A
heavily doped epilayer dopes the substrate, and the
electrical junction is deeper than the nominal thickness
of the epilayer. When the epilayer is lightly doped and
the substrate heavily doped, the opposite is true. Note
that the same deposition rate, 0.2 μm/min, has been
used for all temperatures. This is a limitation in epitaxy
simulation: rates are really temperature dependent, but
they have to be given manually; they do not follow from
ﬁrst principles.
6.7 Advanced Epitaxy
If there are both oxide and single crystal silicon areas
on the wafer, deposition will be epitaxial on silicon and
polycrystalline on oxide. In between there is a region with
ill-deﬁned material: both its crystallinity and thickness are
difﬁcult to predict. In selective epitaxial growth (SEG)
ﬁlm is deposited only in those areas where single crystal
silicon is present (Figure 6.12). SEG is a complex pro-
cess and not fully understood. One process uses SiH2Cl2,
HCl and H2 as source gases. Chlorine etches nuclei on
oxide faster than on silicon, and deposition is preferen-
tially on silicon. Other factors like temperature, pressure,
0.00
1.00
2.00
Depth (mm)
(b)
3.00
5.00
4.00
6.00
BORON
PHOSPHORUS
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
1014
1013
0.00
2.00
4.00
Depth (mm)
BORON
Concentration (cm−3)
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
1014
1013
Concentration (cm−3)
(a)
6.00
8.00
10.00
PHOSPHORUS
PHOSPHORUS
PHOSPHORUS
ICECREM for WINDOWS, Version 4.3
Fraunhofer-Institut fuer Integrierte Schaltungen,
Abteilung fuer Bauelementetechnologie
Schottkystrasse 10, D-91058 Erlangen
ICECREM for WINDOWS, Version 4.3
Fraunhofer-Institut fuer Integrierte Schaltungen,
Abteilung fuer Bauelementetechnologie
Schottkystrasse 10, D-91058 Erlangen
Figure 6.11
ICECREM simulation of epitaxial interface sharpness: three different growth temperatures (1050, 1100,
1150 ◦C) have been used to grow an epitaxial layer nominally 4 μm thick: (a) heavily doped epilayer on lightly doped
substrate; (b) lightly doped epilayer on heavily doped substrate
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 74]
76
Introduction to Microfabrication
Si
ox  
ox
SEG
ELO
ELO
ox
Si
Figure 6.12
SEG, selective epitaxial growth, no deposi-
tion on oxide; ELO, epitaxial lateral overgrowth; merging
of epitaxial ﬁlm fronts over oxide
ﬂow rates, partial pressures and the chemical nature of the
dielectric (oxide, nitride) play their role in SEG. Selective
epitaxy can be done many times over, as long as there is
a high-quality single crystalline seed area available.
Epitaxy requires crystal orientation information from
the substrate, but once this information is registered,
epitaxial growth can continue over amorphous or poly-
crystalline material. The epitaxial lateral overgrowth
(ELO)
technique
incorporates
patterned
seed
areas,
oxide isolation and lateral overgrowth. One of the main
problems in ELO is the point where the two growth
fronts merge: defect density can be very high.
6.8 Exercises
1. Can a laboratory scale with 0.1 mg resolution be used
for epilayer thickness measurements?
2. What are the resistivities of the substrates and epilayers
in Figure 6.12?
3. Growth rates as a function of temperature are given be-
low for SiH4 epitaxy. Plot rate as a function of inverse
temperature and check if there are two growth regimes!
700
750
800
850
900
0.04
0.09
0.2
0.4
0.5
950
1000
1050
1100 ◦C
0.6
0.7
0.75
0.8 μm/min
4. In Figure 6.7 the deposition rate is negative at high
SiCl4 fractions. What does this mean?
5. How abrupt (in nanometers) are transition widths in
thick homoepitaxial silicon cases? What about SiGe
epitaxy?
6. If a 200 mm wafer bows 20 μm due to an epitaxial
layer 5 μm thick, what is the stress in the epilayer?
Simulator exercises:
7. For an n+/n−structure (substrate 1018 cm−3, epilayer
1015 cm−3) calculate the transition width as a function
of epitaxy temperature for an epilayer 4 μm thick.
8. A starting wafer doping level is 1015 cm−3 phosphorus.
The epilayer is dopes with boron doped at 1017 cm−3
concentration. Calculate the junction depth as a func-
tion of growth temperature.
9. If pnp-bipolar transistors are made, the buried layer has
to be p-type. Calculate the boron updiffusion for dif-
ferent epitaxy conditions when the buried layer doping
is 1018 cm−3 and the epilayer doping is 1015 cm−3.
References and Related Reading
Baliga, J.B. (1986) Epitaxial Silicon Technology, Academic
Press.
Beaucarne, G. et al. (2006) Epitaxial thin-ﬁlm Si solar cells,
Thin Solid Films, 511–512, 533–542.
Borschel, C. et al. (2009) Structure and defects of epitaxial Si
(111) layers on Y2O3 (111)/Si(111) support systems, J. Vac.
Sci. Technol., B27, 305–309.
Crippa, D., D.R. Rode and M. Masi (2001) Silicon epitaxy, in
Semiconductors and semimetals, Vol. 72, Academic Press.
Herman, M.A., W. Ricter and H. Sitter (2004) Epitaxy,
Springer.
Jenkins, T. (1995) Semiconductor Science, Prentice Hall.
Magnanini, R. et al. (2008) Investigation of GaAs/InGaP su-
perlattices for quantum well solar cells, Thin Solid Films,
516, 6734–6738.
Meyerson, B.S. (1992) UHV/CVD growth of Si and Si:Ge
alloys: chemistry, physics, and device applications, Proc.
IEEE, 80, 1592.
Theurer, H. (1961) Epitaxial silicon ﬁlms by the hydrogen re-
duction of SiCl4, J. Electrochem. Soc., 108, 649.
Wu, Y.H. et al. (1999) The effect of native oxide on epitaxial
SiGe from deposited amorphous Ge on Si, Appl. Phys. Lett.,
74, 528.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 75]
7
Advanced Thin Films
In this chapter we will discuss thin-ﬁlm deposition proce-
sses in more detail, and explore the relationships between
process parameters and the resulting ﬁlm properties.
Process pressure and temperature, and ion bombardment
during deposition, play their roles in resulting ﬁlm
qualities: grain size and orientation, or amorphousness;
interface sharpness; volume homogeneity and surface
smoothness/roughness. We will encounter a wide variety
of cases involving double layer, multilayer, alloyed,
reacted and other thin ﬁlms. Some of these are stable,
some
are
reacted
intentionally,
and
others
exhibit
unwanted interfacial processes. These complex thin-ﬁlm
stacks have applications in acoustics, magnetics, optics,
electronics and practically every ﬁeld of microtechnology.
7.1 General Features of Thin-Film
Processes
Thin-ﬁlm deposition involves thermal physics, ﬂuid
dynamics, plasma physics, gas phase chemistry, surface
chemistry, solid state physics and materials science. We
must deal with source materials (sputtering targets, pre-
cursor gases, electrolytes), we must address the transport
of source material to the substrate (in high vacuum,
low vacuum, at atmospheric pressure or in liquid), and
we have to understand surface processes (adsorption,
reaction, desorption, ion bombardment-induced effects).
Characterization of ﬁlms entails dozens of techniques
ranging from optical to nuclear, electrical to mechanical.
This multidisciplinarity leads to a great number of
phenomena and models which must taken into account,
in both experimental work and simulation.
There are a few basic methods of source excitation and
tens of different conﬁgurations of these. Thermal activa-
tion can be resistive, and electron, ion and laser beams can
be used, too. Plasma sources range from simple DC diodes
to microwave, helical and inductive conﬁgurations. In the
liquid phase the choices are less numerous, and electro-
chemical and chemical potential differences are the main
driving forces.
Film deposition on the substrate surface is a sum of
many factors. In the ﬁrst approximation, deposition is in-
dependent of substrate. This distinguishes deposition from
growth processes, like thermal oxidation, which is inti-
mately coupled with the substrate. But surfaces do interact
with deposition processes via available chemical bonds,
contamination and crystallography. An important param-
eter is the sticking coefﬁcient, or the probability that an
impinging particle will remain on the surface. A high
sticking coefﬁcient means that the particle will come to
rest at the point of impingement, and a low sticking co-
efﬁcient means that only energetically favorable attached
species will stick, and others will desorb. Sticking coefﬁ-
cients range from 10−5, typical of CVD, to approaching
unity, in evaporation.
Even if no annealing is done immediately after ﬁlm
deposition, ﬁlms will experience thermal treatments
during subsequent processing. Thermal loads from these
treatments can be considerable, and they affect many
ﬁlm properties, like grain size, resistivity and stress. Film
surfaces and interfaces will be modiﬁed during these
annealing steps by diffusion, dissolution or chemical
reactions.
7.2 Film Growth and Structure
Atoms impinging on a surface attach to the surface either
with chemical bonds (≈1 eV, chemisorption) or by short
range van der Waals forces (≈0.3–0.4 eV, physisorption).
Chemically bonded atoms tend to stay ﬁxed on the
surface, with only a small chance of desorption or
diffusion. Physisorbed atoms are only loosely bound.
This is essential in ALD: a monolayer is chemisorbed
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 76]
78
Introduction to Microfabrication
but the temperature is selected to be so high that any
additional physisorbed layer would not adhere.
Thin-ﬁlm deposition is about phase transition from the
vapor phase to solid phase. Atoms condense on a sub-
strate. These adatoms (adsorbed atoms) are subject to des-
orption and surface diffusion. Some adatoms bond to each
other, reducing the desorption probability. More atoms ag-
gregate and some of the bigger clusters avoid desorption.
These processes are depicted in Figure 7.1. These small
nuclei are still mobile, and they grow by merging with
other nuclei, but they can also incorporate atoms from
the vapor phase. Nuclei grow in size to become islands,
but remain separate, and more nuclei can form between
the islands. Coalescence is driven by surface energy and
surface area minimization. Island merging creates a con-
tinuous ﬁlm. For sputtered and evaporated metal ﬁlms this
happens at about 10–20 nm ﬁlm thickness. Films thinner
than this are optically transparent but they can form an
electrically conductive path (percolation). Such ﬁlms have
applications as permeable electrodes in gas sensors and as
top metals in optical devices.
There are many modes of ﬁlm growth. Island growth
is also known as three-dimensional growth. It is common
in metal deposition on insulators, where bonds between
ﬁlm atoms are stronger than bonds between ﬁlm atoms
and the substrate. Two-dimensional growth, also called
layer-by-layer growth, takes place when the arriving ﬁlm
atoms bond more strongly with the substrate than with
each other. It is possible to deposit a single atomic layer
of, for example, nickel on mica. A third mode, called
the Stranski–Krastanov mode, is a mixture of 2D and
3D modes. A fourth mode is columnar growth. These are
pictured in Figure 7.2. When adatom mobility is close to
zero, as in the room temperature deposition of tungsten,
atoms stick where they land and grains grow upward.
Columnar growth looks similar to island growth initially,
but the difference is in coalescence: in the island mode
there is enough energy for the ﬁlm atoms to ﬁnd ener-
getically favorable sites (due to the high temperature in
condensation
re-evaporation
binding at kink
binding at defect
adsorption
nucleation
surface diffusion
Figure 7.1
Surface processes in thin-ﬁlm growth
Figure 7.2
Thin-ﬁlm growth modes: left, 2D (layer-by-
layer) growth; middle, 3D (island) growth; right, columnar
growth with voids between the grains
epitaxy and CVD, or due to ion bombardment in plasma
deposition processes) and the islands will eventually co-
alesce, resulting in a uniform ﬁlm. In columnar growth
grains continue to grow upward, and voids between the
grains remain. The surface will be rough, because grain
height is determined by random nucleation.
If we measure the early stages of thin-ﬁlm growth
by
surface-sensitive
techniques,
for
example
Auger
electron spectroscopy or XPS (which probe the topmost
nanometer only), we can distinguish 2D and 3D growth:
in 2D growth mode the signal from the substrate quickly
dies out because the whole surface becomes covered
by the deposited layer. In 3D mode the substrate signal
slowly decreases as the proportion of open substrate area
is diminished.
Zone models explain the basic features of PVD ﬁlm
structure. The ﬁrst question is: will the ﬁlm be amor-
phous or polycrystalline? Silicon and other covalently
bonding materials often end up amorphous. Many com-
pounds (like TiN and Al2O3) and metal alloys (TiW, SiCr)
with dissimilar-sized atoms similarly result in amorphous
ﬁlms. Elemental metal deposition usually results in poly-
crystalline ﬁlms, including all the standard thin ﬁlms in
microtechnology (Al, Au, Cu, W, Ti, Cr, Pt).
The crystallinity of sputtered ﬁlms is determined by
a complex interaction between the substrate (its surface
chemistry, surface structure and temperature) and the de-
posited ﬁlm. In the zone model pressure and temperature
are the main variables to explain ﬁlm microstructure (tem-
peratures are normalized to melting point temperatures,
T /Tm, in K), see Figure 7.3. Zone 1 is small grained and
porous, zone 2 has larger columnar grains and zone 3 ex-
hibits still larger grains. The intermediate region is termed
zone T (for transition).
Zone 1 is the region where the low momentum of imp-
inging species is combined with slow chemical processes
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 77]
Advanced Thin Films
79
Zone 3
Zone 2
Zone 1
Zone 1
30
20
10
1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Substrate
temperature (T/Tm)
Argon
pressure
(mTorr)
Figure 7.3
Zone model of sputtered thin-ﬁlm microstruc-
ture. Reproduced from Thornton (1986) by permission of
American Institute of Physics
due to low temperature: ﬁlm atoms come to rest almost
immediately, leading to columnar grains. Such a structure
is under moderate tensile stress. The voids between the
grains are nanometer sized, which leads to measurable
density reduction and poor stability because atmospheric
water and oxygen will be absorbed in the voids. Oxygen
impurities in the deposition chamber can change the in-
trinsic stress from tensile to compressive and complicate
the simple model described above.
At lower pressure ion bombardment becomes more im-
portant (fewer ion collisions and therefore more ener-
getic bombardment). Ions densify the ﬁlm by knocking
out loosely bound atoms. A further increase in ion bom-
bardment (at lower pressure or higher sputtering power)
leads to the disappearance of voids and conversion to
compressive stress. Higher temperature leads to enhanced
surface diffusion, which will result in denser ﬁlms as
atoms can migrate and ﬁnd energetically favorable sites to
attach to.
Zone 2 occurs at T /Tm > 0.3, so surface diffusion is sig-
niﬁcant. Grains grow larger, and defects are eliminated.
Zone 3 occurs at T /Tm > 0.5, where diffusion processes
are very fast. Elimination of voids enhances diffusion.
Films are annealed during deposition. Grains are more
isotropic and ﬁlms “lose memory” of the deposition pro-
cess details.
Sputtered aluminum grain size is about 0.5 μm, similar
to the typical ﬁlm thickness. In 3 μm lines there are
always many grains across the line, but in 0.5 μm lines
the situation changes dramatically: there are practically
no three-grain boundaries and the grains are end to
end, known as the bamboo structure. All processes
which depend on grain boundaries, like diffusion and
electromigration, are strongly affected.
Film structure can change not only continuously as de-
scribed above, but also abruptly. Tantalum ﬁlms sputtered
under different conditions can end up in either the body
centered cubic (BCC) structure or as tetragonal β-Ta. The
resistivity of BCC-Ta is about 20 μohm-cm with a tem-
perature coefﬁcient of resistivity (TCR) of 3800 ppm/◦C.
Values for β-Ta are about 160 μohm-cm and 178 ppm/◦C,
respectively (see Figure 5.1 for another tantalum depo-
sition experiment). Phase transitions will also take place
during annealing, for example TiSi2 has several phases,
see Figure 7.16.
Grains in polycrystalline ﬁlms can have any crystal
orientation, but in practice ﬁlms are often strongly tex-
tured: the distribution of grain orientations is along one
or two main crystal planes. For example, aluminum ﬁlms
have usually (111) texture, that is (111) planes paral-
lel to the wafer surface. For undoped LPCVD polysil-
icon, (110) orientation crystals dominate, but for in situ
phosphorus-doped poly, (311) is the dominant orientation.
Grain structure of LPCVD polycrystalline silicon is shown
in Figure 7.4. Because grains of different orientation grow
at slightly different rates, the surfaces of polycrystalline
ﬁlms are generally rough.
Texture is established during deposition, and it is not
greatly affected by subsequent annealing steps below
(2/3)Tm, even though grain size increases.
Texture
inheritance is common: subsequent ﬁlms easily acquire
the same texture as the underlying ﬁlm. Thin seed layers
can therefore be used to modify thick layers. In hard disks
Figure 7.4
SEM of polycrystalline silicon ﬁlm 6 μm thick
deposited by LPCVD on a 1 μm oxide layer. Courtesy Lauri
Sainiemi, Aalto University
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 78]
80
Introduction to Microfabrication
NiFe soft magnetic underlayer, 80 nm
Ta/Ru intermediate layer, 8/60 nm
CoCrPt:SiO2 recording layer 15 nm
Protective coating, DLC, 5 nm
Disk substrate (glass or Al-Mg)
Ti (or Ta) adhesion layer, 10 nm
Figure 7.5
Hard disk structure: the Ta/Ru intermedi-
ate layer is used to induce crystal orientation in the
CoCrPt:SiO2 recording layer. Adapted from Piramanayagan
(2007)
the Ta/Ru intermediate layer is deposited to induce [0002]
orientation growth of the magnetic CoCrPt:SiO2 recording
layer, Figure 7.5.
7.3 Thin-Film Structure
Characterization
PVD ﬁlms, especially sputter-deposited ﬁlms, can be
modiﬁed by a number of deposition process parameters.
System conﬁguration and geometry come into play via
target–substrate distance, base pressure, gas phase impu-
rities, bias voltage. Pressure and power affect the mom-
entum of impinging atoms and ions, and substrate temper-
ature is important for desorption, diffusion and reactions.
Collimated sputtering is a technique where a mechan-
ical grid is placed between the anode and cathode, and
off-angle atoms do not contribute to the ﬂux arriving
at the wafer, but are deposited on the collimator walls.
Collimated sputtering is good for bottom coverage
(Figure 5.15). In Table 7.1 a collimated system is
Table 7.1
Sputtered titanium nitride (TiN) ﬁlm characterization: collimated vs. standard
Film property
Analytical technique
Collimated TiN
Standard TiN
Thickness
RBS (density = 4.94 g/cm−3)
81 nm
161 nm
TEM cross-section
82 nm
178 nm
Sheet resistance
Four-point probe
13.7 ohm/sq
7.4 ohm/sq
Rs uniformity
Four-point probe
3.3%
5%
Resistivity
Rs by four-point probe
112 μohm-cm
132 μohm-cm
Thickness by TEM
Density
Thickness by TEM and RBS
4.88 g/cm−3
4.47 g/cm−3
Density by RBS
93% of bulk
86% of bulk
Stoichiometry (Ti/N)
RBS
1.31
1.00
Phase
Glancing angle XRD
TiN (38–1420)
TiN (38–1420)
(JCPDS card #)
Electron diffraction
TiN (38–1420)
TiN (38–1420)
Preferred orientation
θ–2θ XRD
(220)
(220)
Electron diffraction
Net stress
Wafer curvature
2.7 GPa (tensile)
3.1 GPa (tensile)
Grain structure
Cross-section TEM
Columnar
Columnar
Plan view TEM
2D equiaxial
2D equiaxial
Average grain size
TEM
19.2 nm
18.3 nm
Average roughness
AFM
0.43 nm
1.23 nm
Min/max roughness
8 nm
18.7 nm
Specular reﬂection
Scanning UV
248 nm: 142%
145%
(% of Si reference)
365 nm: 55%
95%
440 nm: 57%
123%
Impurities
AES
O < 1%
O < 1%
(at. %)
C < 0.5%
C < 0.5%
Source: Wang, S.-Q. and J. Schlueter (1996).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 79]
Advanced Thin Films
81
20 nm
200 nm
300 nm
30 nm
AFM:
Surface roughness
Sq = 40 nm
Sq = 18 nm
Sq = 17 nm
Sq = 16 nm
Sq = 4 anm
TEM:
Size and shape of the grains
25 nm
20 nm
8 nm
750 nm
1.25
2.5
5
7.5
8.6
(SiH4) / (SiH4 + H2) [%]
Figure 7.6
Microstructure evolution of silicon ﬁlms deposited by PECVD. Grain size measurement by TEM; surface
roughness by AFM. Reproduced from Vallat-Sauvain et al. (2000) by permission of AIP
compared to a conventional system, and analyzed for a
range of ﬁlm parameters. Such extensive ﬁlm character-
ization is done when a new process is being developed
and, if adopted in production, a simple monitoring
measurement like sheet resistance can be used.
The electrical characterization described in Chapter 2
and in Table 7.1 was at DC, but circuits that operate at
gigahertz frequencies must be measured at proper frequen-
cies. The same applies to dielectric ﬁlms, too.
The main parameters in CVD processes are the reac-
tant gases, ﬂow rates, ﬂow rate ratios of the reactants,
temperature and pressure. In PECVD, RF power and RF
frequency play important roles. In Figure 7.6 on PECVD
silicon
deposition,
the
effects
of
SiH4/(SiH4 + H2)
ﬂow ratio on crystal size were studied. High-frequency
(70 MHz) PECVD was employed, and glass wafers
were used as substrates at 225 ◦C. Keeping all other
deposition parameters constant, changes in gas ratio have
resulted in enormous variations in grain size and surface
roughness. In LPCVD polysilicon deposition using SiH4
as a source gas, a similar grain size variation can be seen
as a function of temperature: at 630 ◦C large grains (on
the order of 100 nm) are formed, below 600 ◦C the grain
size is reduced and at 570◦the ﬁlm is amorphous. The
effect of temperature on MgF2 grain structure can be
seen in Figure 7.7: the lower the temperature, the smaller
the grains.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.7
Grain structure of MgF2 by SEM as a func-
tion of deposition temperature: (a) 250 ◦C; (b) 300 ◦C;
(c) 350 ◦C; (d) 400 ◦C. Reproduced from Pilvi et al. (2008),
Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society
Dielectric ﬁlms are also measured for a number of
properties (Table 7.2). Again, this kind of extensive char-
acterization relates to the research phase of new materials.
Boron nitride is a new material that has been studied
because of its potential as an insulator in multilevel met-
allization: it has a lower dielectric constant than nitride
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 80]
82
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 7.2
Film characterization: PECVD BN (boron nitride)
PECVD conditions:
Process A
Process B
gases
B2H6 (1%)/NH3
B3N3H6/N2
ﬂow rates
1800 sccm/120 sccm
100 sccm/200 sccm
RF power
500 W
200 W
pressure
660 Pa (= 5 torr)
400 Pa (= 3 torr)
temperature
400 ◦C susceptor
300 ◦C susceptor
Deposition rate
300 nm/min
370 nm/min
Uniformity
<5% (3σ)
3% (3σ)
Refractive index
1.746
1.732
Stress
−400 MPa (compressive)
−150 MPa (compressive)
Etch rate in RIE
62 nm/min
28 nm/min
Etch rate H3PO4 167 ◦C
1–11 nm/min
–
Etch rate BHF
0.5 nm/min
<1 nm/min
B/N ratio
1.02
1.02
Hydrogen content
<8 at. %
<8 at. %
Density
1.89 g/cm3
1.904 g/cm3
Structure
Amorphous
Amorphous
Step coverage
60% (1 × 1 μm)
80% (0.5 × 0.5 μm)
Optical band gap
4.7 eV
4.9 eV
Dielectric constant
3.8–5.7
3.8–5.7
Breakdown potential
6–7 MV/m
6–8 MV/m
Source: Cote, D.R. et al. (1995).
(3.8 vs. 6) and low etch and polish rates. It is not used in
volume manufacturing. One special feature is the use of
etch rate as a quality criterion. With dielectrics, thermal
SiO2 acts as a reference ﬁlm which can always be used
to eliminate etchant concentration or temperature effects.
Many of the measurements listed in Table 7.2 are often
laborious and in production control ellipsometric or re-
ﬂectometric thickness and refractive index measurements
would probably be used.
IR spectroscopy measures molecular vibrations around
10 μm wavelength. This is indicative of chemical bonds,
because IR vibrations are typically bond stretching and
bending vibrations. IR spectroscopy is most often prac-
ticed using an interferometric measurement set-up known
as FTIR, for Fourier transform IR. In silicon nitride thin
ﬁlms it is used to see the presence and qualitative abun-
dance of Si–N, Si–H, N–H bonds (Figure 7.8).
7.4 Surfaces and Interfaces
The surface roughness of thin ﬁlms varies considerably. In
general, high-temperature deposition results in smoother
ﬁlms. Epitaxial ﬁlms are of course very smooth, but many
amorphous ﬁlms can also be extremely smooth. There is
a strong correlation between surface smoothness and vol-
ume homogeneity: thermal oxide, amorphous silicon and
TEOS oxide are both smooth and homogeneous, whereas
doped polysilicon and columnar tungsten are rough and
N2 Flows
20sccm
N-H
N-H2
N-H
Si-H
Si-N
(main)
Si-N
10sccm
5sccm
2.5sccm
4000
3200
2400
Wavenumber (cm−1)
Absorbance [arb. units]
1600
800
Figure 7.8
FTIR analysis of silicon nitride ﬁlms de-
posited by PECVD: changing nitrogen ﬂow results in differ-
ent proportion of Si–H, Si–N and N–H bonds. Reproduced
from Biasotto et al. (2008) by permission of Elsevier
inhomogeneous. Volume inhomogeneity makes measure-
ment of thin-ﬁlm properties difﬁcult. It is usual then to
treat the ﬁlm as if it were a stack of many layers, each
with slightly different properties, for example interfacial
mixed layer, bulk of ﬁlm and surface layers modeled as
three materials each with materials constants of their own.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 81]
Advanced Thin Films
83
(a) Abrupt
(b) Interfacial layer
(c) Diffused
(d) Reacted
(e) Pitted
Figure 7.9
Possible interface structures
Thermodynamics gives hints of interface stability. A
change in Gibbs free energy is given by
G = Gproducts −Greactants
(7.1)
G is positive for a stable pair of materials. For the re-
action of titanium with silicon dioxide
Ti + SiO2 ⇒TiO2 + Si
(7.2)
the change in Gibbs free energy is G = GTiO2−
GSiO2 = (160–165) kcal = −5 kcal, indicative that the
reaction can take place. Thermodynamics, however,
is about initial and ﬁnal states, not about rates: some
thermodynamically favorable processes are so slow that
practical devices can be made. But if thermodynamics
forbids a reaction, it cannot proceed: the change in
Gibbs free energy for the cobalt/silicon dioxide reaction
is positive, and cobalt does not reduce oxide. This
means that cobalt silicide formation, Equation 7.3, is
very sensitive to the presence of native oxide, while the
titanium–silicon reaction, Equation 7.4, can proceed in
spite of a thin oxide layer:
Co + 2 Si →CoSi2
(7.3)
Ti + 2 Si →TiSi2
(7.4)
Interface types also vary signiﬁcantly. Abrupt interfaces
(Figure 7.9a) are not only idealizations but encountered
in epitaxy, and other methods, ALD, CVD, PVD, elec-
trochemical, also produce almost ideally sharp interfaces.
However, native oxides are very often encountered on
interfaces (Figure 7.9b), but in many cases those about
1 nm ﬁlms are broken or dissolved in subsequent anneal-
ing steps.
The case of silicon dioxide/copper (Figure 7.9c) shows
copper diffusion into the oxide. A silicon/titanium pair
will react and form silicide (Figure 7.9d). Many metals
do form silicides: copper silicides form at very low tem-
perature, 200–300 ◦C, nickel, cobalt and titanium at 400,
500 and 600 ◦C respectively. Tungsten, molybdenum and
tantalum will also form silicides, not all of them simple
MeSix compounds but complex mixtures of various sili-
cides, for example Me2Si5, Me2Si3, MeSi2, MeSi.
Aluminum reacts with tungsten to form Al12W and
titanium forms Al3Ti.
Aluminum
does
not
form
a
silicide.
Annealing
at 425 ◦C will dissolve native oxide, ensuring good
electrical contact. However, too much annealing will
lead to pitting: silicon is soluble in aluminum (as shown
in the Al–Si phase diagram, Figure 7.10) and an open
volume is left behind as silicon atoms migrate into the
aluminum. Aluminum, on the other hand, will diffuse
to ﬁll the space left by silicon dissolution. This leads
to the case depicted in Figure 7.9e. These aluminum
10
700
20
30
40
Weight per cent silicon
Temperature (°C)
Atomic per cent silicon
0.5
1.0
Wt-% Si
1.5
0.5
1.0
At-%Si
At-% Si
1.5
2.0
50
60
70
80
90
10
0
Al
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Si
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1500
 1430°
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
660°
11.3
(11.7)
600
500
400
577°
1.59
(1.65)
(Al)
(Al) + Si
 0.16 (0.17)
5
577.2°
577°
12.1 (12.5)
10
15
630
610
590
570
REF 31
(Al)
Si
Figure 7.10
Aluminum/silicon phase diagram. Repro-
duced from Hansen and Anderko (1958) by permission of
McGraw-Hill
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 82]
84
Introduction to Microfabrication
spikes can be micrometers deep and extend beyond the
pn junction. To prevent junction spiking, aluminum can
be alloyed with silicon: a silicon concentration of 0.5%
(wt %) will saturate aluminum at 425 ◦C, and 1% Si will
prevent silicon dissolution at 500 ◦C. The other, more
general solution is to implement a diffusion barrier, to be
discussed shortly.
7.5 Adhesion
Adhesion is a major issue in thin-ﬁlm technology. As a
rule of thumb, poor adhesion is the norm and only spe-
cial attention will lead to good adhesion. Some materials
have poor adhesion due to their chemical nature: noble
metals are noble because they do not react, therefore they
do not form bonds across interfaces. Adhesion is also
related to surface cleanliness: residues or dirt from pre-
vious steps will almost inevitably lead to poor adhesion.
Deposition process variables do play a role: in sputtering
energetic ions and atoms will knock out contamination
and loosely bound ﬁlm atoms, but in evaporation the arriv-
ing atoms do not have enough energy to displace weakly
bonded atoms.
Adhesion layers are additional ﬁlms with the role of
improving adhesion and, to a ﬁrst approximation, have
no effect on device structure or operation. Adhesion layer
ﬁlms are selected on the basis of their bond forming abili-
ties: titanium and chromium are the two most widely used
materials, and other oxide forming metals also show good
adhesion, like aluminum. The thickness of the adhesion
layer is in the range of 10 nm because it has the role
of a surface only. Adhesion layer and structural ﬁlm are
deposited immediately after each other in the same vac-
uum chamber: the freshly formed adhesion layer surface
ensures cleanliness and thus eliminates one main factor
of poor adhesion. Typical pairs of adhesion layer/noble
metal include Ti/Pt and Cr/Au (and vice versa). Adhe-
sion layers are also useful for near-noble refractory metals
like tungsten.
The ﬁrst adhesion test is the tape pull test: adhesive tape
(standard ofﬁce tape is commonly used) is attached to the
thin ﬁlm and then pulled off. If the ﬁlm peels off with the
tape, it has failed the adhesion test. More advanced tests
use quantiﬁable pull force.
7.6 Two-Layer Films
Two layers of thin ﬁlms can offer performance beneﬁts
compared to single ﬁlm, as discussed in connection with
Figure 5.19 and in connection with adhesion. There are
many other reasons for adopting two-layer ﬁlms. If very
thin ﬁlms are made, depositing two layers reduces the
possibility of defects: it would be improbable for two
defects to coincide. This is utilized in making masks for
deep etching of glass. Similarly, metal wires consisting
of two different metals can survive even if one ﬁlm is
destroyed, by for example electromigration or corrosion
(see Chapter 36). Stress compensation is often done by
inserting a thin silicon dioxide ﬁlm underneath silicon
nitride. The tensile stress in the nitride is compensated
by the compressive stress in the oxide. In optical MEMS
the mirror membrane material is chosen on mechanical
grounds, and the choice is often silicon or nitride. But in
order to have high reﬂectance, the mirror can be coated
by, for instance, gold or aluminum.
Bimorph cantilevers (of the type shown in Figure 5.18)
can be used as temperature sensors: unequal CTE leads
to cantilever bending. In IR sensors (bolometers and ther-
mopiles) there is usually a sensor layer and the absorber
layer is separate (with sometimes an extra aluminum layer
underneath to reﬂect non-absorbed light). In electrowet-
ting microﬂuidics the electrodes are covered by a hy-
drophobic thin ﬁlm.
Barriers are additional layers between two materials.
Their role is to separate adjacent layers. Many aspects
of barriers are similar to adhesion layers: barriers are
not needed for device operation as such, but their pres-
ence makes either the device fabrication process more
robust or the resulting device more stable. Barriers are
thin, like adhesion layers, with 10–100 nm as the typical
barrier thickness.
Total barriers must prevent all ﬂuxes through them,
both atom diffusion and charge carrier transport. In ﬂat-
panel displays ion barriers are needed: sodium diffusion
from glass sheet to transistors has to be prevented. When
solar cells are processed on steel sheets, iron diffusion
must be prevented. In ﬂexible electronics, gas barriers are
needed: oxygen diffusion through a polymer sheet into
active devices must be prevented. The common solution
is to deposit an inorganic ﬁlm, typically oxide or nitride,
by PECVD, ALD or spin coating. Barriers are needed on
both sides of the polymer because its permeability easily
allows oxygen diffusion through polymer sheets hundreds
of micrometers thick.
In the case of metallization, current has to ﬂow
through the barrier, but metal mixing by diffusion must
be prevented. Metallic barriers have relatively loose
requirements for resistivity (the distance is less than
100 nm). Most barrier materials have resistivities around
100–500 μohm-cm, one to two orders of magnitude
higher than conductors. While resistivity is not a problem
for barriers, contact resistivity must be low.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 83]
Advanced Thin Films
85
Pt
Ti
Si
O
N
C
100
80
60
40
20
0
Atomic %
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Sputter time (min)
Sputter time (min)
0
10
20
30
O
C
N
Si
Ti
Pt
100
80
60
40
20
0
Atomic %
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.11
Auger depth proﬁle of Pt/Ti/SiNx/Si structure: (a) as deposited; (b) oxygen annealed at 600 ◦C: interdiffusion
of ﬁlms is almost complete. Oxygen and carbon accumulations on the surface in the as-deposited sample indicate cleaning
problems. Reproduced from Kang et al. (1999) by permission of Institute of Pure and Applied Physics
The ﬁrst diffusion barriers to be implemented were TiW
ﬁlms 100 nm thick between aluminum and silicon to pre-
vent Al–Si junction spiking. Early experiments in a poor
vacuum led to the incorporation of oxygen and nitrogen,
which passivated grain boundaries without the researchers
noticing the real effect behind the barrier performance.
When the mechanism was elucidated, reactive sputtering
of TiW in an argon/nitrogen atmosphere was adopted. It
led to 10 nm grains and nitrogen incorporation at grain
boundaries, both of which led to improved barrier per-
formance. Amorphous ﬁlms are preferable as barriers and
a-WN is one candidate.
Copper metallization needs barriers between the copper
and silicon to prevent a silication reaction (formation of
for example Cu3Si). Tantalum nitride, TaN, is one possible
choice. But a barrier is needed also between the copper
and oxide because copper diffuses into the oxide. Silicon
nitride can be used.
Adhesion layer and diffusion barrier stability can be
checked by electrical and physical measurements. Sheet
resistance increase is a quick and simple measurement.
Copper resistivity is very low, ca. 2 μohm-cm, and when
the barrier fails, copper reacts to form silicides which are
more resistive. They can be identiﬁed by X-ray diffraction
but the resistance increase is indicative of silicide forma-
tion. Diode leakage at the pn junction is another quick
electrical measurement.
Auger depth proﬁling can be used to see barrier reac-
tions. Auger measurement is slow and destroys samples,
but it can be done without any sample preparation. Usu-
ally an as-deposited sample is compared to an annealed
sample(s), and barrier failure is evidenced by intermixing
of metal and silicon across the barrier. The accumulation
of material at the interfaces, and atom distributions across
the ﬁlm, are helpful in understanding the reactions behind
adhesion failure.
Note that the Auger analysis shown in Figure 7.11 does
not indicate TiO2 formation even though coexistence of
the titanium and oxygen might suggest it: Auger is about
atoms and not about compounds. XRD could show TiO2
formation by the appearance of diffraction peaks identiﬁed
as arising from TiO2.
7.7 Alloys and Doped Films
In addition to elemental metals, many alloys are routinely
used in microtechnology: amorphous TiW (about 30 at. %
titanium), SiCr and NiCr for resistors. Early integrated cir-
cuits used aluminum for metallization. Aluminum–silicon
(1% Si) was adopted, and later Al–Si was replaced by
Al–Si–Cu for improved electromigration resistance. Simi-
larly, dielectrics can be doped and alloyed. Fluorine-doped
oxide, SiOxFy, can be deposited by PECVD, but ﬁlm in-
stability limits the usable ﬂuorine concentration to about
5% (by weight), because ﬁlm stability deteriorates and
the material becomes hygroscopic. Other materials de-
posited by PECVD include carbon-doped oxide SiOxCy
and SiCxNy, which are used as intermetal dielectric layers
in multilevel metallizations.
CVD oxide can be doped by adding phosphine (PH3)
gas to the source gas ﬂow. Phosphorus-doped CVD ox-
ide, PSG (Phosphorus-doped Silica Glass), is a widely
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 84]
86
Introduction to Microfabrication
used doped ﬁlm. Phosphorus oxide is formed by CVD
and intermixed with silicon dioxide:
4 PH3 (g) + 5 O2 (g) ⇒2 P2O5 (s) + 6 H2 (g)
(7.5)
Doped oxide ﬁlms typically have about 5% dopant by
weight. Higher doping levels lead to porous, hygroscopic
material. The toxicity of PH3 (and B2H6 for BSG) needs
to be accounted for, but CVD reactors use silane, which
is a ﬂammable gas, so that the basic designs of CVD
reactors are suitable for dangerous gases. TMP (trimethyl
phosphite) and TMB (trimethyl borate) are less toxic
alternatives to hydrides.
Polycrystalline SiGe (polySiGe) can be used instead of
polysilicon. Germane, GeH4, is mixed with silane, SiH4,
and almost any ratio of silicon and germanium can be
made. Most MEMS applications use Si50Ge50 or similar.
The main beneﬁt of polySiGe is its lower stress annealing
temperature, which makes it easier to implement MEMS
structures together with ICs. SiGe can also be etched
selectively against silicon, enabling free-standing silicon
structures to be made.
Sputtering is suitable for alloy deposition. In alloy sput-
tering the ﬂux is enriched in the component with higher
sputtering yield (yields from alloys are even less accu-
rately known than yields from elemental solids; elemental
solid yields are used as approximations). The composition
of the sputtered ﬂux is given by
Cﬁlm = Ya
Yb
Xa
Xb
(7.6)
where the Xi are the concentration proportions in the tar-
get (they add to unity: Xa + Xb = 1). Because matter is
conserved, the target is enriched in the other component
Ctarget = Yb
Ya
Xa
Xb
(7.7)
A
steady-state
situation
develops
and
composition
remains unchanged. Sputtering in a reactive atmosphere,
in argon/nitrogen or argon/oxygen mixtures, results in ni-
tride or oxide ﬁlms, or stuffed ﬁlms with small amounts of
reactive impurities at grain boundaries. Molybdenum
sputtering in a high-nitrogen-content atmosphere results
in Mo2N compound formation, but a low-nitrogen
sputtering atmosphere results in ﬁlm designated as
Mo:N, nitrogen-stuffed molybdenum. It is very close
to
molybdenum
in
chemical
composition,
but
the
minuscule nitrogen has an important role: it prevents
crystallization, resulting in amorphous ﬁlms. Typical
applications of reactive sputtering are TiN, Ta2O5, ZnO,
AlN, TiW:N and WO3. Often reactively sputtered ﬁlms
are non-stoichiometric, and an annealing step (e.g., in
oxygen) is needed to improve ﬁlm quality.
The introduction of small amounts of nitrogen or oxy-
gen into an argon plasma does not appreciably change
the properties of the plasma discharge or of the growing
ﬁlm, but after a critical partial pressure is reached, the
target surface transforms into nitride or oxide, and the
plasma discharge is established at another equilibrium.
If reactive gas ﬂow is then reduced, the target remains
nitrided/oxidized, and return to initial conditions takes
places at much lower partial pressures, that is reactive
sputtering exhibits hysteresis.
7.8 Multilayer Films
The performance of simple elemental or compound ﬁlms,
with or without barriers or adhesion layers, is often not
enough, and multilayer ﬁlms are introduced to offer im-
provement.
For many generations (0.8–0.5–0.35–0.25 μm) IC
metallization was done with a Ti/TiN/Al/TiN ﬁlm stack.
Titanium acts as an adhesion layer, TiN as a diffusion
barrier, Al as a current-carrying ﬁlm and the top TiN
has the dual role of mechanically stiffening the structure
and reducing reﬂectivity (important for lithography).
Metallization reliability has been greatly improved by
adopting such multilayer metallization schemes, but
a price has been paid elsewhere: the etching of such
multilayer structures is difﬁcult.
Dielectric mirrors with λ/4 layer thicknesses for
high-reﬂectance surfaces are one example of multilayer
ﬁlms. Undoped polysilicon, oxide and nitride are the
usual ﬁlms. For visible wavelengths, layer thicknesses
around 100 nm are typical. Similar λ/4 structures are
used in thin-ﬁlm bulk acoustic resonators (TFBARs):
multilayers of W:SiO2, with thicknesses about 1.5 μm,
act as acoustic mirrors, see Figure 7.12.
In PECVD, oxynitride ﬁlms of composition SiOxNy
can be easily made. By tailoring the composition, the re-
fractive index can be varied from 1.46 to 2, covering the
full range of SiO2 and Si3N4 refractive indices. By sand-
wiching the SiOxNy ﬁlm between two ﬁlms of lower
refractive index, it acts as a waveguide (Figure 7.13).
Doping of oxide by for example phosphorus (PSG) or
germanium can also be used to tailor the refractive index,
but only over a limited range before other ﬁlm properties
change too much.
7.9 Selective Deposition
Both CVD and electrochemical processes can be used
for selective deposition, with electroless copper and CVD
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 85]
Advanced Thin Films
87
Mo
(50 nm)
ZnO
(2300 nm)
Au
(200 nm)
Ni
(50 nm)
SiO2
(1580 nm)
W
(1350 nm)
TiW
SiO2
(1580 nm)
W
(1350 nm)
TiW
(30 nm)
glass wafer
Al
(300 nm)
(30 nm)
Figure 7.12
Bulk ﬁlm acoustic resonator (FBAR) struc-
ture on a glass wafer: a piezoelectric ZnO resonator
is sandwiched between gold and aluminum electrodes.
TiW, Ni and Mo are thin adhesion promotion layers. W
and SiO2 form a λ/4 acoustic wavelength ﬁlter. Adapted
from VTT Microelectronics Annual Research Review
(2001)
0.4 μm
0.1 μm
0.5 μm
2.0 μm
SiO2
SiO2
n = 1.46
p–Si
n = 1.52
n  = 1.46
SiON
Figure 7.13
Refractive index SiO2/SiOxNy/SiO2 waveg-
uide: nf 1.46/1.52/1.46. Reproduced from Hilleringmann
and Goser (1995) by permission of IEEE
tungsten being the most studied ones. The silicon sur-
face reduction process allows selective CVD tungsten in
contact holes:
2 WF6 (g) + 3 Si (s) ⇒2 W (s) + 3 SiF4 (g)
(7.8)
This reaction is selective because SiO2 does not reduce
WF6. However, about 20 nm of silicon is consumed,
and the reaction is self-limiting: WF6 cannot diffuse
through the growing tungsten layer. Tungsten deposition
Figure 7.14
Selective deposition: problems with unequal
hole depths and spurious nucleation
is continued by silane reduction of tungsten hexaﬂuoride
on tungsten according to
WF6 (g) + 2 SiH4 (g) ⇒W (s)
+ 3 H2 (g) + 2 SiHF3 (g)
(7.9)
This reaction, however, is mass transport limited, and
difﬁcult to control. Additionally, it faces problems when
contact holes of different depths have to be ﬁlled: some
are underﬁlled, some are overﬁlled (Figure 7.14).
Plug ﬁll can be achieved by continuing deposition in
hydrogen reduction mode, Equation 5.7. There is always
the problem of selectivity loss. It is usually connected
with residues from the preceding process steps, for
instance incomplete resist removal. Selective deposition
processes are rare in volume manufacturing even though
they sometimes offer enormous simpliﬁcations in process
integration.
7.10 Reacted Films
A rather interesting class of conducting thin ﬁlms is the
silicides, compounds of silicon and metals, for example
TiSi2, CoSi2, NiSi, WSi2 and PtSi. Silicides combine
the good properties of silicon and metals, such as high-
temperature stability and low resistivity, with the lowest
values of about 15 μohm-cm. Silicide CTEs are typically
15 × 10−6/◦C. Young’s moduli for silicides are on the
order of 100 GPa.
Silicides are formed by many methods, for instance by
CVD or alloy sputtering. Tungsten silicide WSi2 is made
by CVD. Most often silicides are made by solid state re-
action of metal ﬁlm and silicon, for example Pt + Si →
PtSi. The interesting feature of reacted silicides is that
they can be made without silicide etching, in a self-aligned
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 86]
88
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.15
Silicide formation by metal/silicon reaction:
(a) metal sputtering on oxide pattern; (b) reaction at
metal/silicon interface, no reaction on oxide; (c) selective
etching of unreacted metal leaves silicide
mode, Figure 7.15. This offers possibilities in advanced
MOS transistor metallization (to be discussed in Chapter
26). The desired pattern is deﬁned in the oxide, and metal
is deposited. Metal/silicon reaction takes place during an-
nealing in those areas where metal and silicon are in
contact, but the metal does not react with the oxide. The
unreacted metal can be etched away to leave the silicide
and oxide.
The surface of the resulting silicide is approximately at
the level of the original silicon surface, and the silicide is
formed under the original surface. This volume expansion
means that reacted silicides are under compressive stress.
Various silicides and their formation methods are listed in
Table 7.3.
Titanium silicide is formed by annealing in argon or
nitrogen. Typical conditions are about 750 ◦C and 30 s in
rapid thermal annealing (RTA) equipment (see Chapter
32 for more on RTA). A simple one-step anneal in argon,
which would produce a predictable thickness of titanium
silicide, is not usable because silicide grows over oxide
laterally.
Two-step nitrogen annealing has been developed to en-
sure silicide formation without silidication over the oxide.
In nitrogen annealing, however, there is a competing reac-
tion taking place at the surface: titanium nitridation. First,
annealing has to be optimized so that the silicon/titanium
reaction (TiSi formation) at the interface is faster than the
gas phase nitridation of titanium into TiN. TiN ﬁlm is
beneﬁcial because it suppresses the lateral growth of sili-
cide over the oxide. The ﬁrst anneal results in C49 phase
TiSi2 which has fairly high resistivity, see Figure 7.16.
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
200
400
600
800
1000
0
Amorphous
TiSi2/Si
C49−TiSi2/Si
C54−TiSi2/Si
Silicide
agglomeration
Temperature (°C)
Sheet resistance (/Ω/ )
Figure 7.16
TiSi2 C49 to C54 phase transitions followed
by sheet resistance measurements. Reproduced from Mann
et al. (1995) by permission of IBM
Table 7.3
Silicide properties
Silicide
Resistivity (μohm-cm)
Formation
Selective etch
TiSi2
15–20
Ti/Si reaction at about 750 ◦C
NH4OH:H2O2
TiSi2
15–20
CVD TiCl4/SiH2Cl2/H2
–
CoSi2
15–20
Co/Si reaction at 500 ◦C
HCl:H2O2 3:1
NiSi
15–20
Ni/Si reaction at 400 ◦C
HNO3
WSi2
30
CVD WF6/SiH2Cl2 at 400 ◦C
–
PtSi
30
Pt/Si reaction
HCl:HNO3 3:1
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 87]
Advanced Thin Films
89
In the case of nitrogen annealing, we have to remove
not only unreacted metallic titanium but also TiN, so
we need to know the selectivity for both Ti:TiSi2 and
TiN:TiSi2 pairs. The thickness of titanium cannot be sim-
ply calculated from the titanium, silicon and TiSi2 den-
sities because some titanium is consumed by the TiN
formation reaction. TiSi2 thickness is also reduced by the
fact that selective etches are not inﬁnitely selective: some
TiSi2 is lost during titanium etching. If titanium thickness
is scaled down and the rest of the process is unchanged,
TiSi2 thickness will decrease more than predicted by the
simple metal-to-silicide relation because surface-nitrided
thickness is independent of titanium thickness.
The second anneal transforms silicide C49 into C54
phase which has a resistivity of about 15 μohm-cm. This
resistivity of C54 titanium silicide is lower that that
of many thin-ﬁlm metals. Anneal temperature must be
at least 700 ◦C to effectuate the phase transformation
but in practice 850 ◦C for 30 s is usually used, see
Figure 7.16. Too high an annealing temperature leads to
silicide agglomeration: the silicide balls up and the ﬁlm
breaks down.
7.11 Simulation of Deposition
Topography simulation (for deposition, etching and pol-
ishing) works on ﬂuxes and surface processes: at each
grid point the incoming ﬂux (from the ﬂuid phase) and
surface reaction probability are evaluated (with return ﬂux
of reaction products in the case of etching/polishing, or
non-sticking species in the case of deposition) to calcu-
late the new surface height. In principle the generation
of incoming species could be simulated (for instance,
ion and radical production in plasma) but this is usually
not integrated into a topography simulator; rather, it is
part of a reactor simulator. New surface points are cal-
culated and those points are connected to represent the
surface. Accuracy is increased by calculating new points
between existing points when the points are far apart
and, similarly, by eliminating points that become close to
each other.
Deposition models deﬁne atom arrival angles, and var-
ious models are available in most simulators: fully direc-
tional, hemispherical, conical, etc. Etch models include
isotropic and anisotropic models and user-deﬁnable mix-
tures of the two. Model selection is very much an em-
pirical question, and the predictive power of topography
simulation is diminished by this semiempirical tailoring
of model parameters.
The input for a typical topography simulation includes:
• surface topography already made
• material to be deposited
• deposition model (angular distribution of depositing
species)
• thickness/rate and time.
Adjustable parameters include surface diffusivity, which
determines how much lateral movement an impinging
species is allowed before it is “frozen” in the growing
ﬁlm.
The topography simulator SAMPLE 2D, developed at
the University of California, Berkeley, has been used to
obtain the proﬁles shown in Figure 7.17. The hemispher-
ical deposition model is an approximation of sputter de-
position. Trench dimensions have been varied to see the
effect of aspect ratio on step coverage. In a 1:1 aspect
ratio trench the step coverage is about 15%, but in a 2:1
aspect ratio trench only a meager 5%. A slightly sloped
proﬁle in the 2:1 trench leads to about 10% step coverage.
Note that step coverage over isolated lines is always
the same irrespective of line aspect ratio: step coverage
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 7.17
Simulation of deposition step coverage with SAMPLE 2D. Hemispherical deposition model corresponds to
sputtering. Trench widths are 1 μm and 0.5 μm, depth is 1 μm. Wall angle either 90◦or 81◦. Film thickness is 0.5 μm on
planar top surface.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 88]
90
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.18
A 3D Monte Carlo simulation of aluminum
deposition into a contact hole: (a) high rate deposition;
(b) low rate deposition. Both depositions are at the same
temperature. The simulation is 3D, but only a cut through
the contact hole centerline is shown. Reproduced from Bau-
mann and Gilmer (1995) by permission of IEEE
depends on atom arrival angles and, by deﬁnition, iso-
lated lines have large unobstructed spaces next to them,
therefore identical step coverage will result.
Monte Carlo (MC) and molecular dynamics (MD) sim-
ulations offer more realism, for example the prediction
of step coverage based on relaxation (Figure 7.18). Cal-
culations can be speeded up by treating matter as 100 ˚A
cluster spheres instead of individual atoms. Clusters, and
the thus the atoms, come to rest at stable positions, for
example when touching three other spheres. The arrival
of new material and rearrangements of already deposited
ﬁlms can be simulated simultaneously. Temperature and
sticking coefﬁcient are used as parameters for surface mo-
bility.
A 2D simulation can overestimate bottom coverage by
40%, compared to a 3D one. This is intuitively easy to
understand because 2D simulation treats recesses as in-
ﬁnitely long trenches, with very large acceptance angles
along the trenches, whereas 3D simulation takes into ac-
count the real acceptance angle.
7.11.1 Scales in simulation
The fundamental simpliﬁcation of many topography/thin-
ﬁlm simulators is the fact that surface-controlled reactions
are assumed. On a microscopic scale this is true: material
is being added to or removed from a surface, but on a
macroscopic scale this is a gross simpliﬁcation. Etching
and deposition processes can be either surface reaction
limited or mass transport process limited. Transport of
reactants from gas ﬂow to the surface (as in a CVD reac-
tor) or removal of reaction products by convection (like
removal of hydrogen bubbles that result from silicon etch-
ing) can be more critical to etching or deposition than the
surface processes. Whether surface reaction or mass trans-
port is the mechanism which determines the reaction rate
has to be studied for each process. If the reaction is trans-
port limited, then the simulation should be able to model
ﬂuid dynamics at the reactor scale, in addition to surface
processes at the micrometer scale.
7.12 Thickness Limits of Thin Films
The thinnest ﬁlms are obviously one atomic layer thick,
as evidenced by ALD and MBE deposited ﬁlms. Very thin
ﬁlms are often discontinuous and the thickness required
for continuous ﬁlms is process and material dependent.
One criterion is transparency, which translates to about
10–20 nm.
PVD and CVD techniques are suitable for ﬁlms in the
thickness range of 10–1000 nm. This is partly a practi-
cal limitation due to deposition rates, which are generally
1–100 nm/min. In many cases thicker ﬁlms are desired,
and PVD or CVD methods are too slow. In CVD silicon
epitaxy, 100 μm layer thickness is feasible because epi-
taxial growth rates can be as high as 5 μm/min and the
limit is economical, physical. For most polycrystalline and
amorphous CVD and PVD ﬁlms, however, stresses build
up to unacceptable levels for thicker ﬁlms, limiting thick-
nesses to a few micrometers. Electroplated ﬁlms can be
very thick, and through-wafer plating is fairly standard.
Deposition rates can be micrometers/minute, even though
they are usually much smaller for thinner ﬁlms.
The read/write heads of hard disk drives involve multi-
layer structures. Shown in Figure 7.19 is the ﬁlm structure
of a giant magnetoresistive (GMR) read/write head. It is
only 39 nm thick, but there are nine layers, the thinnest
1 nm CoFe
2.6 nm Cu
2.5 nm CoFe
0.8 nm Ru
2 nm CoFe
substrate
5 nm Ta
15 nm PtMn
5 nm NiFe
5 nm Ta
Figure 7.19
Thin-ﬁlm stack of a giant magnetoresistive
(GMR) read head. Redrawn after Kools et al. (2000)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 89]
Advanced Thin Films
91
of them just 0.8 nm thick. This is no laboratory curiosity,
but a volume-manufactured piece.
The minimum thickness/minimum period of multilayer
structures depends on growth process characteristics, sur-
face smoothness and the sharpness of interfaces. Interface
abruptness depends on the reactor operating principle: if
growth is dependent on gas ﬂow in the reactor, the min-
imum thickness is determined by the gas residence time
in the reactor (to be discussed in Chapter 33), which can
be fractions of seconds or tens of seconds. Flow systems,
like CVD, are thus not suitable for very thin layers. Beam
systems, evaporation, sputtering and MBE, with shutters,
are able to turn deposition off and on over a time scale
of less than a second.
Periodic multilayers have been fabricated for X-ray
and extreme ultraviolet (EUV) optics: Si/Mo and W/C
and similar light element/heavy element mirrors can have
reﬂectances of 70% at 13 nm wavelength which is be-
ing considered for future EUV lithography. Periodicities
are on the order of nanometers, identical to X-ray wave-
lengths. Surface roughness should be limited to a fraction
of ﬁlm thickness, which translates to 0.1–0.2 nm. The
number of layers can be 50 for example. Surface smooth-
ness must not be compromised as more and more layers
are added. A layer-by-layer growth mode is preferred, and
amorphous ﬁlms are preferred because of their smooth-
ness. Thickness control is important, from layer to layer
and day to day.
Additionally, reactions between the layers have to be
prevented. Molybdenum and silicon form silicide, MoSi2,
and its formation must be prevented. Sputtering is a room
temperature process, and silicide formation thermodynam-
ically should not take place. However, sputtering is a
high-energy process, and on an atomic level the local tem-
perature may rise, and energetic bombardment will knock
atoms forward, enhancing the mixing of layers. If sili-
cide is formed, its volume is about 10% less than that
of molybdenum and silicon combined, and this needs to
be accounted for. Alternatively, silicide formation must
be prevented. Boron carbide has been tested as a bar-
rier. The structure is shown in Figure 7.20. Layer thick-
nesses were extrapolated from bulk sputtering rates, which
introduces some inaccuracy. A reﬂection of 70% was
achieved at 13.5 nm (wavelength chosen for future EUV
lithography systems).
ZrO2/HfO2
multilayers have been
used in order
to improve leakage currents in deposited capacitor
dielectrics. These polycrystalline multilayers have been
termed nanolaminates to separate them from epitaxial
superlattices. The hardness of the TiN/AlN multilayer,
1800
on
the
Knoop
hardness
scale,
is
practically
the average of TiN and AlN hardnesses for thicker
B4C, 0.25 nm
Mo, 2.25 nm
B4C, 0.4 nm
Si, 4.37 nm
Figure 7.20
A single four-layer element of a periodic
EUV multilayer mirror for 13.5 nm lithography. The four-
layer structure is repeated 50 times, to a total thickness of
about 350 nm. Adapted from Bajt (2002)
multilayers, but when periodicity is reduced below
10 nm, the hardness increases to 4000.
7.13 Exercises
1. Which method would you use to measure the following
properties of PECVD silicon nitride ﬁlm: (a) deposi-
tion rate; (b) uniformity; (c) stress; (d) stoichiometry;
(e) structure; (f) step coverage?
2. What are the resistivities of the titanium silicide C49
and C54 phases (Figure 7.15)?
3. The speed of sound in ZnO is 5700 m/s. What is the
intended operating frequency for the TFBAR shown in
Figure 7.11?
4. A periodic lattice of W and C is used as a λ/4
X-ray mirror. What layer thicknesses should be used
for 100 eV X-rays?
5. If 20 nm of nickel reacts with an overabundance of
silicon, how thick a layer of NiSi will be formed?
Densities: Si, 2.3 g/cm3; Ni, 8.9 g/cm3; NiSi, 7.2 g/cm3.
6. CoSi2 is formed by a cobalt thin-ﬁlm reaction with
silicon. What is the position of the CoSi2 surface rel-
ative to the original silicon surface? Densities: Co,
8.9 g/cm3; CoSi2, 5.3 g/cm3.
7. Oxygen is soluble in titanium up to 34 at. %. How thick
must a silicon dioxide ﬁlm be in order to be dissolved
by a titanium ﬁlm 50 nm thick? The density of titanium
is 4.5 g/cm3 and that of silicon dioxide 2.3 g/cm3.
8. Draw a deposited ﬁlm proﬁle over given topography
for:
(a) sputtered aluminum, 300 nm thick
(b) CVD TEOS, 0.25 μm thick
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 90]
92
Introduction to Microfabrication
(c) PECVD oxide, 0.2 μm thick
(d) LPCVD polysilicon, 100 nm thick.
0.5 μm
0.5 μm
9. TiAl3 is formed in a reaction between aluminum and
titanium ﬁlms. What will happen to the volume of
the metal line? Densities: Al, 2.7 g/cm3; Ti, 4.5 g/cm3;
TiAl3, 3.35 g/cm3.
10. How would you measure the following ﬁlm properties:
(a) crystal size in poly-SiGe
(b) carbon content in SiOxCy
(c) stoichiometry of TiSi2
(d) surface roughness of polysilicon
(e) resistivity of electroplated copper?
References and Related Reading
Bajt, S. (2002) Improved reﬂectance and stability of Mo-Si
multilayers, Opt. Eng., 41, 1797–1804.
Baumann, H.F. and G.H. Gilmer (1995) 3D modeling of sputter
and reﬂow processes for interconnect metals, International
Electron Devices Meeting, p. 89.
Biasotto, C. et al. (2008) Silicon nitride thin ﬁlms deposited by
electron cyclotron resonance plasma enhanced chemical va-
por deposition for micromechanical applications, Thin Solid
Films, 516, 7777–7782.
Chou, B.C.S. et al. (1997) Fabrication of low-stress dielectric
thin-ﬁlm for microsensor applications, IEEE Electron Device
Lett., 18, 599.
Cote, D.R. et al. (1995) Low-temperature CVD processes and
dielectrics, IBM J. Res. Dev., 39, 437.
Fang, W. and C.-Y. Lo (2000) On the thermal expansion co-
efﬁcients of thin ﬁlms, Sens. Actuators, 84, 310.
Hansen, M. and K. Anderko (1958) Constitution of binary
alloys, 2nd edn, McGraw-Hill.
Hilleringmann, U. and K. Goser (1995) Optoelectronic system
integration on silicon: waveguides, photodetectors, and VLSI
CMOS circuits on one chip, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
42, 841.
Kang, U. et al. (1999) Pt/Ti thin ﬁlm adhesion on SiNx/Si sub-
strates, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 38, 4147.
Kools, J.C.S. et al. (2000) Deposition technology for thin ﬁlm
magnetic recording heads reader fabrication, Thin Solid
Films, 377–378, 705–711.
Mann, R.W. et al. (1995) Silicides and local interconnections
for high-performance VLSI applications, IBM J. Res. Dev.,
39, 403.
Martinu, L. and D. Poitras (2000) Plasma deposition of opti-
cal ﬁlms and coatings: a review, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A18,
2619–2645.
Murarka, S.P. (1993) Metallization, Theory and Practice for
VLSI and ULSI, Butterworth–Heinemann.
Pilvi, T. et al. (2008) Atomic layer deposition of MgF2 thin
ﬁlms using TaF5 as a novel ﬂuorine source, Chem. Mater.,
20, 5023–5028.
Piramanayagam, S.N. (2007) Perpendicular recording media
for hard disk drives, J. Appl. Phys., 102, 01301.
Raaijmakers, I.J. et al. (1990) Microstructure and barrier
properties of reactively sputtered Ti-W nitride, J. Electron.
Mater., 19, 1221.
Rossnagel, S.M. et al. (1996) Thin, high atomic weight refrac-
tory ﬁlm deposition for diffusion barrier, adhesion layer and
seed layer applications, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B14, 1819.
Thornton, J.A. (1986) The microstructure of sputter-deposited
coatings, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A4, (6), 3059.
Vallat-Sauvain, E et al. (2000) Evolution of microstructure in
microcrystalline silicon prepared by very high frequency
glow-discharge using hydrogen dilution, J. Appl. Phys., 87,
3137 . . .
Wang, S.-Q. and J. Schlueter (1996) Film property comparison
of Ti/TiN deposited by collimated and uncollimated physical
vapor deposition techniques, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B14, (3),
1837.
Wang, S.-Q. et al. (1996) Step coverage comparison of Ti/TiN
deposited by collimated and uncollimated physical vapor de-
position techniques, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B14, (3), 1846.
Wang, Y.Y. et al. (1998) Synthesis and characterization of
highly textured polycrystalline AlN/TiN superlattice coat-
ings, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A16, 3341.
Xu, Y.P. et al. (1992) A study of sputter deposited silicon ﬁlms,
J. Electron. Mater., 21, 373.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 91]
8
Pattern Generation
A pattern generation tool transcribes the chip design data
into a physical structure. It must be able to expose sin-
gle pixels to create all possible designs, and expose them
fairly fast since designs can consist of millions of pix-
els. Sometimes these patterns are written directly on the
wafer in question, and the method is called direct write,
but more often these patterns are written on a glass plate
to produce photomasks for optical lithography. UV illumi-
nation through a photomask will expose all the patterns
simultaneously, enabling very fast patterning, once the
mask has been written.
Direct write is akin to writing with a pen: it is easy
to write short notes, and you can change your mind on
the ﬂy to create new motifs. However, if you want to
write a longer story, it can certainly be done, but it will
take time. And if you want to make copies of your work,
each copy takes the same time to write as the ﬁrst one.
With photomasks the time to make the ﬁrst pattern is the
same as in direct writing, but the subsequent copies can
be made very quickly. However, if you want to change
something, you need to create another original pattern.
So optical lithography is akin to a printing press, with
the same strengths and weaknesses as printing, compared
to handwriting.
8.1 Pattern Generators
The ﬁrst pattern generator consisted of a mechanical stage,
aperture blades and a UV lamp (Figure 8.1). The wafer
is covered with photoresist, a layer of photosensitive
polymer. Resists come in two ﬂavors, like photographic
ﬁlms: positive and negative. With positive resists the ex-
posed areas will become soluble in developer, while with
negative resists the exposed areas are crosslinked and
become insoluble. To create a pixel, aperture blades are
sized and positioned, followed by the exposing ﬂash. Af-
ter mechanical movement of the stage, the aperture sizing
stage movement
illumination from Hg-lamp
exposed resist
aperture blade
Figure 8.1
Optomechanical
pattern
generator:
stage
movement, aperture blade and ﬂash bulb expose the pattern
pixel by pixel
operation and ﬂashing are repeated, with an operating
frequency of about 1 Hz. This method was employed in
the early era of microfabrication when linewidths were
above 10 μm.
Today, if simple and fairly large patterns are needed,
laser printers can be used to write the patterns. They are,
after all, designed to write arbitrary shapes. While of-
ﬁce laser printers can produce lines in the 100 μm range,
more advanced laser writers are used in the printed circuit
board industry, enabling linewidths down to a few tens
of micrometers.
Dedicated laser mask enable submicron linewidths to be
written. Even smaller features can be exposed by focused
electron or ion beams. The beam can be scanned very
quickly, up to 500 MHz, but modern integrated circuits
can consist of billions of pixels, and writing times can be
days for advanced chip designs.
Electron and laser beam systems are the standard tools
for pattern generation. We will ﬁrst discuss issues relevant
to both, such as how to break up a complex chip design
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 92]
94
Introduction to Microfabrication
into a form that can be exposed pixelwise, and how to
stitch together large patterns from very small pixels.
First, the design data has to be fractured to suit the
beam writer. All patterns must be broken down to squares
or rectangles. This generates enormous data ﬁles: even a
fairly simple chip design can be gigabytes after fracturing.
Integrated circuits are amenable to a Manhattan street plan
of x and y coordinates, while for instance CDs require a
spiraling “street plan.” Pattern generators exist speciﬁcally
designed for both basic types. A fractured pattern using
an xy-oriented machine is shown in Figure 8.2. Note that
circular and wedge shapes are approximated. If the beam
writer has a small address grid, and a small spot size, this
approximation can be made increasingly accurate but at
the expense of writing time. If the pixel edge is halved,
then the number of pixels to be drawn is quadrupled,
meaning that writing time is also fourfold.
In addition to spot size, it is important to consider the
address grid of the mask writer. The address grid deter-
mines how small increments can be drawn. While a beam
spot is for example 100 nm, an address grid can be for
example 25 nm. It is determined by stage mechanics and
the laser interferometer measurement system.
The simplest writing strategy is raster scan: the beam
scans all over the plate and at each spot an exposure/no-
exposure decision is made. This works ﬁne for dense
patterns, but if the design consists of a few patterns far
apart, the raster scan wastes time. On the other hand,
writing time is independent of design.
Vector scanning enables skipping of empty (non-
exposed) spaces, thus faster writing, at the expense
of system complexity: managing gigabytes of data at
100 MHz data rate is a formidable task. Position accuracy
is also more difﬁcult to realize than in a raster scan:
rapid sweeping from ﬁeld to ﬁeld is not as accurate as
step by step from pixel to neighboring pixel. Raster scan
and vector scan are compared in Figure 8.3.
Basically a single shot can expose a single pixel, but
in practice the minimum pixel is exposed by for example
Figure 8.2
Circular shape reconstructed as rectangles
ready for pixelwise writing
Figure 8.3
Raster scan and vector scan: in raster scan
every pixel is scanned while in vector scan empty spaces
are skipped
5 × 5 shots. There are several reasons for this. First of all,
edge acuity can be much better if multiple, overlapping
shots are used. In the case of a single shot per pixel,
there is the danger of statistical errors: a line would be
discontinuous if a single pixel were exposed incorrectly.
The ultimate resolution of electron or laser beam writ-
ing is only applicable to a small area, for example a ﬁeld
of 250 × 250 μm2. This area can be scanned electromag-
netically (e-beam) or acousto-optically (laser beam). If a
larger area needs to be drawn, additional movements must
be introduced. The stage scan is a mechanical movement,
controlled by an interferometer. Patterns at adjacent ﬁelds
must be accurately stitched together at intersections. For
instance, the stitching error of subﬁelds can be made as
small as 6 nm in the x-direction, but not in the y-direction,
because the former depends on beam scanning but the
latter on mechanical stage movement
Writing time can be limited by several factors which
depend on pixel size (d), total area (A), required exposure
dose (resist sensitivity, S), beam current (I), electronic
scan frequency (f ), mechanical scan speed (v), electronic
scan length (l) and mechanical scan length (L). First of
all, the area that needs to be exposed by the current in
use gives time τ1:
τ1 = AS/I
(8.1)
Exposed pixel size d affects writing time via τ2: when the
same area is broken up into smaller pixels, more shots are
needed. If the beam writer’s electronic scan frequency can
be increased, τ2 can be decreased:
τ2 = A
fd2
(8.2)
The wafer stage mechanical movement time must be con-
sidered for a complete system, which gives τ3:
τ3 = A/Lv
(8.3)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 93]
Pattern Generation
95
Assuming the following parameters
A = 10 cm2
f = 100 MHz
d = 100 nm
L = 10 cm
l = 250 μm
v = 10 cm/s
and calculating for three different resist sensitivities (1, 10
and 100 μC/cm2), we get τ1 exposure times of 100, 1000
and 10 000 s, respectively. Mechanical movements are not
limiting (400 s), but a 100 nm pixel size at 100 MHz re-
sults in 10 000 s for τ2. Therefore, resist choice is not very
critical because τ2 is the limiting time. A rough estimate
for mask writing time in this case is 3 hours.
8.2 Electron Beam Lithography
In this section we will study issues speciﬁc to electron
beam writing. Electron beam spots in the 5 nm range
are available. This is not limited by the wavelength of
electrons (λ = 8 pm for 25 kV) but rather by electron
source size and electron optics aberrations and diffraction
for highly collimated beams. Beam current cannot be
increased indeﬁnitely because of Coulomb repulsion.
Microampere currents are already quite intense, and 2 μA
beam current will lead to spreading of 100 nm because
of interaction aberration.
One of the distinguishing features of electrons is that
electrons are light mass objects and when they hit photore-
sist with high energy (typically 10–50 kV) they scatter.
Even though the beam spot is very small, scattering broad-
ens the beam inside the resist and the exposed area is
much larger than the beam spot size (Figure 8.4).
As can be seen, thinner resist would be beneﬁcial
because the beam will traverse it with less scattering.
However, thin resist is problematic in further processing
because it does not block ion implants or withstand harsh
etching conditions. Thin resists are also more likely
to be defective, with pinholes, lowering yield. Higher
beam energy will help: the traversed electrons scatter
less if they are energetic. However, these high-energy
electrons do not increase resist exposure directly in
proportion to their energy, therefore high energy is not a
straightforward way to improve resolution.
Electrons scatter both forward and backward. These
high-energy electrons are, however, not the major compo-
nent of resist exposure: most of the resist exposure comes
from low-energy secondary electrons which have been
created when the beam slows down. These electrons have
energies less than 400 eV and mostly less than 200 eV.
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
10 kV
50 kV
10 kV
50 kV
Figure 8.4
The effects of resist thickness and electron
beam acceleration voltage on beam scattering and resolu-
tion. Note that almost all electrons traverse the resist and
penetrate the wafer
The corresponding travel distances of such electrons in
the resist are 10 nm and 5 nm, respectively. Therefore the
minimum exposed size is limited to about 10 nm. But
there are many other factors contributing to ﬁnal feature
size, for example the development of exposed patterns
(the analogy to photography is obvious: it is not only the
quality of the negative that affects print quality, but also
all the other steps, e.g., development time, concentration
and temperature, which make a contribution).
An approximation to effective beam diameter in resist
is given by
deff (nm) = 0.9 ×
 t
V
1.5
(8.4)
where resist thickness t is in nm and voltage in kV. Ideal
photoresist should remain unaffected by the beam until
a threshold dose is delivered, and then be fully exposed.
Such an idealized resist response is shown as the box-
like curve in Figure 8.5 (negative resist is assumed, i.e.,
exposed resist determines the line). Below threshold dose
no pattern is formed, and above it a line of constant width
is produced. Real resists and lithographic processes have
ﬁnite contrast. Because of scattering and natural variabil-
ity, some parts of the resists are exposed and a narrow
line is formed at very low dose, and subsequently wider
lines as the dose increases.
Some electrons experience backscattering (large-angle
scattering) with about micrometer range. Exposure dose
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 94]
96
Introduction to Microfabrication
ideal resist
real resist
exposure dose
linewidth
Figure 8.5
Dose–linewidth relationship in e-beam expo-
sure
thus depends on the neighboring structures. This is known
as the proximity effect, see Figure 8.6.
The proximity effect can be combated by biasing struc-
tures smaller or larger so that the ﬁnal pattern is of the
desired size and shape. This is, however, a formidable
task because there are a myriad of possible combinations
of shapes in microstructures. It also slows down writing
considerably, because proximity correction means more
complex shapes, as will be discussed in Chapter 11, in
the context of optical proximity correction.
To determine how many electrons or photons are
needed to expose a pixel, we need to understand the
sensitivity of photoresists (yes, they are called photore-
sists also in the case of electron beam lithography).
There are dozens of different formulations for e-beam
resists, some of which are listed in Table 8.1 below.
There is an unfortunate inverse relationship between the
resist sensitivity (measured as charge per area needed to
expose it) and the minimum linewidth.
This sensitivity–linewidth tradeoff can be gauged as
follows. Let us assume 100 nm by 100 nm pixels and re-
sist sensitivity of 0.3 μC/cm2. The number of electrons
needed to expose the pixels is then 186. This is precious
few electrons, and statistical variations are great. In order
to write 10 × 10 nm pixels, two electrons would sufﬁce,
but in practice less sensitive resist is used to average out
random variation.
While electron beam lithography is the workhorse of
nano- and microfabrication, it has many difﬁculties. The
slow writing speed for large areas is a major drawback,
but because there really are no competing technologies in
the 100 nm feature size range, electron beam writing must
be employed. There are also challenges in meeting all
the criteria simultaneously: for example, pattern density
affects local heating by electron-deposited energy, and
the conductivity of the substrate affects charging, which
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.6
Proximity effect: electron backscattering at re-
sist/substrate interface leads to increased exposure in the
space between the lines. Dose thus depends on the neigh-
boring structures
can lead to the deﬂection of electrons. Despite all these
problems, e-beam lithography is widely practiced as a re-
search tool for writing test structures and devices, and
in the production of photomasks for optical lithography.
There are also some device manufacturing applications,
in devices where very small series are produced. In those
cases the cost of a mask is not spread over many devices,
and direct writing does make economical sense.
Table 8.1
E-beam resists: sensitivity vs. feature size
Resist
Sensitivity
Beam energy
Minimum feature
(μC/cm2)
(kV)
size (nm)
PMMA
300
50
10
EBR-9
25
50
200
AZ5206
6
10
250
COP
0.3
10
1000
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 95]
Pattern Generation
97
8.3 Laser Pattern Generators
Laser beam pattern generators work on similar principles
as e-beam systems, but there are a few important differ-
ences which make laser beam writing faster and cheaper.
First of all, laser writing is done in room ambient, while e-
beam systems operate in vacuum. The costs of the vacuum
vessel and pumps are eliminated, and temperature control
is easier in room ambient than in vacuum. Delicate me-
chanical movements of the stage are difﬁcult to implement
in vacuum, when it is necessary to minimize particles si-
multaneously. The mechanics of a laser pattern generator
are shown in Figure 8.7. Mechanical movements are mea-
sured by interferometric techniques, and stage positioning
uses piezoelectric translators for achieving nanometer po-
sition resolution.
Because laser beams use visible and UV wavelengths, a
wide variety of photoresists developed for optical lithog-
raphy are available to laser beam writing. Laser beam
systems can write for example 0.6 μm minimum lines at
1 cm2/min and 6 μm lines at 100 cm2/min. Laser pattern
generators are used whenever their linewidth resolution is
adequate, and only when lines smaller than laser resolu-
tion are needed are the slower, more expensive e-beam
systems used. In a CMOS process some mask levels may
be written by e-beam and some by laser systems. Laser
writing completely dominates mask making for ﬂat-panel
displays and other large-area applications, which, usually,
work with larger linewidths.
8.4 Photomask Fabrication
Instead of directly writing millions of pixels on a wafer,
beam writers can be used to write photomasks for optical
lithography. Photomasks are glass plates with chromium
interfero-
meter 
mirror
piezo- 
translator
x-stage
y-stage
laser beam
piezo translator
lens
mask plate
feedback
circuitry
vacuum chuck
Figure 8.7
Mechanics of the laser mask writer stage
Figure 8.8
A 7 inch photomask: a chromium layer
100 nm thick on a glass plate holds the desired patterns
layers (about 100 nm thick) on them (Figure 8.8). The
beam writer exposes the resist on the mask plate, in iden-
tical fashion to writing patterns on a wafer (just replace
the wafer in Figure 8.1 by a mask plate).
Optical lithography with photomasks is the dominant
patterning technology because optical exposure is fast:
illumination through a photomask exposes up to 1010
pixels in less than 1 second. The enormous throughput ad-
vantage of optical exposure warrants the making of mask
plates, which can be costly: a set of 15 plates (needed for
1 μm CMOS processes) costs $15 000; and an advanced
45 nm process requires $1 million mask sets ($30 000 dol-
lars each for 35 plates).
Optical lithography can be done with reduction optical
systems (to be discussed in Chapter 10), which means that
the patterns on the mask are larger than ﬁnal structures
on the wafer. This is a great relief for mask makers: the
100 nm ﬁnal size on a wafer corresponds to 400 nm on
the mask when 4× reduction optics is used. This is a
major beneﬁt of optical lithography compared to X-ray
lithography and nanoimprint (Figure 1.9) which require
the mask pattern size to be the same as the ﬁnal pattern
size on the wafer.
Soda lime glass plates are used for larger linewidths
(>3 μm) and quartz (fused silica) is the material of
choice for micron and submicron work. This is for both
thermal and optical reasons: making smaller patterns calls
for shorter wavelength exposure and quartz transmission
in ultraviolet wavelengths is superior to soda lime
(Figure 8.9). The mask plate heats up during exposure,
and thermal expansion needs to be addressed. Quartz
has a much smaller coefﬁcient of thermal expansion
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 96]
98
Introduction to Microfabrication
150
0
2
3
4
1
25
50
75
100
200
250
300
l (nm)
 t (%)
350
400
450
Figure 8.9
Optical transmission of various glasses 1 mm
thick: 1, ultrapure quartz; 2, common quartz; 3, very pure
soda lime glass; 4, common soda lime. Reproduced from
Scholze (1977), with kind permission of Springer
than soda lime, therefore it maintains its dimensions
more accurately.
Photomasks with chrome-on-glass also go by the name
of binary masks, because there is either transmission
or blockage of light, but nothing else. In a phase shift
mask (PSM), the phase of the light is manipulated while
traversing the mask. PSMs will be discussed in Chapter
10. If the mask is mostly covered by chrome, with only
a small percentage of transparent area, it is said to be
a dark-ﬁeld (DF) mask (as in Figure 8.8); if it is mostly
transparent, with only a small percentage of chrome, it
is designated a light-ﬁeld (LF) mask, also known as a
bright ﬁeld (BF) mask.
The processes needed to fabricate masks is shown in the
process ﬂow below. In addition to pattern writing, there
are many other process steps, especially etching, which
will affect the ﬁnal pattern quality. There are also many
inspection, measurement and repair steps, which, in fact,
make up a major part of mask price.
Process ﬂow for mask fabrication
1. Mask blank preparation
deposition of chrome on quartz
resist application
2. Pattern writing
e-beam or laser
3. Pattern processing
resist development
chrome etching
resist stripping
4. Metrology
CD (critical dimension) control
5. Inspection for pattern integrity
defects (in chrome)
pattern ﬁdelity (shape and position)
6. Cleaning
particle removal
7. Repair
focused ion beam etching and/or deposition
8. Final defect inspection
Adapted from Skinner et al. (1997)
8.5 Photomask Inspection, Defects
and Repair
Photomask fabrication requires, in addition to scanning
beam equipment, a repertoire of inspection and repair
equipment. Three basic control measurements for masks
are linewidth, position and defects. Linewidth is a local
measurement over a test structure pattern. With linewidths
in the micrometer range, measurement should be able to
discern about 10 nm. Pattern position is a global mea-
surement and it is usually ﬁxed to a mask writing tool,
controlled by a stage interferometer, and measured to
about 10 nm accuracy over a mask plate size of 10 cm.
Two basic inspection strategies are used: optical inspec-
tion combined with comparison to a known perfect mask
plate (known as die-to-die) or comparison between design
data and the ﬁnished mask plate (die-to-data). Defects on
the mask are fatal because they will be reproduced on
all the wafers. Defects can be classiﬁed into two broad
categories of soft defects and hard defects. Soft defects
are mainly particles or resist residues that can be cleaned
away. Hard defects are permanent spots or scratches in
chrome or in quartz.
Defects come in many guises, but from a repair point
of view there are two grand classes of defects:
• missing chrome
• extra chrome.
Missing chrome calls for a deposition process. Usually a
metallic layer is deposited (e.g., tungsten). Extra chrome
calls for an etching process. These repair processes will
be discussed in Chapter 24 on serial microprocessing.
The geometric/topological classiﬁcation of defects (see
Figure 8.10 below) is as follows:
• protrusion (extra chrome attached to a feature)
• intrusion (partial loss of chrome in a feature)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 97]
Pattern Generation
99
bridging
protrusion
intrusion
necking
pinhole
pinspot
Figure 8.10
Mask defects: extra chrome (protrusion,
bridging, pinspot) and missing chrome (necking, intrusion
and pinhole). If defect is very small, it may cosmetic only
because it does not print in lithography. Redrawn after
ref. Skinner
• bridge (chrome connecting two features)
• necking (discontinuity in a line)
• pinhole (hole in a chrome)
• pinspot (extra chrome on a light-ﬁeld area).
From yield and reliability points of view not all defects
are equal. Defect must be understood as a very broad
term: anything that prints on the wafer or changes critical
dimension by more than 10% counts as a defect. This can
be a light transmission error (e.g., roughness in quartz),
a pattern error, a stochastic scratch or an undulating
line edge.
Defect size is important: not all defects are able to de-
stroy the functionality of the chip. As a rule of thumb,
defects greater than one-third of the minimum linewidth
are prospective “killer defects.” Smaller ones will not
print on the wafer in the lithography process.
Optical defects not related to written patterns include:
• transmission variability in glass (LF areas)
• transmission variability in chrome (DF areas).
Transmission defects are subtle and, even if detected, their
repair is not straightforward. Phase shift mask making is
very expensive partly because of difﬁculties in the inspec-
tion and repair or transmission defects.
8.6 Photomasks as Tools
Photomasks are used to make devices, but they also serve
as tools for process and device engineers. As shown in
Figure 8.11
Test structure for lithography and etching:
the central line is surrounded by dark-ﬁeld and light-ﬁeld
areas, and it is found as an isolated line as well as an array
line. In an ideal case the linewidth should be independent
of its neighborhood
Figure 1.4, there are not only device chips on the wafer,
but test chips as well. Process engineers want to see the
resolution of the optical lithography process, and this is
checked by the linewidth test structures. Process robust-
ness is tested by implementing it on photomask structures
which span a range around the baseline fabrication pro-
cess. For example, if the design linewidth is 3 μm, test
structures may span the range 1–10 μm. The same applies
for spaces between the lines. Linewidth is dependent on
the neighboring structures, therefore test structures should
include lines of different kinds: isolated, nested, dense and
sparse, as shown in Figure 8.11.
Device
engineers
design
different
geometries
of
devices, for example rectangular and octagonal inductor
coils, or straight and meandering resistors. For transistor
parameter
extraction
a
set
of
test
transistors
with
dimensions of, say, 2, 3, 5, 10, 20 and 50 μm is used.
8.6.1 Photomask requirements
Because of high cost and long delivery times, it is im-
portant to specify masks correctly, and not to overpay
for them. Not all lithography steps are equal: some are
critical for device performance and the highest possible
mask quality must be speciﬁed. In CMOS this applies to
the gate and contact level masks. The metallization lev-
els are usually less demanding, and the masks can be
made to looser speciﬁcations. And there are levels with
even looser requirements: bonding pads for wire bonding
or ﬂuidic ports are tens or hundreds of micrometers in
size. They can be realized by even cheaper masks. Many
packaging applications require compatibility with wafer
processing, but make do with cheaper masks. As stated
before, the various inspection and measurement steps take
up a major part of photomask price. Mask buyers can
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 98]
100
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.12
Thick photoresist patterning: with chrome mask (a) and with plastic mask (b). Reproduced from Lee et al.
(2001), with kind permission of Springer Science and Business Media
specify defects, and accept imperfect plates with some
defects which have been classiﬁed as non-fatal.
In a university lab, mask costs can be brought down by
adopting completely different technologies for different
mask levels. The cost of laser-printed overhead trans-
parencies is next to nothing, but they are suitable for
structures in the size range of hundreds of micrometers.
Polymer-based masks suffer from wear and tear and from
dimensional instability. It also takes some effort to insert
plastic masks into a mask aligner designed for chrome-
on-glass plates.
In addition to linewidth, other issues need to be
addressed in selecting mask technology. Sometimes
large-linewidth structures require very smooth edges, for
example some optical devices. And if rounded structures
are needed, the number of polygons used to approximate
circular shapes becomes important. These issues are
depicted in Figure 8.12, showing the difference between
chrome masks and plastic masks. Additionally, plastic
masks may look opaque to the eye but still leak light in
the UV, rendering them unusable, especially for thick
resists which require long exposure times.
8.7 Other Pattern Generation Methods
There are needs for masks at different linewidths and cost
levels. There is the consideration between mask making
and direct writing when production runs are small. Alter-
native pattern generation methods have been devised, but
so far they have not become competitive with e-beam and
laser beam methods for mainstream applications.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 99]
Pattern Generation
101
One alternative technology is based on SLM (Spatial
Light
Modulators)
technology,
namely
arrays
of
micromirrors made by microfabrication. They can be
used as “programmable masks” or “virtual masks” which
are projected on a wafer. Applications of this approach
are shown Figures 23.2 and 39.21, and the actual
micromirrors are detailed out in Figures 29.25 and 39.21.
All the above methods are general purpose pattern gen-
eration methods: they can produce any shape the designer
has imagined. There are also many methods to produce
certain shapes very effectively. For instance, interference
lithography (holographic lithography) is based on inter-
secting laser beams, and it is a very convenient way to
produce regular arrays of lines and spaces, for example
optical gratings. Di-block copolymers are systems that
will phase segregate and end up, for example, with dot
and hole patterns. Other shapes can be made, but each pat-
tern needs a different block copolymer. Microbeads can
form regular hexagonal arrays during liquid drying and
have been used to make photonic crystals. Electrochemi-
cal etching of aluminum can result in a regular hexagonal
lattice of holes. Some of these special techniques will be
discussed in Chapter 23.
8.8 Exercises
1. How far will (a) a 10 keV e-beam penetrate into silicon
and (b) a 50 keV beam into quartz?
2. What is the difference between writing masks and writ-
ing directly on silicon from the viewpoint of an elec-
tron beam writer?
3. What is the smallest possible feature size that can be
written with a 50 keV electron beam?
4. What is the photomask writing time for a gigabit circuit
with 1 000 000 000 contact holes of 90 nm diameter,
when the incrementing rate is 500 MHz and the mask
plate area 10 cm by 10 cm? The photomask is four
times the ﬁnal size.
5. If a 7 inch mask plate for 1× lithography with
1 μm linewidth is written by e-beam, what is the
limiting process and what would be an estimate of the
writing time?
6. How is electron beam system throughput affected if
5× masks are drawn, instead of 1× masks?
7. Calculate the number of quanta needed to expose re-
sists: electron beam resist sensitivity is 10 μC/cm2, and
optical resist sensitivity 10 mJ/cm2.
8. Use a laser printer to make simple line/space test
structures with different resolutions (say 600 dpi and
1200 dpi) and check by microscope for linewidths,
line edge roughness and reproducibility.
References and Related Reading
Allen, P.C. (2002) Laser scanning for semiconductor mask pat-
tern generation, Proc. IEEE, 90, 1653.
Eynon, B. and B. Wu (2005) Photomask fabrication technol-
ogy, McGraw-Hill.
Hahmann, P. et al. (2007) High resolution variable-shaped
beam direct write, Microelectron. Eng., 84, 774–778.
Kawano, H. et al. (2003) Development of an electron-beam
lithography system for high accuracy masks, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., B21, 823–827.
Lee, L.J. et al. (2001) Design and fabrication of CD-like mi-
croﬂuidic platforms for diagnostics: polymer-based micro-
fabrication, Biomed. Microdevices, 3, 339–351.
McCord, M.A. and M.J. Rooks (1997) Electron beam lithogra-
phy, in P. Rai-Choudhury (ed.) Handbook of Microlithog-
raphy, Micromachining and Microfabrication, SPIE.
Meyer, A.R., A.M. Clark and C.T. Culbertson (2006) The effect
of photomask resolution on separation efﬁciency on micro-
fabricated devices, Lab Chip, 6, 1355–1361.
Pease, F.R. (2005) Maskless lithography, Microelectron. Eng.,
78–79, 381–392.
Pugh, G. et al. (1998) Impact of high resolution lithography
on IC mask design, Custom Integrated Circuits Conference,
IEEE, p. 149.
Rizvi, S. (ed.) (2005) Handbook of Photomask Manufactur-
ing Technology, CRC Press.
Scholze, H. (1977) Glas-Natur, Struktur und Eigenschaften,
2nd edn, Springer.
Skinner, J.G. et al. (1997) Photomask fabrication procedures
and limitations, in P. Rai-Choudhury (ed.) Handbook of Mi-
crolithography, Micromachining and Microfabrication,
SPIE.
Wu, B. (2006) Photomask plasma etching: a review, J. Vac.
Sci. Technol., B24, 1–15.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 100]
9
Optical Lithography
Optical lithography, also known as UV lithography or
photolithography, uses UV lamps or UV lasers to expose
photosensitive ﬁlm through photomasks. Chromium pat-
terns on a photomask block light at selected areas, forming
patterns in the photosensitive ﬁlm (which is called pho-
toresist for historical reasons). Once a photomask with
millions of pixels has been written, photoresist can be
exposed very quickly: typical exposure times are on the
order of 1 second.
After a photoresist pattern is thus formed, various pos-
sibilities are open: for instance, the open areas of the
underlying material can be etched away, in the case of sili-
con dioxide, by hydroﬂuoric acid (Figure 9.1). Photoresist
is removed after etching. Wafer processing then contin-
ues with thin-ﬁlm deposition, doping or plating steps,
and new lithographic steps. The successive layers have
to be aligned to each other, so that desired contacts are
formed. Overlay of successive layers is a critical factor
in lithography.
There are three rather different elements in the optical
lithography process:
1. Optics: radiation generation, propagation, diffraction,
interference.
2. Chemistry: photochemical reactions in the resist,
development.
3. Mechanics: mask to wafer alignment and parallelism,
focusing.
We will ﬁrst go through the lithography process step by
step as the wafer sees it. A more detailed discussion of the
various steps then follows. All discussion in this chapter
refers to 1× lithography: the patterns on the mask are
transferred to the wafer in the same size as they are on the
mask. This mode is called contact/proximity lithography.
Projection lithography with reduction optics will be dealt
with in the next chapter.
9.1 Lithography Process Flow
9.1.1 Bake and prime
Practically all microfabrication processes start with some
sort of surface preparation step (these will be discussed in
detail in Chapter 12). Surface preparation “initializes” the
wafer, and the starting conditions will then be independent
of preceding process steps or wait time. In lithography,
the ﬁrst preparation step is a baking process. Adsorbed
water is removed by baking the wafer at 100–200 ◦C.
The next step, wafer priming, is also known as ad-
hesion promotion. Hexamethyl disilazane vapor (HMDS,
(H3C)3–Si–NH–Si–(CH3)3) is applied at reduced pres-
sure. As shown in Figure 9.2, the oxygen in the hydroxyl
group at the wafer surface will form a bond with sil-
icon atom in HMDS, and the amine group reacts with
hydrogen, releasing ammonia.
The monomolecular silane layer makes the wafer
slightly
hydrophobic
(contact
angles
60◦–70◦
for
example), which prevents water readsorption. It also
ensures good wetting by photoresist. This is especially
important for materials like metals, polysilicon and
PSG, because resist adhesion to these materials is
poor. Adhesion promotion is also a guarantee against
cleanroom humidity variations and a precaution against
processing delays, as HMDS primed water retains its
water-free condition even for a couple of days.
9.1.2 Spin coating
Spin coating is the standard resist application method. A
few milliliters of resist is applied on a static or slowly
rotating wafer. Acceleration to about 5000 rpm spreads
the resist over the wafer, leaving a very uniform layer
(Figure 9.3). Standard resist thicknesses are about 1 μm
when contact/proximity lithography is used.
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 101]
104
Introduction to Microfabrication
SiO2
(a)
Photoresist
(b)
UV radiation
Photomask
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 9.1
Making oxide patterns: (a) oxide ﬁlm deposition; (b) photoresist application (negative resist used); (c) UV
exposure through a photomask; (d) development of resist image; (e) etching of oxide; (f) photoresist removal. Courtesy
Esa Tuovinen, University of Helsinki
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
H
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
NH3
+
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
CH3
H3C
CH3
Si
Figure 9.2
HMDS adhesion promotion (priming)
9.1.3 Pre-exposure bake
The spin-coated resist still contains solvent, and a bake
step is needed to drive out most of the solvent. This bake
is, for example, 90 ◦C for 30 min in an oven or 90 ◦C
for 60 s on a hotplate. Care is needed to optimize the
bake temperature, because too high a temperature will
decompose the photoactive compound, leading to lower
sensitivity to exposing radiation. Pre-exposure bake is also
known as soft bake or post-apply bake.
9.1.4 Alignment
Next, the wafer and the photomask are inserted into a
mask aligner. In alignment, the patterns already on the
wafer are aligned to the new mask patterns (Figure 9.4).
In the case of the ﬁrst mask level, no alignment is
needed. However, it is useful to print zero-level alignment
marks on the wafer using a speciﬁc mask, and etch those
marks in silicon. This is especially necessary when the
ﬁrst process step does not leave anything visible on the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 102]
Optical Lithography
105
Resist dispensing 
(a few milliliters)
Final spinning 5000 rpm 
(partial drying via evaporation)
Acceleration 
(resist expelled)
Figure 9.3
Spin coating process
Figure 9.4
Alignment operation: left, wafer with a resistor and alignment marks; middle, photomask with contact holes
and alignment marks; right, after linear translation and rotation of the wafer, the alignment marks on the wafer and mask
coincide, and consequently the resistor and contact holes too
wafer surface; for example, doping by ion implantation
will only insert some dopant atoms inside silicon.
9.1.5 Exposure
The mask aligner is, in spite of its name, also an expo-
sure tool. The simplest lithographic technique is contact
lithography: the photomask and the resist-covered wafer
are brought into intimate contact, and exposed. A mask
aligner is shown in Figure 9.5: mercury lamp UV radia-
tion is ﬁltered and uniformly distributed over the wafer.
Mechanical parts ensure wafer and mask distance and par-
allelism. The lithography section of a cleanroom is similar
to a dark room in a photographic lab, except that yellow
light is used instead of red light, because photoresists are
sensitive below 450 nm only.
Resolution is determined mainly by pattern dimensions
on the mask. Extremely small patterns can be made in
theory by pressing the mask into intimate contact with
the resist (called vacuum contact). This is, however, a
source of defects when resist debris adheres to the mask.
Ellipsoidal mirror
Cold light mirror
Condenser lens
Heatsink
Diffraction red. optics
Front lens/mask wafer
Mirror
Light sensor
Shutter
Figure 9.5
Exposure/mask aligner tool: lamp–mirror–
shutter–ﬁlter–lens system, and mask and wafer. Courtesy
S¨uss Microtech
9.1.6 Post-exposure bake
Some resists require post-exposure bake (PEB). It leads
to the diffusion of photogenerated molecules. These
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 103]
106
Introduction to Microfabrication
molecules are responsible for changing the resist solubility
in the developer and this diffusion smoothes out optical
interference effects. In so-called chemically ampliﬁed
resists (CARs) the UV exposure only initiates the pho-
topolymerization process, and a bake is absolutely needed
to complete it. During the bake, the catalyst molecules
generated by UV exposure react and produce the solubility
difference between exposed and unexposed resist.
9.1.7 Development
In development the soluble parts of the resist are etched
away. In positive resists the exposed parts turn to car-
boxylic acid, which is removed by an alkaline devel-
oper, typically 0.26 M TMAH (tetramethyl ammonium
hydroxide). In negative resists the exposed parts have
been crosslinked and rendered stable, and the unexposed
parts are removed by a solvent developer. Just as in pho-
tography, it is the combined effects of exposure and devel-
opment that determine the ﬁnal outcome. One can com-
pensate the other to a certain extent by tuning it: overex-
posure and underdevelopment, and vice versa, may save
the day (but certainly not lead to optimal results). Rinsing
and drying complete the development, again in analogy
to photography.
9.1.8 Hard bake
Hard bake hardens the resist, which is useful in the sub-
sequent plasma etching and ion implantation steps, which
are energetic processes. It is also useful in wet processes
like etching or electroplating because it improves resist
adhesion. The hard bake temperature is limited by the
resist glass transition temperature Tg: above Tg the
resist will ﬂow, and shallow sloped walls will result
(Figure 18.29), while vertical or nearly vertical walls are
practically always desired.
9.1.9 Inspection and metrology
After hard bake the results of the lithography process are
checked. Even when linewidths are below optical mi-
croscopy resolution, it is useful as an initial check: for
instance, resist adhesion loss and delamination and other
gross errors can be seen. Linewidth speciﬁcation is usually
set as ±10% of design value. Linewidth measurements by
mechanical stylus, AFM or SEM form the basis of lithog-
raphy process control. SEM micrographs of photoresist
patterns can be seen in Figure 9.6. If resist patterns are
found to be faulty, the photoresist is removed and the
wafers resist coated and exposed again. The rework rate
is a few percent in manufacturing. It is one of the few
process steps where rework is possible.
Magn
138x
IMT
200 µm
Figure 9.6
Linewidth test structure of positive photoresist
in SEM micrograph. Reproduced from Roth et al. (1999)
9.2 Resist Chemistry
In this section we will discuss in more detail the work-
ing mechanisms of photoresists. Resists have three main
components:
1. Base resin, which determines the mechanical and ther-
mal properties.
2. Photoactive compound (PAC), which determines sen-
sitivity to radiation.
3. Solvent, which controls viscosity.
The most common base resin for positive resists is phe-
nolic novolak, which is soluble in alkaline developers.
Diazonapthoquinine (DNQ) photoactive compound acts
as an inhibitor, and unexposed resist is therefore non-
soluble in developer. Upon exposure, the DNQ reacts to
form an acidic compound which makes the exposed resist
soluble. As can be seen in Figure 9.7, water is needed for
the reaction to take place. This is one reason for clean-
room humidity control: cleanroom air is the source of
this water vapor. Constant humidity around 40% RH is
typical of cleanrooms. Another concern is gas evolution:
nitrogen gas can lead to bubble formation inside the resist,
especially when working with thick resists.
Negative resists can become insoluble because of an
increase in molecular weight, that is polymerization.
The resist becomes crosslinked either via free radical
or acid-catalyzed polymerization. Negative resists are
usually developed by solvents. This is a bit of a problem
because
solvents
can
swell
the
crosslinked
resist,
reducing pattern ﬁdelity.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 104]
Optical Lithography
107
C
C C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
N
N
O
R
expose
C
C
C
C
C
C
R
C
C
C
C
O
+
N2
C
C
C
C
C
R
C
C
C
C
O
+
H2O
hvdrate
C
C
C
C
C
C
R
C
C
C
C COOH
C
C
C
C
C
C
R
C
C
C
C
+
NaOH
develop
C
C
C
C
C
C
R
C
C
C
C COONa
 COOH
+ H2O
Figure 9.7
Diazonapthoquinine (DNQ) novolak resist re-
action upon UV exposure. Photoactive compound reacts to
form carboxylic acid, which is soluble in the developer
The crosslinking feature which makes negative resists
stable
also
makes
photoresist removal
difﬁcult, an
obvious dilemma. Many negative resists are stable
enough to be used as permanent structural materials in
microsystems, especially microﬂuidics. These will be
discussed in Chapter 18.
9.3 Resist Application
Spin coating is a very widely used method for photoresist
spinning and polymer deposition in general. Spinning is
a simple process for viscous material deposition. Spin-
ners, with typical speeds up to 10 000 rpm, are found in
every microfabrication laboratory. The main parameters
for ﬁlm thickness control are viscosity, solvent evapo-
ration rate and spin speed. Spin-coated ﬁlm thicknesses
range from 0.1 μm up to 500 μm, with standard photore-
sists usually around 1 μm. Special features of thick resists
will discussed in Chapter 18 on polymer microprocessing.
Depending on the wafer size and desired ﬁlm thick-
ness, a drop of 1–10 ml (= cm3) is dispensed at the
wafer center. Rapid acceleration to for example 1000 or
5000 rpm spreads the liquid toward the edges. Half of
the solvent can evaporate during the ﬁrst few seconds,
so rapid acceleration is essential because viscosity in-
creases upon drying, and radially non-uniform thickness
will result from viscosity differences. Spin speed can be
controlled to about ±1 rpm; this is important because
±50 rpm will result in 10% thickness differences.
Film thickness depends mainly on resist viscosity (η)
and spin speed (ω), according to
t ∝
 η
ω
(9.1)
Spin speed can be used to tailor resist thickness over one
decade, for example 0.5–5 μm, but beyond that a new re-
sist formulation with a different viscosity must be used.
Viscosity is dependent on resist solid content (which can
vary from 20 to 80%) and temperature. The solvent evap-
oration rate depends on the ambient environment, and a
closed spinner bowl with saturated solvent vapor and an
adjustable exhaust from the spinner bowl can both be used
to control evaporation.
Spin coating is very good in terms of ﬁlm uniformity:
±5 nm can be achieved for 1 μm ﬁlms, but for thicker
ﬁlms it is not so good, but for example 100 μm ±5 μm.
Because spin coating works on liquid materials, smooth-
ness is excellent: RMS roughness of spin-coated ﬁlms is
comparable to the initial smoothness of a silicon wafer,
for example 0.2 nm.
Turbulence (both from the spin process itself and
from cleanroom airﬂows) and ambient humidity (which
is affected by the exhaust from the spinner bowl and
cleanroom environmental controls) affect evaporation
rate and consequently ﬁlm thickness. Turbulence sets in
earlier in larger systems, and spin speeds for 300 mm
wafers are limited to about 2000 rpm to avoid turbulence.
Pinhole
defects
in
spin-coated
ﬁlms
are
thickness
dependent: thinner ﬁlms are more defective. Pinholes can
be caused by particles on wafers, but also by particles
in the dispensed ﬂuid, even though all chemicals in
microfabrication
have
been
ﬁltered
with
submicron
ﬁlters. Air bubbles formed during dispensing (caused by
an unclean dispense tip, for example) can cause either
pinholes or large buddles, in the millimeter range.
Resist is expelled over the edge of the wafer during
spinning. At the wafer edge, however, a balance is formed
where drying increases viscosity and reduces ﬂow, and ﬁ-
nally surface tension becomes the dominant force, leading
to the formation of a bulge. This bulge is known as edge
bead. Edge bead height sets a minimum mask-to-wafer
distance and often is so high that an optimum distance
(gap) cannot be set. Edge bead removal (EBR) is a pro-
cess where a directed solvent jet etches the resist away
from the wafer edges.
9.3.1 Resist proﬁle over topography
Spin processing over severe topography is difﬁcult:
liquid-like ﬁlm will ﬁll grooves and crevasses, and
highly non-uniform thickness results. On the other
hand, this planarizing effect is sometimes used to
advantage: spin coating ﬁlls the gaps and smoothes out
topography. Spin-on-glass planarization works this way
(see Figure 16.7).
There are other resist coating techniques: namely,
spray
coating,
electrochemical
coating
and
casting.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 105]
108
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.8
Resist over topography: (a) spin coated;
(b) spray coated; (c) cast; (d) laminated dry ﬁlm
Electrochemical
coating
requires
special
resist
formulations, and is applicable to conductive surfaces
only. Spray is applicable to thin resists. Casting is
suitable for thick resists only. These techniques are
especially suited to applications where resist coverage is
needed over severe topography. And if there are holes
in the wafer, as in MEMS devices after through-wafer
etching, spin coating is unsuitable for many reasons: the
resist would spill into the holes, and the vacuum chuck
would not be able to hold the wafer during spinning
(unless a special design were used). Still another way is
to use dry ﬁlm resists: negative resists are available as
sheets that can be laminated on a wafer. These different
resist coating techniques over an etched cavity are shown
in Figure 9.8.
9.4 Alignment and Overlay
Because microdevices are built up layer by layer, over-
lay of successive layers on top of previous layers is a
paramount performance criterion of optical lithography
align/exposure tools. Overlay refers to general pattern
placement, and alignment refers to speciﬁc spots on the
wafer, namely the alignment marks (or alignment keys or
targets), which are used for the alignment procedure. Be-
cause alignment is limited to speciﬁc structures (usually
on the wafer or chip edge), it is not a full guarantee of
overlay elsewhere. Overlay is affected by lens aberrations,
wafer chuck irregularities (equipment-related problems),
mask pattern misplacement (mask fabrication problems),
or distortions of the wafer itself, such as warping or site
ﬂatness. We will, however, use the term alignment be-
cause it is an easy operational concept. The term mask
aligner nicely underlines the importance of alignment. A
contact/proximity aligner that can print 3 μm minimum
lines is typically capable of 1 μm alignment accuracy be-
tween levels.
Alignment needs to be evaluated over a long time: de-
vice fabrication processes take weeks or even months.
For example, temperature differences between different
exposures will affect alignment because of thermal ex-
pansion of the wafer, the wafer stage and the photomask.
The lenses in the optical path of the exposure tool are
subject to constant UV ﬂood, and they too need to be
thermally stabilized.
Alignment needs to be discussed from two rather dif-
ferent points of view:
1. Equipment view: This is an optomechanical problem
of ﬁnding alignment marks on the mask and on the
wafer, and manipulating them to coincide.
2. Device design view: This is a design issue and
it depends on how structures need to overlap or
relate to each other, for instance metallization has to
overlap contacts and a guard ring has to surround the
active device.
Alignment could be done using the devices themselves,
but this is impractical because of the micrometer dimen-
sions and multiple identical structures. Therefore separate
alignment marks are used. Alignment marks are much
larger than device features because they exist only for
alignment and have nothing to do with resolution. Align-
ment is usually done on a wafer level, with two alignment
marks as far from each other as possible, to increase theta
(rotational) resolution.
The alignment sequence determines which layers are
aligned to each other. Layers are not usually aligned se-
quentially to the previous layer, but to some important
previous layer. The capacitor top electrode is aligned to
the bottom electrode, even though other steps might have
been done in between.
9.5 Exposure
A mercury lamp provides strong spectral peaks at
wavelengths of 436, 405 and 365 nm. Typical exposure
energies for standard positive novolak resists is in the
range of 100 mJ/cm2, which translates to exposure times
of a second or a few seconds. Thicker resists require
larger exposure doses, and the times can be even minutes.
Proximity lithography is a modiﬁcation of contact
lithography: a small gap, for example 3–50 μm is left
between the mask and the wafer (Figure 9.9). Resolution
is now not simply dependent on feature size on mask, but
diffraction effects have to accounted for. Both contact
and proximity lithography are done in one and same
machine: the gap between the mask and the wafer is
an adjustable parameter, with values from zero upward.
Contact/proximity lithography systems are 1×: the image
is the same size as the original.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 106]
Optical Lithography
109
gap
Figure 9.9
Contact lithography: mask and wafer are in
intimate contact. Proximity lithography: a gap of typically
5–50 μm is instituted between resist-coated wafer and the
photomask
9.6 Resist Proﬁle
Perfectly vertical resist walls (90◦) are difﬁcult to make.
Positive resists usually have a slightly positive slope,
85◦–89◦, negative resists have typically similar negative
proﬁle. This is a natural consequence of exposure
light intensity through the mask (Figure 9.10). Due to
diffraction, some light is exposing resist underneath
the opaque parts of the mask. With positive resists
this exposed part becomes soluble, and a positive
slope results. With negative resists the diffracted light
contributes to crosslinking reactions, making the exposed
parts less soluble in developer, resulting in a negative
(also called retrograde) proﬁle.
9.7 Resolution
Making individual narrow lines is not a major problem in
microlithography, but rather making closely spaced nar-
row lines. Line plus space, which is microlithographic
resolution, is called pitch. An individual narrow line can
be made even accidentally by for example overexposure
(but the line shape will be far from ideal). Resolution, or
the ability to separate two patterns, is the criterion for
lithography capability. Proximity lithography minimum
resolvable linewidth (half-pitch) is calculated from Fres-
nel diffraction and approximated by
linewidth ≈

λ ×

g + d
2

(9.2)
where g is the gap and d the resist thickness. Typical val-
ues for wavelength λ of exposing radiation are 436, 405 or
365 nm when a mercury lamp is used as the light source.
Gaps range from zero (called vacuum contact) to a few
tens of micrometers. With a 405 nm wavelength, gap of
Figure 9.10
Diffraction at chrome pattern edges affects
photoresist proﬁle: positive resist (left) with exposed parts
developed away leads to positive slope; negative resist
(right) with exposed parts hardened leads to negative proﬁle
5 μm and 1 μm resist thickness, minimum lines of 1.5 μm
(and 1.5 μm spaces between them) can be obtained.
With thick MEMS resists minimum linewidths are
clearly much larger. This is shown in Figure 9.11 where
patterns of various sizes are printed in resist 7 μm thick.
Four different exposure modes are used and the best
results are achieved for vacuum contact between the
mask and the resist-coated wafer. Hard contact results are
also good, but for soft contact and 20 μm proximity the
smallest 2.5 μm feature is not exposed, and the proﬁle of
the resist gets fairly shallow.
X-ray lithography is 1× proximity lithography, too.
Wavelength is just much smaller, for example 4 nm, en-
abling much smaller minimum lines. However, making
masks with very small dimensions is problematic.
9.8 Process Latitude
Many lithography parameters change and drift over
time,
including
resist
thickness
(which
is
affected
by for example viscosity change due to temperature
change), exposure energy (which changes as the lamp
ages), developer concentration (which may increase
due
to
water
evaporation),
and
many
more.
The
process window for lithography can be deﬁned in
many ways, but exposure dose–development time is
useful (Figure 9.12). The process window is the set of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 107]
110
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 9.11
The effect of mask-wafer gap: vacuum con-
tact (topmost) results in good resist proﬁles, hard contact
(2nd from top) in acceptable proﬁle while soft contact
and 20 μm proximity gap (bottom) result in sloped walls
for 5 μm and 10 μm features and incomplete exposure for
2.5 μm feature. Positive resist 7 μm thick. Courtesy S¨uss
Microtech
development time
exposure time
underexposure      under development
no pattern formed
overexposure, 
pattern distortion
overdevelopment, 
adhesion loss
Figure 9.12
Process window for lithography process: ex-
posure time vs. development time
exposure dose and development time combinations that
results in linewidths which are within speciﬁcation,
typically ±10%.
Underexposure leads to no pattern formation, and it is
therefore a fatal processing error. Overexposure clears all
resist in open spaces, but it also clears resist where it
should not, leading to patterns with widths different from
design widths. Also, the resist sidewall proﬁle is affected.
9.9 Basic Pattern Shapes
There are four basic shapes that have to be patterned: line,
trench, hole and dot. More complex shapes can all be
patched together from these elementary shapes, as pattern
generators do. An opaque chromium line on a mask will
end up as a line on the wafer if positive resist is used, but
as a trench in the case of negative resist. A transparent
opening in chromium will result in a trench with positive
mask, and a line with negative resist.
Patterns come in two basic varieties: isolated and array
(Figure 9.13). Lithography for these is different, and the
ultimate lithographic resolution is also shape dependent.
For example, stray light is a major issue for a light-
ﬁeld structures, whereas in dark-ﬁeld patterns it is not so
much of an issue. Dark-ﬁeld patterns are also less affected
by particles: most of them fall on chrome and will not
affect patterns.
9.10 Lithography Practice
After lithography, various processes are possible, and all
of them exhibit different requirements for resists in terms
of optimum thickness and sidewall proﬁle, chemical sta-
bility, thermal and mechanical speciﬁcations, etc. Resists
Figure 9.13
Isolated vs. array features and light ﬁeld vs.
dark ﬁeld
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 108]
Optical Lithography
111
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 9.14
Processing after lithography: (a) ion implantation (Chapter 15); (b) wet etching (Chapter 11); (c) molding
(Chapter 18); (d) plasma etching (Chapter 11); (e) electroplating (Chapters 5 & 29); (f) lift-off (Chapter 23)
face a serious scaling trade-off: thickness has to be scaled
down for better resolution, but etch resistance and implant
blocking capability cannot be sacriﬁced. Also, making re-
sist thinner by a factor of two increases the number of
pinhole defects by a factor of 10 or even 100.
Other criteria for resist selection include the following:
• sensitivity (photospeed)
• contrast
• exposure latitude
• shelf life.
In a university setting photospeed is not important, but
in manufacturing setting it certainly is. Contrast (to be
discussed in the next chapter) is important when verti-
cal walls are needed. Exposure latitude is a measure of
linewidth constancy in spite of variations in exposure en-
ergy. Shelf life refers to the fact that decomposition of the
photoactive compound during storage eventually makes
resist useless.
Figure 9.14 shows six different applications for resist
patterns. In wet processes (wet etching, electroplating)
adhesion is important, while in vacuum processes (ion
implantation, plasma etching, lift-off) vacuum compat-
ibility is essential. In molding, the molded piece must
be detached from the mold, and surface energy, surface
smoothness and sidewall angle are important considera-
tions. The resist requirements for the different applications
are listed in Table 9.1.
And of course there is the possibility that the resist
structure is the ﬁnal structure. Such permanent structures
have to be evaluated for mechanical and thermal stability,
surface properties and chemical tolerance. Chapter 18 will
deal with permanent polymer microstructures.
9.11 Photoresist Stripping
After photoresist has served its role as a protective layer,
it must be removed. There are a number of methods to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 109]
112
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 9.1
Resist requirements for different applications
Ion implantation:
• resist thickness of 1 μm will stop B, P, As, Sb ions with
<200 keV energy
• beam current heats resist: cooling or current limitation
are needed
• resist carbonizes under heavy doses (>1015 cm−2), dif-
ﬁcult to remove
Wet etching:
• resist adhesion is important, resist may peel off
• resist will not tolerate strong acids or alkaline etch so-
lutions
• hot etch baths degrade resist fast
Molding:
• smooth surface
• non-negative proﬁle
• minimize chemical reactions with polymers
Plasma etching:
• resist will be etched in plasma: its size and shape will
change
• resist will be damaged by plasma (both bombardment
and thermal effects)
• removal of damaged resist is difﬁcult
Electroplating:
• plating solutions are often chemically aggressive
• adhesion is important
Lift-off:
• thickness of the ﬁlm needs to be less than resist thick-
ness
• resist sidewall proﬁle preferably retrograde
• deposition process T < 120 ◦C because of resist ther-
mal limitation
accomplish this, listed in Table 9.2. The choice depends
on the particular process step, the materials present on
the wafer, resist nature and established laboratory prac-
tice (which may be determined by historical precedence,
environmental concerns or other idiosyncratic factors).
Sulfuric acid is a strong oxidant, and therefore an effec-
tive remover of organic materials. The photoresist surface
is carbonized during ion implantation but hot sulfuric
acid/peroxide mixture can remove it. However, sulfuric
acid cannot be used if the wafer is metallized because the
acid will etch metals too. Acetone is a fairly mild remover,
Table 9.2
Photoresist stripping
Techniques
Mechanism
Oxygen plasma
Oxidation in vacuum
Ozone discharge
Oxidation under atmospheric
pressure
Acetone
Dissolution in liquid
Ozonized water
Bond breaking and dissolution
Sulfuric acid
Oxidation in liquid
Organic amines
Oxidation and dissolution in
liquid
Hydrogen peroxide
Oxidation in liquid
but it cannot be used if the resist has been damaged or
transformed by plasma or ion bombardment. Other or-
ganic strippers are amine and phenolic based, and more
effective than acetone. Oxygen plasma is the general pur-
pose resist stripping technique. Ozone is similar to oxygen
plasma: highly reactive O3 is generated in the reactor and
reacts with organic materials. It is a common practice to
use two-step resist stripping: plasma (dry) removal fol-
lowed by wet removal for best results.
Ultrapure ozonized water UPW-O3 (10–100 ppm ozone
in DI water) is potentially a major cost reduction invention
in stripping. Strip rates of 150 nm/min can be achieved,
and utilization of ozone is very efﬁcient even though a
simple chemical reaction might suggest otherwise:
CH2 + 3 O3 ⇒CO2 + H2O + 3 O2
(9.3)
CH2 can be used as a model molecule for photoresist.
This calculation shows that 10.3 g of ozone is needed
to remove 1 g of resist; that is, a batch of 25 wafers
(200 mm diameter wafers) would need about 10–100 kg of
ozonized water depending on pattern density. Fortunately
much less is needed: ozone breaks up longer molecules,
and the smaller molecules are water soluble.
9.12 Exercises
1. What fraction of resist ends up on the wafer in spin
coating?
2. What is the ultimate resolution in optical contact
lithography?
3. What is the best possible resolution of X-ray con-
tact/proximity lithography?
4. A silicon wafer of 100 mm diameter has 1 μm lines
fabricated on it. The photomask is made of soda lime
glass with a coefﬁcient of thermal expansion (CTE)
of 10 ppm (10 × 10−6/◦C). How accurately must the
temperature in the patterning process be controlled in
order to keep distortions from thermal expansion over
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 110]
Optical Lithography
113
the 100 mm wafer below 0.3 μm? Silicon CTE is 2.5 ×
10−6/◦C.
5. Plot minimum feature size in proximity lithography as
a function of resist thickness from 1 μm to 1000 μm
thicknesses.
6. If 5000 rpm spinning produces a resist 1 μm thick, plot
resist thickness at other spin speeds!
7. How do light-ﬁeld and dark-ﬁeld photomasks differ
with respect to particle contamination?
8. If a wafer with a resist 350 μm resist is baked on a
hotplate which is 0.1◦off-horizontal, what will be the
resist non-uniformity due to gravitational ﬂow?
9. What alignments are needed in fabricating the device
of Figure 5.19?
References and Related Reading
Chuang, Y.-J., F.-G. Tseng and W.-K. Lin (2002) Reduction
of diffraction effect of UV exposure on SU-8 negative thick
photoresist by air gap elimination, Microsyst. Technol., 8,
308–313.
Cui, Z. (2005) Micro-Nanofabrication, Springer.
Franssila, S. and S. Tuomikoski (2010) MEMS lithography,
in V. Lindroos et al., Handbook of Silicon Based MEMS
Materials and Technologies, Elsevier.
Mack, C. (2007) Fundamental Principles of Optical Lithog-
raphy, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Moreau,
W.
(1988)
Semiconductor
Microlithography,
Plenum Press.
Pham, N.P. et al. (2008) Photoresist coating and patterning
for through-silicon via technology, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
18, 125008.
Rai-Choudhury, P. (ed.) (1997) Handbook of Microlithogra-
phy, Micromachining and Microfabrication, SPIE.
Roth, S. et al. (1999) High aspect ratio UV photolithogra-
phy for electroplated structures, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
9, 105–108.
Saha, S.C. et al. (2008) Tuning of resist slope with hard-baking
parameters and release methods of extra hard photoresist for
RF MEMS switches, Sens. Actuators, A143, 452–461.
Shaw, J.M. et al. (1997) Negative photoresists for optical
lithography, IBM J. Res. Dev., 41, 81.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 111]
10
Advanced Lithography
This chapter concentrates on the making of narrow lines
for modern integrated circuits. Linewidth scaling has been
driven by CMOS scaling for four decades, and the trend
continues. While in the 1980s it was thought that 1 μm
would be the limit of optical lithography, in 2010 lines
of 50 nm are manufactured in high volumes by UV ex-
posure (microprocessor gates are 20 nm, but these are not
done directly by optics, as will be explained later in this
chapter). This tremendous progress is based on a number
of innovations in optics, optomechanics, resist chemistry
and related processing advances.
From a manufacturing point of view, lithography per-
formance can be pinpointed to a few key elements:
• CD control: How accurately is the critical dimension
(linewidths) controlled?
• Overlay/alignment: This concerns the placement of
patterns relative to previous layers.
• Defectivity: This applies to pattern ﬁdelity itself, as
well to added particles: there should be none.
• Metrology: Masks have to be veriﬁed for correctness
and the resist patterns inspected after lithography; both
tasks are becoming formidable because of simultaneous
linewidth reduction and chip size increase.
• Cost:
Because lithography is done many times (25
photomasks in DRAM, 35 in modern microprocessors)
it is imperative to keep throughput and yield high.
10.1 Projection Optical Systems
While contact and proximity lithography discussed in the
previous chapter relied on 1× reproduction of the mask
pattern on the wafer, today 4× reduction optics is the
norm. This is a great relief for mask makers as 50 nm fea-
tures are “only” 200 nm on the mask. The main elements
of a reduction optical system are depicted in Figure 10.1.
a
Source of radiation 
(DUV 193 nm/248 nm)
Optical system I 
(lenses, mirrors)
Mask (pattern)
Optical system II 
(lenses, mirrors)
Numerical aperture 
NA = n*sin a
Photoresist 
Wafer (with patterns)
Wafer stage 
(alignment mechanism)
Figure 10.1
Reduction
projection
optical
lithography
system
In projection optical systems the optical system II of
Figure 10.1 is the key element: it provides an image of
the mask on the wafer. To emphasize the difference from
1× masks, reduction masks are often called reticles.
Projection optics today is used for chipwise exposure:
one chip is exposed, the wafer is moved to a new posi-
tion, and another chip is exposed. This approach is termed
step-and-repeat, and the systems are known as steppers
(Figure 10.2). In spite of the fact that it is easier to ex-
pose a chip-sized area than full wafers, stepper lenses are
very large and expensive. The lens of a stepper with for
example an 8 cm2 ﬁeld (on a wafer) can weigh 500 kg
and cost $10 million (Step-and-repeat was an existing
technique in the photomask industry: the original chip
pattern was written once on a mask blank and the ﬁnal
1× full wafer mask with hundreds of identical chips was
made by copying the original pattern many times over to
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 112]
116
Introduction to Microfabrication
Mask
Wafer
Scanner
Reduction Stepper
Figure 10.2
Scanning projection and reduction step-and-
repeat. Reproduced from Mack (2007) by permission of
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
another mask blank.) Step-and-repeat lithography was the
mainstay of IC fabrication in the 1980s and 1990s.
The alternative method is step-and-scan (with tools
known as scanners), where the mask and wafer are
moved in opposite directions and the exposure is done
through a slit. Scanners expose smaller areas, in a sense,
because only the narrow slit is exposed, making it easier
and cheaper to fabricate optics for scanners. The ﬁeld
size can be made larger because of cheaper optics. And
the ﬁeld size is limited by optics only in the slit height
direction; in the scan direction it is limited by stage
mechanics. The beneﬁts of cheaper optics are partially
lost because the mechanics of wafer stage and mask
holder movements must be delicately coordinated. IC
fabrication relies mostly on scanners today.
It is certainly slower to expose chips than to expose
full wafers. Steppers in the early 1980s exposed 25 wafers
per hour (WPH) while the then dominant 1× projection
aligners had throughputs of 100 WPH. Today steppers
and scanners achieve up to 200 WPH. Assuming a 40 ×
20 mm exposure ﬁeld and 300 mm wafer size, this trans-
lates to a fraction of a second per chip. Exposure ﬁeld
size is important for DRAMs and microprocessors, which
are large chips, and an integral number have to ﬁt an ex-
posure ﬁeld. With smaller chips it is possible to reduce
reticle costs by including many different designs on the
same reticle.
Many other operations in addition to exposure can be
done individually for each chip, enabling tighter process
speciﬁcations. For example, focusing and alignment can
be done for each chip, and wafer warping can be com-
pensated for. Additionally, chipwise exposure enables
the optimization of lithography in an economical fashion.
In test runs all chips can be exposed differently, in order
to ﬁnd the optimum exposure dose and focus conditions,
and to check process robustness. The focus–exposure
Focus (μm)
(a)
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1
0.0
0
50
100
150
200
250
0.1
0.2
Resist Feature Width (nm)
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
Focus (μm)
(b)
0.1
0.2
180
Dose
Resist Feature Width (nm)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Figure 10.3
Focus–exposure matrix: linewidth plots with
different focus depth and exposure dose (mJ/cm2) combi-
nations: (a) array lines; (b) isolated lines. Reproduced from
Mack (2007), ﬁgure 10.14, by permission of John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd
(FE) matrix results are shown in Figure 10.3. It shows
linewidths for different focus settings with exposure dose
as a parameter. As can be seen, it is difﬁcult to optimize
for both isolated and array lines simultaneously.
Alternatively, the FE matrix can be displayed as con-
stant linewidths in focus–exposure dose coordinates. The
process window can then be expressed as the maximum
rectangle that ﬁts within the linewidth speciﬁcation
(usually 10%), see Figure 10.4. For the isolated lines
the process window is much smaller than for dense
array lines.
It is possible to change the reticle between exposures
and to have many different chips on one wafer in any
proportion. The inclusion of different designs for rapid
prototyping or test chips is thus ﬂexible. Because the
reticle never makes physical contact with the wafers, its
lifetime is inﬁnite in principle. In practice it is determined
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 113]
Advanced Lithography
117
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1
0.0
Focus (μm)
0.1
0.2
30
Exposure (mJ/cm2)
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
Figure 10.4
Process window in focus–exposure coordi-
nates: all combinations inside the boxes result in acceptable
linewidths from Mack (2007) by permission of John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd
by product lifetime: many chips have such short lifecycles
that a reticle set is often used only once, to make a lot of
25 wafers of 1000–10 000 chips depending on size.
Projection optics allows an extra trick to preserve reticle
quality. A transparent ﬁlm, called a pellicle, is framed in
front of the reticle. Airborne particles will settle on the
pellicle ﬁlm, which is about 100 μm above the chrome
pattern. Particles on the pellicle will be out of focus, and
do not print on the wafer.
10.2 Resolution of Projection
Optical Systems
The resolution of a projection optical system is approx-
imated by the Rayleigh relation, Equation 10.1, and the
depth of focus (DOF) is given by Equation 10.2:
resolution ≈k1λ
NA
(10.1)
DOF ≈k2 × λ
NA2
= ±
λ
2 × NA2
(10.2)
where NA is the numerical aperture. From geometrical
optics we get k1 as 0.5, which means that minimum lines
will be λ/2NA. One approach to better resolution (smaller
linewidths) is by wavelength reduction. This strategy
has been steadily used: from 436 nm (g-line from an Hg
lamp), to 365 nm (i-line from an Hg lamp) to 248 nm
(KrF laser) to 193 nm (ArF laser). All else being equal,
this alone would result in a factor of two improvement
in resolution and a factor of four improvement in device
areal density. NA enhancement is another clear route
Table 10.1
Linewidth scaling of CMOS
Wavelength
Aperture
k factor
Linewidth
DOF
(nm)
(μm)
(μm)
λ = 436
NA = 0.38
k1 = 0.8
1
±1.5
λ = 365
NA = 0.48
k1 = 0.6
0.5
±0.8
λ = 248
NA = 0.60
k1 = 0.6
0.25
±0.35
λ = 248
NA = 0.65
k1 = 0.5
0.18
±0.30
which has been used. In 20 years NA has increased from
about 0.2 to 0.9, a factor of ﬁve improvement through
better optical design and manufacturing.
Table 10.1 lists CMOS resolution trends assuming k2 =
1 but letting k1 evolve.
Resolution enhancement by NA increase has been
paid for dearly on the focus side: DOF is becoming very
small indeed. DOF (Equation 10.2) is an optical concept
but resist chemistry and resist proﬁle speciﬁcations
(which depend on subsequent process steps) must also be
considered. Besides optical DOF, other factors must be
accounted for: the wafer is not ﬂat, neither is the wafer
chuck, and stepper focus mechanisms are not perfect.
All these contribute, say, 0.1–0.2 μm errors in focus.
Previous etching and deposition steps can easily create
topographic variations on the order of half a micrometer,
so planarization is critical for lithography (see Chapter
16 on chemical mechanical polishing).
A 4× reduction makes mask making much easier. Er-
rors in both resist image on the mask and the etched
chrome image on the mask are reduced, leading to tighter
linewidth tolerances on the wafer. Mask writer placement
error is also reduced, improving the overlay between two
layers. The more complicated optics of reduction systems
(in contact printing there is no imaging optics) introduced
some distortion but this is a minor price to be paid.
10.3 Resists
In Chapter 9 we treated resists as if they were digital
on/off materials which either react to exposure or not.
Now we are dealing with more realistic cases: resists have
exposure threshold energy, ﬁnite contrast and ﬁnite selec-
tivity in developers. Resists are also optical materials and
part of an optical system with reﬂections, interference and
absorption. All these aspects become more pronounced
when resists go over topography; patterning on a planar
surface is fairly straightforward.
The calculation of exposure uses normalized remaining
inhibitor concentration M(x, t): it describes the fraction
of inhibitor left after exposure for a certain time in a
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 114]
118
Introduction to Microfabrication
certain position inside the resist. Optical absorption α in
photoresist is given by
α = AM (x, t) + B
(10.3)
where
A
is
exposure-dependent
and
B
exposure-
independent absorption. A and B are known as Dill
parameters, and their values for novolak resists are in
the range of 0.4–1/μm for A and 0.01–0.1/μm for B. A
decrease of inhibitor concentration depends not only on
light intensity I(x, t), but also on sensitivity to exposing
radiation C and of course to inhibitor concentration M.
Time-dependent inhibitor concentration is given by
∂M
∂t
= −I(x, t)M(x, t)C
(10.4)
The sensitivity parameter C is also known as Dill C and
its value for novolak resists is on the order of 0.01 cm2/mJ.
A, B and C are all of course wavelength dependent. An-
alytical solutions to resist exposure are very difﬁcult and
simulation is used extensively.
Resist sensitivity can be tailored for different wave-
lengths (or for electrons, ions or X-rays). Sensitivity is
important for productivity. With typical exposure ener-
gies on the order of 100–500 mJ/cm2 for DNQ positive
resists, exposure times for standard resists 1 μm thick are
on the order of 1 s with 500 W lamps.
The ﬁrst DUV lasers had intensities that were too low
for practical throughputs and this problem led to the de-
velopment of high-sensitivity chemically ampliﬁed resists
(CARs) in the 1980s. CAR works in two steps: photoacid
generator (PAG) molecules decompose upon photon im-
pact and these decomposition products catalyze more PAG
decomposition so that a single photon can lead to 100
decomposition reactions. In the second step, the post-
exposure bake, the photoreaction products diffuse (a few
nanometers or a few tens of nanometers) and react, and
the reaction products are responsible for the solubility
difference between exposed and unexposed resist. The co-
efﬁcient Dill A is zero for CARs, because the exposure
itself does not change the resist greatly.
Because the reaction is catalytic, the exposure dose is
very small and system throughput is high (the exposure
time is just one factor in throughput: the stepper has
to move between exposures, align and focus, and all
these add up in throughput calculations). CARs need
only 10–50 mJ/cm2 exposure doses, one-tenth of novolak
resists. However, the very fact that the reaction is
catalytic poses a danger: if the reaction is quenched, and
multiplication stops, the resist is not exposed. This can
happen due to airborne contaminants which react with
the resist. Ammonia is one prime culprit, and it cannot be
completely eliminated from cleanroom air because it is
such an essential cleaning chemical (see Chapter 12) and
it is released by the HMDS priming process (Equation
9.2). The two-step nature makes CAR processing time
sensitive: no delays are allowed between exposure
and bake.
10.3.1 Contrast
Photoresist contrast is important for both resolution
and proﬁle. A sigmoid (nonlinear) response function is
essential for patternability. Optical wavefronts after the
mask are not ideal square waves but rather attenuated
sine waves, and a linear response as a function of
exposure dose is rather useless because photoresist
patterns would be smoothly curving bumps, not clearly
deﬁned rectangular shapes.
Contrast (γ ) is calculated for positive and negative
resists as the slope of dose required to clear the resist
completely, Equation 10.5, which is graphically shown in
Figure 10.5:
γp =
1
log
 dc
d0

γn =
1
log
d0
di

(10.5)
where dc is dose to clear all resist and d0 is extrapolated
dose at the kink in the contrast curve. For negative re-
sist d0 and di are deﬁned analogously. Typical contrasts
are 2–5 for novolak-based positive resist and 5–10 for
deep-UV CARs. High contrast is beneﬁcial for the re-
sist proﬁle: on the one hand it is easy to achieve vertical
walls, while on the other hand high contrast resist is easily
overexposed, or saturated.
Resist thickness is limited by its mechanical stability:
resist patterns that are too tall will collapse during drying
due to capillary forces. This same phenomenon is seen
in surface MEMS: short stubby ones survive better than
long slender ones (Equation 29.8). Resist thickness is con-
stantly reduced, and resist aspect ratios are 2–3:1, which
translates to resists 300 nm thick for 90 nm technology
and 130 nm thick for 45 nm node.
10.4 Thin-Film Optics in Resists
Photoresist is a part of an optical system involving the il-
lumination light source, the lenses and the photomask, and
we have to include the substrate also, because some light
reaching the substrate through the resist will be reﬂected
back, contributing to pattern formation.
Photoresist thickness determines the optical path length
for incoming and outgoing rays. Constructive and destruc-
tive interference inside the photoresist lead to intensity
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 115]
Advanced Lithography
119
thickness remaining
thickness remaining
1
10
 100  mJ/cm2
1
10
100  mJ/cm2
do
do
di
dc
Figure 10.5
Resist contrast plots on a thickness–exposure
dose axes for inﬁnite contrast resist and real resists: left,
positive resist; right, negative resist
variations in the vertical direction through the resist. This
is seen as standing wave patterns in the developed resist
(Figure 10.6). In the extreme case, the parts that received
least light (in positive resist) will not be developed by a
developer that has high selectivity between exposed and
unexposed parts (high contrast developer).
Thin-ﬁlm interference in the resist leads to thickness-
dependent exposure doses. Depending on resist thickness,
the total dose needed to expose the resist changes. If de-
structive interference takes place in the resist top surface,
almost all of the illumination energy is absorbed in the
resist, whereas in the case of constructive interference at
the top surface, only half of the energy stays inside the
resist. Maxima and minima alternate at λ/(4n) intervals;
for example, for λ = 365 nm exposure and 1.6 index of
refraction for typical photoresist, this interval is 56 nm.
On a planar surface this problem can easily be solved by
better control of photoresist thickness (spinning process),
but on a structured surface there is no general solution to
the variable resist thickness problem.
Figure 10.6
Reﬂections at air/resist and resist/substrate
interfaces result in interference pattern of standing waves.
Reproduced from Peterson et al. (1996) by permission of
Henley Publishing
0.90
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.95
1.00
1.05
Resist Thickness (μm)
Resist Linewidth (μm)
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 10.7
The effect of resist thickness variation on
linewidth. Reproduced from Mack (2007) by permission
of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
The effect of resist thickness variation of linewidth is
shown in Figure 10.7. Minor variation of 50 nm (5% of
resist thickness) can lead to 20% linewidth variation.
Post-exposure bake (PEB), which enhances the diffu-
sion of photoproducts, will make standing wave effects
smaller. A diffusion distance of about half the period will
smooth out standing waves. However, when lines are very
narrow, PEB cannot be used: the diffusion distance must
be considerably smaller than the linewidth, otherwise it
will affect the line shape too much.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 116]
120
Introduction to Microfabrication
Swing ratio is a measure of variation introduced by
thin-ﬁlm optical effects. It is determined as exposure–dose
variation (max −min) divided by mean value. It can be
deﬁned similarly for the linewidth. It is analogous to a
lossy Fabry-P´erot interferometer and can be modeled by
the following equation:
S = 4 e(−αD)√
R1R2
(10.6)
where R1 is reﬂectivity at the air/resist interface, R2 is
reﬂectivity at the resist/substrate interface, α is the resist
absorption coefﬁcient and D is resist thickness.
Obviously there are four ways to minimize the swing
ratio. The ﬁrst strategy is to minimize R1, which translates
to a top antireﬂective coating (TARC). Light traversing
the TARC twice will interfere destructively and minimize
reﬂections if TARC thickness matches the λ/(4n) condi-
tion. The TARC refractive index should be given by
nTARC = √nresistnair
(10.7)
With the resist n typically around 1.65, the TARC refrac-
tive index should be about 1.3. TARC thickness would
then be about 70 nm.
Photoresist-like spinning is a favorite method for coat-
ing TARC, and the material is very much photoresist-like
(non-absorbing, however); it will be removed by the de-
veloper. Added process complexity is small. TARC is
insensitive to substrate material, therefore it is a fairly
general method to reduce reﬂections and swing. If, how-
ever, TARC is deposited over steps in a way similar to
resist, TARC thickness will be variable, and its effective-
ness reduced. There are not many materials with n = 1.3,
so choices are not abundant.
The reduction of R2 involves bottom antireﬂective
coatings (BARCs). The role of BARCs on absorbing
metal surfaces is to reduce reﬂectivity, and on transparent
surfaces (like oxides) to reduce thickness effects. BARCs
work by index matching, just like TARCs, but also
by absorption: absorbed light will not re-enter the
resist. BARC thicknesses are similar to TARC’s, in the
range of 20–70 nm, but the materials and processes are
different. BARCs must tolerate developers because, if
they did not, they would undercut the resist patterns.
BARCs are therefore patterned by dry etching. Spin-on
polymer-based BARCs do exist, but inorganic BARCs
that will be left as permanent parts of the ﬁnished
devices are also used. Titanium nitride TiN is a BARC
for aluminum lithography, but it is deposited in the
same process as the aluminum, not in conjunction with
resist processing. Oxides and nitrides can also be used
as BARCs. It is difﬁcult to remove them selectively,
and most often they remain as parts of ﬁnished devices.
Inorganic BARCs can act as hard masks for etching: the
resist is used as a mask for BARC etching, and BARC
is then used as a mask for ﬁlm etching.
The
absorption
strategy
involves
resist
tailoring.
The standard α are around 0.2–1/μm. Adding dyes to
increase absorptivity α to for example 2/μm means that
all radiation will be absorbed in the top resist layer,
and the bottom part will not be exposed. So there is
an optimum between swing ratio reduction and resist
proﬁle. Top surface imaging (TSI), overcomes the ab-
sorption dilemma by using very thin and very absorbing
resists, which are not sensitive to proﬁle variation like
standard resists.
The fourth possible strategy, resist thickness increase, is
at odds with resolution: if we wish to print narrow lines,
thinner resists are better. Scaling to smaller linewidths
with this strategy is therefore not an option at all.
10.5 Lithography Over Steps
The
viscous
ﬂow
of
photoresist
over
steps
leads
inevitably to uneven resist thickness (Figure 10.8) and
linewidth change at step edges. Because spin coating
results
in variable
resist
thickness
over
steps,
the
linewidth will be dependent on underlying steps via resist
thickness changes.
On non-planar surfaces the effect of structures from
previous steps causes some problems. Reﬂections from
underlying metal lines can cause resist exposure in un-
wanted places. This is called reﬂective notching and is
depicted in Figure 10.9.
Figure 10.8
Thickness variation of spin-coated resist over
topographic features
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 117]
Advanced Lithography
121
Figure 10.9
Reﬂective notching: left, top view of dis-
torted resist lines; right, cross-sectional view showing how
the underlying metal line reﬂects incoming light into the
resist sidewall
10.6 Optical Extensions of Optical
Lithography
Over the years many alternatives have been proposed as
replacements for optical lithography, among them X-ray
lithography, e-beam projection, ion beam projection and
e-beam direct write. Optical lithography has been able
to prosper because a constant ﬂux of improvements has
been forthcoming. For instance, there is immersion, an
old technique that has been known to microscopists since
the nineteenth century. NA (Equations 10.1 and 10.2) can
be increased by replacing air (refractive index 1.00) with
a higher refractive index ﬂuid, usually water (n = 1.35).
Immersion has been used in the production of 65 nm and
more advanced chips.
Optical waves have four basic properties: amplitude,
phase, direction and polarization. Engineering these
has resulted in many new ways to improve optical
lithography performance. Phase shift masks (PSMs),
off-axis illumination (OAI), optical proximity correction
(OPC)
and
subresolution
assist
features
(SRAFs)
are
collectively
known
as
resolution
enhancement
technologies (RETs).
10.6.1 Phase shift masks (PSM)
Normal masks are called binary masks because there are
two possibilities for light: transmission or blockage. In
phase shift masks (PSMs) there is a third possibility:
transmission with phase shift. Shifters are semitransparent
structures that produce a 180◦phase shift in the transmit-
ted light. Light along the shifted path will be out of phase
with the light going through the unshifted part, and the
amplitude will go through zero. Intensity, which is ampli-
tude squared, will be much steeper compared to a binary
mask, which improves both resolution and edge contrast.
The phase shift for light traveling in air for a distance L
is  = 2πL/λ, and for light traveling in the phase shifter
material with index of refraction n,  = 2πnL/λ. For a
180◦phase shift,  = 180◦, the condition for shifter
thickness is given by
L =
λ
2(n −1)
(10.8)
In alternating PSM (Figure 10.10) a shifter is either
etched or deposited for every second feature, which
limits PSM applications to regular arrays. The rim shifter
(see Figure 10.11) utilizes undercut and can be applied
to any pattern shape and size.
Rim PSM fabrication makes use of ingenious self-
alignment with back-side illumination (Figure 10.11):
an ordinary binary mask is fabricated ﬁrst, with chrome
patterns on a quartz plate. Shifter material is then
deposited all over the plate, and photoresist is spun. The
structure is then exposed from the opposite side of the
binary mask  (quartz/chrome)shifter
phase shift mask (PSM)
amplitude
intensity
Figure 10.10
Binary mask (left) and alternating phase
shift mask (right) compared: amplitude goes through zero
for PSM, and intensity (= amplitude squared) is steep
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 118]
122
Introduction to Microfabrication
quartz
quartz
quartz
quartz
Double exposure
quartz
quartz
Single exposure
quartz
Figure 10.11
Two schemes for fabrication of rim PSMs:
double exposure self-aligned on the left; standard single
exposure on the right side. Both processes result in identical
mask plates
mask plate and the chrome acts as a self-aligned mask
for the shifters. The shifters are then etched, followed by
chrome undercutting in a second etching step.
Process ﬂow for PSM fabrication
by single exposure
• Chrome deposition
• Shifter deposition
• Photoresist application
• Pattern generation
• Shifter etching
• Chrome etching and underetching
• Photoresist stripping
Chrome undercutting in both methods results in exactly
the same degree of dimensional control. The difference is
in mask inspection and repair: in the self-aligned method,
the chrome pattern can be inspected and repaired before
shifter fabrication. Lack of inspection and repair for PSMs
has been one main factor holding back their adoption.
PSM has been used in production since the 180 nm gen-
eration. As shown in Figure 10.12, it is possible to print
100 nm lines with 193 nm wavelength.
200 nm
Figure 10.12
PSM: 100 nm lines printed with 193 nm
light source. Reproduced from Fritze et al. (2003) by per-
mission of IEEE
10.6.2 Off-axis illumination (OAI)
Normally the illuminating light hits the mask perpendic-
ularly but in off-axis illumination (OAI) the light hits the
mask tilted (Figure 10.13). This has the effect of shifting
the diffraction pattern so that only the undiffracted zeroth
order and the ﬁrst diffracted order are transmitted (and
two components are needed to form an image). While in
normal illumination the zeroth order is at the middle of
the aperture, and the ﬁrst orders at the edges, giving pitch
as λ/NA, in OAI the pitch is halved because the zeroth
and ﬁrst order are twice that far apart. Theoretically OAI
can therefore provide a pitch that is half the standard illu-
mination pitch. Various pupil designs for OAI are shown
in Figure 10.14. One of the drawbacks of OAI is that par-
allel and perpendicular lines will be different, and in fact
each mask should have a pupil optimized for it.
Mask Pattern
(Equal Lines 
and Spaces)
Diffraction Pattern
Lens Aperture
Figure 10.13
Off-axis illumination (OAI). Reproduced
from
Mack
(2007),
by
permission
of
John
Wiley
& Sons, Ltd
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 119]
Advanced Lithography
123
Figure 10.14
Conventional,
annular
and
quadrupole
apertures
Figure 10.15
Standard mask (top left) and its resulting
resist pattern (top right); optical proximity corrected mask
(bottom left) and its resist pattern (bottom right)
10.6.3 Optical proximity correction (OPC)
Isolated and dense lines print differently (Figure 10.3)
because diffraction in arrays is different from that of an
isolated structure. This effect becomes more signiﬁcant
when feature sizes are scaled down. It can be combated
by designing the structures to take into account the
neighboring structures. This is an inverse problem: we
know the desired end result, and we have to work
backward from the correct resist pattern to a mask
pattern which will give us that. In Figure 10.15 this is
represented by arrows pointing in both directions: the
mask on the left produces the pattern on the right, or,
alternatively, to get the pattern on the right, we have to
design the mask to be as shown on the left.
10.6.4 Subresolution assist features (SRAF)
Subresolution assist features (SRAFs) are lines that are too
small to be printed in the lithography process, but they
will still affect the diffraction patterns, enabling better
control of feature shapes (Figure 10.16). SRAFs around an
Figure 10.16
Subresolution assist features (SRAFs)
isolated line make it look more like an array line, making
the difference between the two smaller, thus improving
process latitude. On the negative side, it takes a lot more
shots from the pattern generator to print all those extra
small pixels.
10.7 Non-Optical Extension of Optical
Lithography
Because optical lithography tools are expensive, there is
a constant need to ﬁnd ways to produce narrow lines in
a more cost-effective way. One such technique is resist
trimming. The minimum resist line is ﬁrst produced by
optical lithography, and isotropic plasma etching of the
photoresist is then performed (Figure 10.17). The resist
line gets narrower and thinner. This method is most
suitable when narrow lines can be used as a starting
point. In a university lab, a 1 μm minimum line can be
Figure 10.17
Resist trimming: resist lines made narrower
by isotropic etching of the resist in oxygen plasma. In both
cases the resolution (line + space) remains constant
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 120]
124
Introduction to Microfabrication
narrowed to 200 nm by 400 nm lateral narrowing on both
sides (resulting in a resist 600 nm thick). In modern IC
fabrication this technique is employed to narrow down
critical individual lines: the microprocessors gates. Lines
of 50 nm original width can be narrowed down to 20 nm:
that is, 15 nm horizontal narrowing from both sides.
Pitch is not affected, and device packing density remains
unchanged, but transistor speed improves because the
transit time from the source to drain becomes smaller,
see Equation 26.1.
10.8 Lithography Simulation
Lithographic pattern formation starts with the designer’s
layout ﬁle which is turned into a physical mask plate
in a mask shop. This mask is inserted into the expo-
sure tool, where it modiﬁes illumination from the light
source. After complex photochemistry steps in the pho-
toresist, development creates patterns in the resist. This
information ﬂow (Figure 10.18) has many points where
errors can occur and where dimensions are not accurately
transferred. Some of these are data errors related to for-
mats used in drawing and mask writing, and some are
physical and chemical errors related to both mask writing
and exposure resolution and to etching tolerances.
Note that the mask writing process has a similar
information ﬂow and similar error sources: the mask
DESIGN (CAD file) 
mask writing tool and process 
MASK
optical lithography tool, λ , NA 
AERIAL IMAGE 
focus, dose, wafer topography, reflections, 
thin film interference 
INTENSITY IMAGE IN RESIST
resist photochemistry, post-exposure bake 
LATENT IMAGE 
development 
RESIST IMAGE 
etching
PHYSICAL STRUCTURE ON WAFER 
Figure 10.18
Lithography
information
ﬂow.
Adapted
from Brunner (1997)
Intensity inside resist 
Spatial concentration 
of the photoactive 
compound
Developed resist 
profile
Aerial image & standing waves 
(optical computations)
Exposure kinetics and diffusion 
during bake (photochemical models)
Developement kinetics 
and etch algorithm 
(specialized topography simulation)
Figure 10.19
Modules of lithography simulation. Re-
drawn after Neureuther and Mack (1997)
writer has ﬁnite resolution; the photoresist used in mask
writing is similar to resists used in optical lithography;
and chrome etching has its non-idealities just like any
other etching process.
Lithography simulation is a self-contained specialty
within microfabrication simulations. It is partly physical
simulation (optical modeling) and partly semiempirical
(development simulation). Lithography simulators have
three basic functions as shown in Figure 10.19. The ﬁrst
module is optical modeling, the second is photochemical,
time-dependent, diffusion modeling, and the third module
is an etch simulator speciﬁcally built for resists. The
development of novolak resist in alkaline developer is an
etching reaction, and it uses models similar to etching,
but because its application ﬁeld is very speciﬁc, higher
accuracy is possible. These steps have been modeled
with good success even though an understanding of
many of the basic mechanisms in resist exposure and
development is yet to be revealed.
SAMPLE
2D
is
a
lithography
and
topography
simulator containing a concise optical lithography model
(Figure 10.20). Lithography simulation input parameters
include light source data like wavelength, exposure dose,
NA and coherence; resist thickness and Dill parameters
A, B and C; wafer and resist refractive indices; and
development rate parameters. SAMPLE 2D is able to
predict resist proﬁles with standing waves. PROLITH
is an advanced lithography simulator especially for
deep-UV lithography.
10.9 Lithography Triangles
Optical lithography has been amazingly persistent, and
it has been scaled down more than anybody could ever
imagine. Contenders for optical lithography will be dis-
cussed in Chapter 38. Some of them excel in certain as-
pects, but optical lithography has all the elements it takes:
light sources, resist, masks, metrology, design software,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 121]
Advanced Lithography
125
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.20
SAMPLE 2D simulation of resist exposure
and development; nominal linewidth is 1.0 μm (only right
hand side is shown because the structure is symmetric): (a)
exposure dose 100 mJ/cm2, development time 65 s; (b) dose
80 mJ/cm2, development 75 s, leads to sloped proﬁle; and
(c) dose 70 mJ/cm2, development 70 s, leads to incomplete
development. In (d) conditions are identical to (c) but resist
thickness is only 0.5 μm
etc. It takes time to build an infrastructure for a new
lithography technology.
Critical dimension, CD, is basically a 2D concept.
However, the resist sidewall is seldom 90◦, so CD should
photospeed
line edge 
roughness
resolution
depth 
of focus
etch 
selectivity
temperature 
sensitivity
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.21
Magic triangles in lithography. Adapted
from Zell (2006)
really be able to describe the shape of a trapezoidal object.
Real resist lines are also rough to some extent, and line
edge roughness (LER) is used to describe this.
Fantastically narrow lines are printed optically but there
are tradeoffs. These are shown by two “magic triangles”
in Figure 10.21. Magic triangles tie together properties
that are difﬁcult to optimize simultaneously.
10.10 Exercises
1. Produce a graphical presentation of projection lithog-
raphy resolution vs. depth of focus!
2. Estimate the contrasts of resists in Figure 10.3.
3. If subresolution assist features are half the feature size,
how is e-beam mask writing time affected?
4. How much will the swing ratio be reduced if the top
antireﬂection coating can reduce air/resist reﬂections
by 20%? How much will the swing ratio be reduced
if absorbance increases from 0.5 to 1/μm?
5. Calculate some good and bad resist thicknesses for
novolak resist at 365 nm exposure!
6. What
is
the
resist
thickness
and
linewidth
in
Figure 10.6?
7. How does resist trimming work if the original
linewidth is 0.5 μm and resist thickness 1 μm? What
if the original linewidth is 100 nm and resist thickness
150 nm?
8. How thick are phase shifters if a 193 nm laser is used
for exposure?
References and Related Reading
Ausschnitt, C. P. et al. (1997) Advanced DUV photolithog-
raphy in a pilot line environment, IBM J. Res. Dev.,
41, 21.
Brunner, T. (1997) Pushing the limits of lithography for IC
production, International Electron Devices Meeting, p. 9.
Fritze, M. et al. (2003) Enhanced resolution for future fabrica-
tion, IEEE Circuits Devices Mag., 1, 43.
Gu, A. and A. Zakhor (2008) Optical proximity correction
with linear regression, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 21,
263–271.
Holmes, S. J. et al. (1997) Manufacturing with DUV lithogra-
phy, IBM J. Res. Dev., 41, 7.
Lin, B. J. (2006) The ending of optical lithography and
the prospects of its successors, Microelectron. Eng., 83,
604–613.
Mack, C. (2007) Fundamental Principles of Optical Lithog-
raphy, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
McCallum, M., M. Kameyama and S. Owa (2006) Practical de-
velopment and implementation of 193nm immersion lithog-
raphy, Microelectron. Eng., 83, 640–642.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 122]
126
Introduction to Microfabrication
Neureuther, A. R. and C. A. Mack (1997) Optical lithogra-
phy modeling, in P. Rai-Choudhury (ed.) Handbook of Mi-
crolithography, Micromachining and Microfabrication,
SPIE.
Peace, R. F. and S. Y. Chou (2008) Lithography and other
patterning techniques for future electronics, Proc. IEEE, 96,
248–270.
Peterson, B. et al. (1996) Approaches to reducing edge rough-
ness and substrate poisoning of ESCAP photoresists, Semi-
cond. Fabtech, 8, 183.
Rai-Choudhury, P. (ed.) (1997) Handbook of Microlithogra-
phy, Micromachining and Microfabrication, SPIE.
Schellenberg, F. M. (2005) A history of resolution enhancement
technology, Opt. Rev., 12, 83–89.
Zell, Th. (2006) Present and future of 193nm lithography,
Microelectron. Eng., 83, 624–633.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 123]
11
Etching
The pattern transfer process consists of two steps: litho-
graphic resist patterning and the subsequent etching of
the underlying material. Resist protects the areas where
the material needs to remain, and open areas are etched.
In the etching process material is chemically and/or
physically attacked and eroded in the unprotected areas.
Some materials are spontaneously chemically etched,
like silicon by ﬂuorine, aluminum by chlorine, or oxide
by hydroﬂuoric acid. Sometimes physical processes are
needed to assist in etching, like ion bombardment in chlo-
rine etching of aluminum oxide and ﬂuorine etching of
silicon dioxide. In those cases the resulting etch rate is a
synergistic sum of both chemical and physical processes.
All materials can be etched by energetic ions, and this
applies to the resist mask and the underlying ﬁlm, too.
But in practical processes it is important to achieve selec-
tivity: that is, high etch rate ratio between two materials.
In the ideal case etching would stop when ﬁlm clears,
but in practice some underlying material loss is almost
inevitable (Figure 11.1). Resist is also consumed in the
process, and the sidewall of etched structure is not neces-
sarily perfectly vertical. It calls for engineering judgment
Figure 11.1
Etching with photoresist mask: thin ﬁlm has
been etched, with some etching of the underlying material
and resist, too. There is some undercutting and the proﬁle
is not perfectly vertical
to decide which degree of proﬁle control and selectivity
are acceptable.
In lithography rework is easy: if the resist pattern is
found to be faulty in inspection, the resist is stripped and
lithography repeated, but once the pattern has been trans-
ferred into solid material by etching, rework is much more
difﬁcult, and usually impossible.
11.1 Etch Mechanisms
Etching is often divided into two classes, wet etching
and plasma etching. Wet etching equipment consists of
a heated quartz tank or bath plasma etching equipment
consists of a vacuum chamber with a RF generator and a
gas system.
The basic reactions in etching are given by
Wet etching:
solid + liquid etchant ⇒soluble products
Si (s) + 2 OH−+ 2 H2O
⇒Si(OH)2(O−)2 (aq) + 2 H2 (g)
(11.1)
Plasma etching:
solid + gaseous etchant ⇒volatile products
SiO2 (s) + CF4 (g) ⇒SiF4 (g) + CO2 (g)
(11.2)
There are several processes that must take place for etch-
ing to proceed:
• transport of etchants to surface (ﬂow and diffusion)
• surface processes (adsorption, reaction, desorption)
• removal of product species (diffusion and ﬂow).
These basic steps are the same for both wet etching and
plasma etching, but clearly diffusion in the gas phase is
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 124]
128
Introduction to Microfabrication
more rapid than in the liquid phase. In plasmas there are
many possibilities to provide extra energy to the process,
in the form of accelerated ions. The chemical component
of etching can be enhanced by heating, in both wet and
plasma etching.
A comparison of the basic processes of plasma etching
in Figure 11.2 to those of CVD (Figure 5.6) reveals ob-
vious similarities. Gases are fed in by forced convection,
some species diffuse through the boundary layer to the
surface and react there, desorb and diffuse back to the
main ﬂow stream, and get pumped away. Note that uti-
lization of source gases is never perfect: some source gas
molecules “ﬂy by” the wafer in the main ﬂow. A very
small fraction of molecules are ionized, and these ions
enhance surface reactions. Plasma etcher can be run as a
deposition tool, and PECVD reactor as an etcher, which
is beneﬁcial for chamber cleaning.
If etching is too slow, any of the above steps can be the
cause of the problem: inadequate inﬂow of etchant, slow
diffusion through a thick boundary layer, slow chemical
reaction on the surface, low volatility (or solubility) of
products. Redeposition of products on the surface can also
take place, and sometimes byproducts, like hydrogen gas
evolution (as in Equation 11.1), are so strong that they
prevent etchant from reaching the surface.
Etch rates are typically 100–1000 nm/min, for both
wet and plasma processes. The lower limit comes from
manufacturing economics and the upper limit from resist
degradation, thermal runout and damage considerations.
Silicon etching is exceptional: rates up to 20 μm/min are
available in both wet etching (HF:HNO3) and in plasma
etching (DRIE) in SF6.
11.1.1 Footnote on terminology
The term dry etching, as an opposite to wet etching, is
often used as a synonym for plasma etching, but there
are dry methods which do not involve plasmas, e.g. XeF2
etching of silicon. We use the terms plasma etching and
RIE interchangeably. RIE, Reactive Ion Etching is a mis-
nomer: ions in RIE are in a minor role, most etching
is done by excited neutrals. Ion etching, also known as
ion milling, is a completely different kind of an etching
process, to be discussed in Section 11.11.
11.2 Etching Proﬁles
The isotropic etching front proceeds as a spherical wave
from all points open to the etchant. Because the etch
front proceeds under the mask (resulting in undercut),
isotropic etching cannot be used to make ﬁne features
(Figure 11.3). In fully isotropic etching lateral extent
(undercutting) is identical to vertical etched depth.
1. etchant flow
2. ionization
3. diffusion 
4. adsorption
5. reaction
6. desorption
7. diffusion 
8. pump out
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 11.2
Basic processes in plasma etching: forced ﬂow, boundary layer diffusion and surface processes enhanced
by ion bombardment
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 125]
Etching
129
Figure 11.3
Undercutting in isotropic etching: wide lines
are narrowed but narrow lines are completely undercut and
released
Etch bias, deﬁned as the difference between etched
feature size and mask size, is then twice the etched
depth.
Isotropic proﬁle is the most commonly encountered
etch proﬁle. Most wet etchants result in an isotropic pro-
ﬁle, and it is encountered also in plasma and dry etching.
In plasma etching, the degree of isotropy can be con-
trolled by the etching parameters, from fully isotropic to
fully anisotropic (which may not be easy !).
Undercut can be compensated by making the initial
mask feature larger than the desired width, for light-ﬁeld
structures, and smaller for dark-ﬁeld structures. This ap-
proach works quite well for isolated structures, but in
dense arrays its utility is limited.
Wet etching proﬁles are seldom perfectly isotropic,
and both deep slopes and gently sloping sidewall proﬁles
are possible. The main parameters affecting the slope are
the same as those governing the other main features of
etching: etchant concentration and temperature. Silicon
dioxide etching can produce steep slopes in NH4F:HF at
a ratio of 7:1 at 25 ◦C, but a ratio of 30:1 at 55 ◦C leads
to a gentle slope. Gentle slopes may be desirable for
step coverage in subsequent deposition steps. NH4F:HF
mixture is known as buffered HF (BHF) because the
consumption of ﬂuoride ions by the etching reaction
is compensated, buffered, by ionization of NH4F into
ammonia and ﬂuoride.
Undercutting
is
sometimes
desirable
and
even
necessary. In order to fabricate free-standing beams and
plates, isotropic etching is a must: the beams are released
when the underlying material is completely removed
(Figure 11.3). Such released beams and plates are
essential building blocks in surface micromechanics, for
instance the bolometer of Figure 2.1 has been released
by isotropic undercutting.
Anisotropic etching results in a vertical or almost verti-
cal proﬁle, which is suitable for ﬁne structure fabrication.
Isotropic
and
anisotropic
proﬁles
are
compared
in
Figure 11.4. In plasma etching the proﬁle can be tailored
by process conditions: pressure, power, temperature and
gas ﬂows. Bombardment supplies energy to horizontal
surfaces and drives vertical etching. Sidewalls do not
experience ion bombardment, and therefore the etch
rate in the lateral direction is reduced. Low-pressure
operation favors anisotropy because bombardment is
more directional, but low-pressure operation requires
either a bigger pump or reduced ﬂow rate, in which
case the rate is lower. Other effects of ion bombardment
include ion-induced desorption, ion-induced damage and
ion-activated chemical reactions. Increased ion energy
Figure 11.4
Isotropic (left) and anisotropic etch proﬁles (right)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 126]
130
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 11.5
Mechanism of anisotropy: all surfaces are
passivated by a thin ﬁlm, but directional ion bombardment
will clear ﬁlms from a horizontal surface while leaving pas-
sivation ﬁlm on the sidewalls, enabling etching to proceed
vertically only
can be helpful for increasing vertical etch rate, but the
masking material is also etched faster if power is high.
The other main mechanism for anisotropy is sidewall
passivation. Passivating ﬁlms, for example (CF2)n-type
ﬂuorocarbon ﬁlms (from CHF3 or C4F8 gases), deposit
on all surfaces, but ion bombardment removes them from
horizontal surfaces, and sidewalls remain passivated
(Figure
11.5).
Operation
at
cryogenic
temperatures
(e.g., −120 ◦C) leads to reduced chemical reaction rates
according to the Arrhenius equation. Suppression of
spontaneous reactions means that only ion bombardment-
driven reactions take place, and they are anisotropic.
Cryogenic etching of silicon in SF6/O2 etching of silicon
results in SiOxFy reaction products that are not very
volatile, and they will redeposit on the wafer. And just as
with ﬂuoropolymer ﬁlms, ion bombardment will remove
this redeposited ﬁlm from horizontal surfaces, leaving
the sidewalls passivated.
11.3 Anisotropic Wet Etching
Isotropy, or homogeneity of space in all directions,
is sometimes useful as we can neglect directions.
Anisotropic
processes
are
spatially
directional,
but
there
are
two
completely
different
usages
of
the
term anisotropic etching: anisotropic wet etching and
anisotropic plasma etching. Anisotropic wet etching
could be termed crystal plane anisotropy, because the
different silicon crystal planes have different etch rates.
Potassium
hydroxide
(KOH)
is
the
prototypical
anisotropic wet etchant for silicon. In KOH silicon
(100) crystal planes are etched 200 times faster than
(111) planes. KOH etching at about 80 ◦C cannot be
done with photoresist mask. Instead, resist is used to
etch silicon dioxide or silicon nitride, and after resist
stripping silicon etching is done in KOH with oxide or
Figure 11.6
Anisotropic
crystal
plane-dependent
wet
etching of silicon: top view and cross-sectional view of
a membrane and a V-groove etched on (100) silicon
wafer
nitride mask. Initially the shape is determined by the fast
etching crystal planes (100) and (110) but in the end
etching terminates when only slow etching (111) planes
are present. When the slow etching (111) planes meet,
etching will terminate. The etched depth is determined
by the mask opening and the angle between the (111)
and (100) planes, 54.7◦. This angle is very characteristic
of silicon MEMS structures. Some simple geometries
are depicted in Figure 11.6, namely V-grooves and
membranes. Note that it is important that the structures
are aligned to the crystal planes (indicated by the
wafer ﬂat).
A square-shaped mask pattern will lead to a square-
shaped well, or, if thought of differently, to a silicon
membrane that can be used in pressure sensors as the
active bending element. If etching is continued until sili-
con is completely removed, a nitride membrane results. If
the mask opening is small, the slow etching (111) planes
will meet, and an inverse pyramid shape is formed (as
seen in Figure 1.14a).
Because anisotropic wet etching is controlled by the
crystal planes, etching can be continued extendedly with-
out loss of control. Through-wafer etching is possible, en-
abling, among others, microrocket thrusters (Figure 11.7).
The thruster is made of two identical wafers which have
been bonded together. The variety of shapes that can be
made by crystal plane-dependent etching is astonishingly
large, as will be seen in Chapters 20 and 30.
11.4 Wet Etching
Wet etching mechanisms fall into two major categories:
metal etching by electron transfer, Equation 11.3, and in-
sulator etching by acid–base reaction, Equation 11.4:
Me (s) ⇒Men+ (aq) + ne−
(11.3)
SiO2 + 6 HF ⇒H2SiOF6 (aq) + 2 H2O
(11.4)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 127]
Etching
131
inlet
diffused resistor
diffused resistor
exit nozzle
fuel chamber
Figure 11.7
Anisotropic wet etching of silicon: two iden-
tical silicon wafers bonded together to form a microrocket
fuel chamber and inlet and exit nozzles (with diffused re-
sistor heater). Adapted from Mukerjee et al. (2000)
The rates of wet chemical reactions can have two behav-
iors which we encountered earlier in the CVD reaction
mechanisms:
1. The surface reaction is slow and it determines the rate.
2. The surface reaction is fast and the rate is determined
by etchant availability (transport of reactant by con-
vection and diffusion).
Surface reaction-limited processes exhibit activation ener-
gies of 30–90 kJ/mol. The rate increases with increasing
etchant concentration and is insensitive to stirring. Differ-
ent crystal planes can have different surface reaction rates
and this leads to anisotropy, for example in KOH and
TMAH etching of silicon. Aluminum etching in H3PO4
is also surface reaction limited: Al2O3 dissolution is the
rate determining step, with 54 kJ/mol activation energy.
Transport-controlled reactions are characterized by
activation energies of 4–25 kJ/mol. Their rate increases
with agitation and stirring because more reactant is being
brought within the vicinity of the surface. Furthermore,
all crystal planes etch at the same rate, which is natural.
Silicon etching in HF:HNO3 mixture is limited by
HF diffusion through the product layer. The activation
energy is 17 kJ/mol.
Wet etching processes are available for most materials,
with diamond and GaN being the most notable exceptions.
Table 11.1 lists a number of etch processes for photore-
sist masked etching. As a general rule, lower temperature
and more dilute solutions can be tried if the photoresist
mask does not survive the etching conditions. It must
Table 11.1
Wet etchants for photoresist masked
etching (mostly room temperature)
SiO2
NH4F:HF (7:1),a 35 ◦C
SiO2
NH4F: CH3COOH:C2H6O2 (ethylene gly-
col): H2O (14:32:4:50)
Poly-Si
HF:HNO3:H2O (6:10:40)
Al
H3PO4:HNO3:H2O (80:4:16), water can be
changed to acetic acid
Mo
H3PO4:HNO3:H2O (80:4:16)
W, TiW
H2O2:H2O (1:1)
Cr
Ce(NH4)NO3:HNO3:H2O (1:1:1)
Cu
HNO3:H2O (1:1)
Ni
HNO3:CH3COOH:H2SO4 (5:5:2)
Ti
HF:H2O2 (1:1)
Au
KI:I2:H2O, KCN:H2O
Pt, Au
HNO3:HCl (1:3), “aqua regia,” H2O dilu-
tion may be used
aCalled BHF, for buffered HF, and also known as BOE, for buffered
oxide etchant.
be remembered that other factors will change too, for
example sidewall proﬁle.
Oxide etch rate goes down linearly with decreasing
HF concentration. However, aluminum etch rate goes up
when HF concentration decreases: 49% HF etches alu-
minum at 38 nm/min, but 10:1 diluted HF results in a
320 nm/min rate. This is because water has an active role
in aluminum surface oxidation. Buffering agents and other
additives can dramatically change etch rates and selec-
tivities, as shown in Table 29.2. Wet etch processes for
non-masked etching are listed in Table 11.2. These pro-
cesses remove ﬁlms without making any patterns.
Wet etching is an indispensable tool in defect analysis:
microstructural defects like stacking faults and pinholes
can be made visible by wet etching. Sirtl, Secco, Wright,
Dash and Sailor are etchants for delineating defects. In
reverse engineering and failure analysis thin ﬁlms are
removed selectively by isotropic etching (wet or dry) to
reveal layer by layer the wanted structures.
Table 11.2
Wet etchants for unmasked etching
SiO2
DHF, dilute HF (1%), for removing native ox-
ide (about 10 nm/min)
SiO2,
PSG
HF (49%) sacriﬁcial layer removal (>1 μm/
min)
Si3N4
HF (49%) layer removal (4 nm/min)
Si3N4
H3PO4 (concentrated, 180 ◦C)
Si
HF:HNO3:H2O (6:10:40) (thinning etch, up to
20 μm/min)
Cu
HCl
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 128]
132
Introduction to Microfabrication
Wet etching processes are easy in theory, but in practice
wet etching is difﬁcult:
1. Reaction products may affect the etching reaction, for
example hydrogen evolves when silicon is etched by
hydroxide (KOH, for instance) and this hydrogen can
prevent etchant from reaching the surface.
2. Etching products catalyze or inhibit the reaction
(HF:HNO3 etching of silicon).
3. The etching reaction is sensitive to stirring (mass or
heat transport limited).
4. The etching reaction is exothermic and temperature
rises during etching (for these reactions, stirring de-
creases the etch rate because it removes heat).
5. Evaporation of etchant leads to concentration changes
during etching.
11.4.1 Wet etching tools
Wet etching comes in three major variants: tank immer-
sion (bath) (Figure 11.8), spray tool and single wafer
processor. The tank is for example a quartz vessel with
heating and temperature control. It is ﬁlled with water
and chemicals and the wafers are immersed in liquid for
a required time and then transferred to similar tanks for
rinsing. Spray tools handle a cassette (or cassettes) but,
instead of immersion, liquid is sprayed from stationary
nozzles on rotating wafer cassette(s). After the ﬁrst spray-
ing the process continues with either another chemical or
water spray and nitrogen drying, in the same vessel. Fresh
mixing of chemicals and lower liquid volumes are spray
tool advantages over tanks. Single wafer tools are akin to
photoresist spinners, and in a sense they are spray tools,
Figure 11.8
Wet etching tank. Courtesy VTT
too. However, processing acts on a single wafer at a time,
and works on the wafer topside only.
Heating wet etching tanks uniformly is no easy task be-
cause highly reactive and corrosive chemicals are used at
high temperatures (e.g., 180 ◦C boiling nitric acid to etch
nitride). Temperature uniformity depends on ﬂow patterns
in the tank. This is not trivial because stirring can enhance
reactant supply, reaction product removal, or heat removal
from an exothermic reaction.
The materials of the tanks and heaters must be compati-
ble with the process, in chemical, thermal and mechanical
respects. Teﬂon and quartz are often used in the most de-
manding applications, but both are expensive materials
and difﬁcult to machine. Polypropylene is used for less
critical applications, while stainless steel is the material
for solvent tanks.
11.5 Plasma Etching (RIE)
Vertical walls and highly accurate reproduction of pho-
toresist dimensions translate to closely spaced structures.
High packing density of devices is possible by anisotropic
plasma etching. When undercut becomes signiﬁcant rela-
tive to linewidth, wet etching faces serious problems. In
IC fabrication this led to the adoption of plasma etching
at about 3 μm linewidths. With anisotropy, that is ver-
tical sidewalls, undercut compensation schemes became
unnecessary, and all the resolving power of lithography
tools could be used to increase device packing density.
Plasma etching is done in a vacuum chamber by re-
active gases excited by RF ﬁelds (Figure 11.9). Both
excited and ionized species are important for plasma etch-
ing. Excited molecules like CF4∗are very reactive, and
ionic species like CF3+ are accelerated by the RF ﬁeld and
impart energy directionally to the surface. Plasma etching
is thus a combination of chemical (reactive) and physical
(bombardment) processes.
Deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) is an extension of
RIE to make deep structures with high etch rate. DRIE
reactors have two power generators, one for generating
a high-density plasma (1012–13 ions/cm3) and another for
biasing the wafer electrode, see Figure 33.2. This arrange-
ment enables high powers to be used for active species
generation, but independent control of ion bombardment
via the second power source. DRIE will be discussed in
detail in Chapter 21.
11.5.1 Plasma etch chemistries
In a plasma discharge a number of different mechanisms
for gas phase reactions are operative. The discharge gener-
ates both ions and excited neutrals, and both are important
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 129]
Etching
133
Figure 11.9
Plasma etching system (RIE): gases are in-
troduced through the top electrode; wafers are on the pow-
ered bottom electrode
for etching, that is
Ionization:
e−+ Ar
⇒Ar+ + 2 e−
Excitation:
e−+ O2
⇒O2∗+ e−
Dissociation:
e−+ SF6 ⇒e−+ SF5∗+ F∗
The most abundant species in the plasma reactor is the
source gas. Etch reaction products are the next most abun-
dant, and they may represent a few percent or 10% of all
moieties. Excited neutrals may be present at a few percent,
but ions are just a very minor component, for example
one in 100 000. They are, however, often important for
the mechanism.
Plasma etching is based on reaction product volatil-
ity. Silicon is easily etched by halogens: the ﬂuorides
(SiF4), chlorides (SiCl4) and bromides (SiBr4) of silicon
are volatile at room temperature at millitorr pressures. No
ion bombardment is needed for etching because the re-
actions are thermodynamically favored and the role of
ion bombardment is used to induce directionality. Sili-
con nitride (Si3N4) is etched by ﬂuorine, producing SiF4
and NF3. Aluminum is spontaneously etched by Cl2, but
the surface of aluminum is always protected by a na-
tive aluminum oxide layer a few nanometers thick, and
aluminum etching can only commence after this oxide
has been removed. Ion bombardment is essential for alu-
minum oxide etching.
Table 11.3
Typical etch gases
Fluorine
Chlorine
Bromine
Stabilizers
Scavengers
CF4
Cl2
HBr
He
O2
SF6
BCl3
Ar
CHF3
SiCl4
N2
NF3
CHCl3
C2F6
C4F8
XeF2
Table 11.3 lists typical plasma etch gases. These include
not only the etchant gases but also scavengers and stabiliz-
ers. SF6- and CF4-based processes have typically 10–40%
oxygen added to them. Oxygen has several roles: it reacts
with SFn and CFn fragments, and keeps ﬂuorine concen-
tration high by preventing ﬂuorine recombination with the
fragments. Oxygen reacts with resist, which contributes
to sidewall polymer formation and therefore improved
anisotropy. Oxygen also increases the resist etch rate, so
that selectivity can in fact be worse even though the sili-
con etch rate is enhanced.
11.5.2 Plasma etch mechanisms
Chemical bonds need to be broken for etching to take
place. Bond energies, therefore, give indications of
possible etching reactions. Reactions that lead to bonds
stronger than the Si–Si bond will etch silicon, and if the
products have stronger bonds than Si-O, silicon dioxide
will be etched (Table 11.4). These simple predictions
are experimentally conﬁrmed: ﬂuorine, chlorine and
bromine will etch silicon because silicon–halogen bonds
are stronger than silicon–silicon bonds. Only the Si–F
bond is stronger than the Si–O bond and therefore only
ﬂuorine is predicted to etch oxide. But because of ion
bombardment, oxide is slightly etched also in chlorine
and bromine plasmas, but to a much lesser extent than
in ﬂuorine plasmas.
In practice, the volatility of reaction products (i.e., high
vapor pressure) is used as a criterion for etchant selection.
Boiling points of reaction products can be used to estimate
volatility (Tables 11.5 and 11.6). (Note that boiling points
are usually for 1 atm pressure, not for reduced pressures,
but they are very useful as quick estimates for volatility.)
Table 11.4
Bond energies (kJ/mol)
C–O
1080
Si–F
550
Si–O
470
Si–Cl
403
Si–Si
227
Si–Br
370
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 130]
134
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 11.5
Etch product boiling points (Tbp,◦C;
d = decomposition, s = sublimation)
SiF4
−90
SiCl4
−70
CO2
−56
NF3
−206
AlCl3
190
PH3
−133
WF6
2.5
GaCl3
78
AsH3
−116
WOF4
110
TiCl4
−25
TaF5
96.8
WOCl4
211
SiBr2
5.4
MoF6
17.5
WCl6
275
MoOF4
98
InCl2
235
NbF5
72
MoCl5
194
GaF3
800s
PtCl4
370d
PbCl4
−15
Cr(CO)6
110d
Table 11.6
Non-etchable reaction products
(Tbp,◦C; d = decomposition, s = sublimation)
CuCl2
620
TiF4
>400
CuF2
950d
PbF2
855
CrCl2
824
CrF2
1100
AlF3
1290s
TiF3
1200
Reaction products like WOF4 (from CF4 and O2 etching
of tungsten) and AlCl3 (Cl2 etching of aluminum) have
boiling points around 200 ◦C and are volatile enough for
practical etching, but AlF3 or CrF2 have boiling points
about 1000 ◦C and therefore ﬂuorine is not a suitable
etchant for these materials. Ion bombardment enhances
the removal of material and can be used to drive reactions
which might otherwise not be suitable for etching. Such
reactions are, however, prone to residues. Gallium ﬂuo-
ride is involatile but chlorides are volatile, and therefore
GaAs and GaN etching uses chlorine.
The exact plasma etch mechanisms remain unknown
in many cases. It has been shown that damaged single
crystal tungsten is etched much faster than perfect crystal.
Silicon etch rate has been shown to be synergistic, with
both ion bombardment and chemical components: etching
with argon ion bombardment alone results in low rate,
and similarly for XeF2 gas etching, but for simultaneous
Ar+/XeF2 process the etch rate increases by a factor of
10–100.
11.6 Isotropic Dry Etching
There are plasma-less dry etching methods: XeF2 and
ClF3 gases will spontaneously break down and release
free ﬂuorine, which aggressively etches silicon. XeF2 is
a crystalline solid which sublimes to produce XeF2 vapor
with a vapor pressure of a few torr. It is very reactive with
water and forms hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) which presents
hazards to operators.
Another dry etching process without plasmas is oxide
etching with HF vapor. Because it is based on diffusion of
vapors, there is no directionality and the resulting proﬁle
is isotropic. This process, too, requires extensive safety
precautions because of HF. Isotropic dry etching is very
desirable in MEMS, as will be discussed in Section 29.6.
The great beneﬁt of dry etching compared to wet etch-
ing is the elimination of the drying step and the surface
tension-caused mechanical distortions resulting from cap-
illary forces.
11.7 Etch Masks
11.7.1 Resist selectivity
Usually a vertical resist sidewall is desirable and neces-
sary for the best linewidth control in plasma etching. Most
often the resist is, however, slightly sloped, for example
86◦or 88◦(positive slope), or even negatively sloped
(retrograde). Fluorine plasmas are “milder” than chlorine
plasmas, and resist selectivity is better, for example 5:1
or 10:1, while in chlorine plasmas 3:1 or 5:1 is more typi-
cal. In severe cases 1:1 is seen. This then means that only
rather thin layers can be etched.
In wet etching resist selectivity is often inﬁnite in
practice, but adhesion of resist becomes an issue. This
is dependent on priming, feature size, resist thickness
and the chemical character of the resist. Some resists
are speciﬁcally tailored for wet processing (etching
and/or electroplating). Generally,
thicker resists
are
mechanically more stable. If there is any loss of adhesion
between the resist and substrate, etching will easily
penetrate along the interface, leading to complete resist
delamination, or just to a sloped sidewall, which may be
beneﬁcial in subsequent deposition steps.
11.7.2 Etching with a hard mask
Many wet and dry etching processes utilize hard masks
because resists are simply not tolerant enough under harsh
etch conditions. Harsh can mean aggressive chlorine plas-
mas, very long etch times or hot acids or bases like 80 ◦C
25% KOH for silicon anisotropic etching. In deep submi-
cron processes resist thickness has to be scaled down for
maximum lithographic resolution, but these thin resists
are not always suitable as etch masks.
Photoresists are materials that combine photoactivity
and
mechanical/thermal/chemical
stability;
obviously
photoactivity is the property that cannot be sacriﬁced.
In order to ﬁnd optimum materials as etch masks, the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 131]
Etching
135
concept of hard mask has been devised. The hard mask
material is etched with photoresist mask, photoresist is
then stripped and the etch process is performed using the
hard mask only. The hard mask material can be optimized
to suit the application, irrespective of photoresist.
In silicon etching in KOH, silicon dioxide or silicon
nitride hard masks are standard materials. When glass
wafers (or thick oxides) are etched, nickel, chromium,
polysilicon and amorphous silicon are suitable masking
materials for concentrated HF (49%). Silicon carbide
(PECVD SiC) and tantalum pentoxide (Ta2O5) are
excellent hard masks for many wet and dry etching
processes.
In DRIE etched depths can be 500 μm (through the
wafer) and resists cannot be used as masks. Many mate-
rials are used as hard masks, such as silicon dioxide and
aluminum. Aluminum nitride (AlN) and aluminum oxide
(Al2O3) are very resistant in many plasmas, but can be
easily wet etched by KOH and even dilute NaOH photore-
sist developer. This fact can sometimes make processing
much faster and easier, compared to other hard masks that
are very stable materials (which is why they were chosen
in the ﬁrst place).
RIE processes that use Cl2 chemistry use metals like
chromium or nickel as etch masks. However, the use of
metal masks poses a problem in plasma etching. Even
though the mask is chemically inert, it is always etched
somewhat under ion bombardment. Redeposition of these
non-volatile ion-etched species on the surfaces leads to
non-etchable spots. This is called micromasking. In the
case of perfect anisotropy micromasking leads to the for-
mation of dense forest of pillars or grass.
Polysilicon gate etching can be done with an oxide hard
mask. Because poly etching is highly selective against
gate oxide, it is also highly selective against oxide hard
mask, therefore a very thin oxide hard mask is enough,
and very thin photoresist can be used to etch this hard
mask. Elimination of carbon (i.e., elimination of photore-
sist) from the reaction brings about a major selectivity
improvement: the selectivity between poly and oxide can
be as high as 300:1 compared to 30:1 with resist mask,
while keeping plasma parameters (RF power, pressure
and gas ﬂows) constant. In the presence of carbon CO is
formed because it is energetically favorable (Table 11.4)
and the source of carbon for CO formation is the photore-
sist, hence the lower oxide selectivity. In the absence of
carbon/resist, no CO is formed.
11.8 Non-Masked Etching
Plasma etching replaced wet etching because of less un-
dercut and better linewidth control. But this argument
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.10
Etchback: (a) the trench wall is coated with
a thin Ti/TiN layer and ﬁlled with CVD tungsten; (b) tung-
sten etchback will result in a planar surface and ﬁlled
vertical plug
applies to patterning etching only: there are plenty of
applications where etching is not used for making pat-
terns, therefore there is neither photoresist nor hard mask.
Etchback is a process where extra material is removed,
with the whole wafer exposed to plasma. In tungsten etch-
back, tungsten is removed from planar areas, leaving only
the contact/via plugs ﬁlled (Figure 11.10). Etchback is
used in multilevel metallization to make tungsten plugs
(see Chapter 28 for more on this).
Non-masked wet etching removes for instance diffusion
mask oxide after diffusion, and similarly, mask nitrides
are removed in H3PO4 or concentrated HF (which would
immediately attack resist). Dilute HF removes native ox-
ides. High rate maskless silicon etching is needed in wafer
thinning.
11.9 Multistep and Multilayer Etching
Etching a single layer structure can be accomplished
in a single step, but multistep etching can be used for
improved process control. In polysilicon gate etching a
three-step process is typical. The ﬁrst step removes native
oxide in a short, non-selective process. Bulk etching
is then done, but before the end point is reached, the
process is switched to a low-rate, high-selectivity recipe.
Note that the underlying oxide loss is a sum of four
different factors: (1) polysilicon ﬁlm (non)uniformity; (2)
polysilicon etch process (non)uniformity; (3) poly:oxide
selectivity; and (4) overetch time.
11.9.1 Multilayer etching
Thin-ﬁlm functionalities are enhanced by multilayer struc-
tures. This is bad news for etch engineers, because there
is no guarantee that the materials behave at all similarly
in etching.
It seldom happens that both (or all) layers can be etched
with the same process parameters, and it may well be
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 132]
136
Introduction to Microfabrication
resist
WSi2
poly
oxide
silicon
Figure 11.11
Double layer plasma etching: simultaneous
optimization of both ﬁlms is not easy – photoresist is still
in place
that completely different etch chemistries must be used.
In two-step double layer etching an end point signal must
be obtained so that etching can be stopped, or else etch
chemistry must provide high selectivity. High selectivity,
however, is not always beneﬁcial: if TiN on top of alu-
minum is etched in ﬂuorine plasma, etching will deﬁnitely
stop once the underlying aluminum is met, but the alu-
minum surface will turn to AlF3, which is a very stable
material, and initiation of the aluminum etch step is en-
dangered. Etching of polycide gate (WSi2/poly) is shown
in Figure 11.11 with potential proﬁle issues.
Process ﬂow for WSi2 /polysilicon
(polycide) etching
1. WSi2 etching: Cl2/He/O2 for WSi2
2. Poly etching: Cl2/HBr for poly
3. Poly end point step: HBr/He/O2 for etching last
20 nm of poly
4. Overetch step: HBr/He/O2 optimized for high oxide
selectivity
Etching of the bottom layer has all the usual require-
ments about rate, selectivity and proﬁle, and the extra
requirement of not etching the top layer. Of course the ac-
ceptable degree of undercut in either of the layers calls for
engineering judgment. Problems with ﬁlm stacks which
require different etch chemistries (chlorine vs. ﬂuorine)
has led to multichamber etch reactors, with each chamber
reserved for one material and/or speciﬁc etch chemistry.
This will be discussed in Chapter 31.
11.10 Etch Processes for Common
Materials
11.10.1 Silicon
Fluorine, chlorine and bromine processes are standard for
silicon etching, resulting in reaction products SiF4, SiCl4
and SiBr4, respectively. Single crystal silicon, polysilicon
and amorphous silicon can all be etched with similar etch
processes, which is not necessarily true for wet etching.
Fluorine processes are safer to use, but seldom fully
anisotropic. Chlorine processes which have less sponta-
neous chemical etching and more ion enhancement result
in vertical sidewalls, and the same applies to bromine pro-
cesses. These two gases are, however, highly toxic, and
the equipment for Cl2 or HBr etching must be equipped
with loadlocks. Loadlocks complicate system operation
but simultaneously improve reproducibility since the re-
action chamber is not exposed to room air and humidity.
Silicon
isotropic
wet
etching
is
often
done
in
HF:HNO3:CH3COOH (sometimes water is used instead
of acetic acid). Depending on the ratio of nitric acid
to hydroﬂuoric acid, the etch rate can be modiﬁed
from a few hundred nanometers per minute to tens
of micrometers per minute. A common mixture is
1:3:8 which etches silicon at about 3 μm/min at room
temperature. Hydroxyl ions (OH−) form according to
HNO3 + H2O + HNO2 →2 HNO2 + 2 OH−+ 2 h+
(11.5)
Hydroxyl ions react with silicon to form silicon dioxide,
Equation 11.6. Holes (h+) are needed in the reaction to
balance charges. HF ﬁnally etches the oxide. The overall
reaction is given by Equation 11.7:
Si + 2 OH−+ 2 h+ →SiO2 + H2
(11.6)
Si + HNO3 + 6 HF →H2SiF6 + HNO2 + H2O + H2
(11.7)
The reaction is problematic for many reasons. First of all,
it is autocatalytic: nitric acid (HNO3) produces nitrous
acid (HNO2) which reacts with nitric acid to produce more
nitrous acid. The reaction is also very exothermic, releas-
ing a lot of heat which accelerates the reaction. If the
etchant is stirred, heat is carried away, reducing the etch
rate. Because the reaction needs holes, its rate depends
on silicon doping level. The rate is high for highly doped
silicon but decreases rapidly when doping concentration
falls below 1017 cm−3. This has applications in MEMS,
like etching highly doped epitaxial layers, see Figures 22.7
and 30.7.
11.10.2 Silicon dioxide
Silicon dioxide plasma etching is driven by ion bombard-
ment. Isotropic plasma etching of oxide is therefore difﬁ-
cult, but a high enough radical concentration will result in
reasonable isotropic etch rates. These processes are, how-
ever, not selective against silicon. Any ﬂuorine-containing
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 133]
Etching
137
gas can be used as an etchant for oxide, CF4 or SF6 for
example. But both gases etch silicon too, and they are
suitable for non-selective etching only.
CHF3, C2F6 and C4F8 are used as oxide etch gases
when selectivity against silicon is required. They provide
ﬂuorine and carbon for etching (SiF4, CO2 etch prod-
ucts) and CF2* radicals which are polymer precursors.
Polymerization takes place on silicon surfaces, whereas
on oxide surfaces (CF2)n polymerization does not take
place due to oxygen supply: ion bombardment-induced
reactions on oxide result in CO2 formation.
A three-step oxide etch process consists of a bulk etch-
ing step, an end point step which is highly selective (and
polymerizing), followed by a low-power step that removes
polymeric residues: a few extra nanometers of silicon are
lost in the low-power etch step but the wafer cleaning that
follows will be much easier.
Wet etching of oxide with HF-based etchants offers
high selectivity against silicon, and if the only role of
oxide etching is to remove oxide, not to make patterns,
it is often advisable to use wet etching, while plasma
etching excels in pattern etching. A major problem in wet
etching of oxides is that different CVD oxides etch at
widely different rates. Therefore thermal oxide etch rate
is usually given as a reference.
11.10.3 Silicon nitride
Nitride etching has aspects of both silicon and oxide etch-
ing. SF6- and CF4-based plasma processes etch nitride
quickly and isotropically, and without selectivity against
silicon. They do, however, show some selectivity against
oxide, for instance 2:1. CHF3-based processes, on the
other hand, etch nitride and provide selectivity against sil-
icon. In fact, CHF3 and C4F8-based oxide etch processes
usually perform well as nitride etch processes too, and
result in anisotropic proﬁles, unlike SF6- and CF4-based
processes.
The wet etchant for Si3N4 is boiling concentrated phos-
phoric acid. Photoresist cannot tolerate such etching con-
ditions. Instead, oxide is used as an etch mask: CVD oxide
is deposited on top of nitride, and oxide is patterned by
photoresist and etched with HF. After resist stripping ox-
ide acts as a mask for nitride etching. When CF4 plasma
was found to etch nitride, manufacturers were willing to
invest in plasma etching, even though it was immature
technology and not very production worthy, just because
the wet etching process was so difﬁcult.
11.10.4 Aluminum
Aluminum has a native oxide Al2O3 which is very dif-
ﬁcult to etch. Chlorine and chlorine-containing gases are
used, with AlCl3 as the main etch product. Multistep etch-
ing is needed to etch aluminum: in the ﬁrst few seconds
high power is used to ion-etch native Al2O3 away; power
is then reduced to etch the bulk of aluminum. Aluminum
is spontaneously etched in Cl2, and a polymerizing agent
is needed to passivate the sidewalls for anisotropic pro-
ﬁle; CHCl3 and CH4 are often used. In some low-pressure
reactors Cl2/BCl3 gases without polymer-forming gases
will result in clean, anisotropic proﬁles. Nitrogen or ar-
gon is often added to stabilize the plasma and to improve
photoresist selectivity.
If linewidths are large, phosphoric acid-based wet etch-
ing is very simple. Above 3 μm linewidths H3PO4 etchant
will perform nicely, especially if the ﬁlm is so thin that
undercutting can be neglected.
11.10.5 Copper
Copper is not plasma etched in current microfabrication
processes. It is a difﬁcult material to etch because nei-
ther ﬂuorides (CuF2) nor chlorides (CuCl2) are volatile
at room temperature. Increased temperature will help, but
even at 100–200 ◦C the rate is still low and photoresist
is severely attacked. If aluminum is alloyed with copper
(to improve electromigration resistance), aluminum etch-
ing will be difﬁcult for the same reason. Al–0.5% Cu is
still fairly easy to etch but Al–4% Cu leaves a residue of
copper chlorides that is difﬁcult to remove.
Wet etching of copper can be done by a number of
acidic solutions. The criteria are really resist stability,
metal thickness and other factors. Copper patterns can
be made by two other techniques instead of etching: elec-
troplating into a resist mold (Figures 5.11 and 5.12), or
by depositing in a groove and polishing away the excess
copper (Figure 16.1).
11.10.6 Refractory metals and silicides
Tungsten etching is similar to silicon in many respects.
In ﬂuorine plasmas the reaction product is WF6; in
oxygen–halogen plasmas, WOF4 or WOCl4. Tungsten
hexaﬂuoride has a boiling point of 17 ◦C and an
isotropic etching proﬁle easily results. Oxyﬂuorides and
oxychlorides are less volatile and ion bombardment is
needed to remove them completely, which translates to
better anisotropy. Molybdenum, too, is etched by both
chlorine and ﬂuorine plasmas, with or without oxygen.
For titanium etching, chlorine etching is preferred, but
ﬂuorine etching is possible, and for TiW (30 at. % Ti)
SF6 is a typical choice. Tantalum and niobium are etched
similarly. Silicides WSi2, MoSi2 and TaSi2 are etched
with both ﬂuorine and chlorine-based processes which
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 134]
138
Introduction to Microfabrication
are similar to silicon and refractory metal etch processes,
for example SF6/O2 for tungsten silicide or Cl2/O2 for
MoSi2.
Refractory metals are wet etched by hydrogen peroxide-
based solutions. These are often harsh on photoresists, and
therefore etching must be done at room temperature and
in dilute solution.
11.11 Ion Beam Etching
Accelerated ions will etch all materials. This technology is
known as ion beam etching (ion milling). It is, however,
difﬁcult to ﬁnd suitable non-eroding masking materials:
if all materials can be etched by ion bombardment, this
applies to masking materials as well. Typical ion milling
rates by argon ions are about 20 nm/min for Si, SiO2,
SiC, Si3N4 and resist, and 20–100 nm/min for metals. Ion
milling is therefore much slower than plasma etching. One
of the beneﬁts of ion milling is inclined etching: the wafer
can be tilted relative to the ion beam, and inclined struc-
tures can be made. Many solid state laser and magnetic
materials (of the type Gd3Ga5O12, gadolinium gallium
garnet) are etched by ion beam etching.
11.12 Etch Process Characteristics
11.12.1 Linewidth and proﬁle
Linewidth is also known as CD, for critical dimension,
in the IC industry. Linewidth measurement checks any
deviation from design values. A deviation of 10% is ac-
ceptable for digital devices, but the error budget has to be
divided between lithography and etching.
The sidewall proﬁle of the ﬁnished feature has impor-
tant implications for subsequent process steps: the step
coverage of the next deposition process depends on it.
The proﬁle can be measured from top view optical or
SEM measurements, but destructive cross-sectional SEM
pictures are considered the ultimate proﬁles.
Line edges are seldom abrupt, and judgment must be
used to locate a line edge properly. Real lines do not have
perfectly vertical sidewalls but sloped, or even retrograde,
walls (Figure 11.12), with edge roughness which can be a
signiﬁcant fraction of the linewidth for narrow lines. Mul-
tiple scans must be made to average over edge roughness.
Substrate and ﬁlm roughness add noise to stylus measure-
ments, and, for soft materials, stylus penetration can be a
Figure 11.12
Line proﬁles: left, ideal vertical wall; mid-
dle, retrograde wall; right, positively sloped wall with rough
edge
problem. Linewidth can also be measured electrically, as
was discussed in Chapter 2.
11.12.2 Selectivity
Selectivity is a measure of etch rate ratios (ERRs). It can
be deﬁned between the ﬁlm and substrate and between the
ﬁlm and masking material. Selectivities range from 1:1 to
100:1 in typical plasma etching processes. Resist selectiv-
ities range from 1:1 to 10:1 in plasma etching (with 100:1
possible). In wet etching resist selectivity is often so good
that it does not need to be considered, but resist adhesion
loss and peel-off are severe limitations. When polymeric
ﬁlms are etched, selectivity and photoresist stripping are
problematic: resist is polymeric material, too, and selec-
tivity between two similar materials is difﬁcult to achieve.
Etch stop is the term used for etching processes where
the selectivity is so high that etching essentially stops
when the underlying material is reached. This will be
discussed in more detail in Chapter 20 because it has
important implications in bulk MEMS.
11.12.3 Etch rate and etch time
Etch rate should be determined by plotting etched depth
against etch time for a number of data points, and taking
the slope as the rate. There are many mechanisms which
make etch rate determination less straightforward than ex-
pected. There may be etch initiation lag: for example, a
thin native oxide layer will prevent etching initially. This
is especially true for silicon and aluminum. Then there are
etch slowdown effects: etch rate in deep narrow structures
is not identical to ﬂat open areas, and as etching continues
and the hole becomes deeper, etch rate will slow down.
This issue is covered in more detail in Chapter 21.
Etch time seems like a simple concept: ﬁlm thickness
divided by etch rate. Add corrections for both ﬁlm thick-
ness and etch process non-uniformity, say 5% for each,
and etch time results. Overetch required to clear ﬁlm on
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 135]
Etching
139
Figure 11.13
Spacer formation: top, thin-ﬁlm deposition
over a step; bottom, anisotropic etching to clear ﬁlm from
horizontal surfaces leaves spacers at feature edges
planar samples amounts then to 10–20% depending on
process details.
But when the ﬁlms to be etched run over topography,
the situation changes dramatically. Film thickness at the
edge of a step will be the sum of the ﬁlm thickness and
step height. If anisotropic etching is stopped at the end
point calculated from planar ﬁlm thickness, residue equal
to original step height remains at the edge (Figure 11.13).
Long overetch will eventually remove this residue but this
puts a high demand on etch selectivity between the two
materials.
Sometimes it is desirable to leave this residue in
place, and utilize it in the fabrication process. It is then
termed spacer. Spacers have important applications in
both MOS and bipolar transistor fabrication, as will be
seen in Chapters 26 and 27. Note that it is essential for
spacer formation that etching is anisotropic: in isotropic
etching sideways etching would remove the material at
the step edge.
If the steps are made of conducting material and the
spacer is dielectric (e.g. CVD oxide), the spacer can be left
in place. But if the steps are made of dielectric material
and conductive lines go over them, the conductive spacers
will short all the lines. Extended overetch is then needed
to ensure complete spacer removal.
11.12.4 Spacer lithography
The concept of spacer lithography (also know as side-
wall lithography and double patterning) was originally
Figure 11.14
Spacer lithography: after the formation of
spacers the original pattern is etched away, and the spacers
act as etch masks for the next etching step
introduced in 1984 when the end of optical lithography
was speculated. It was used to fabricate MOS ICs in an
industrial setting, and now it is again being considered for
extending the life of optical lithography.
In spacer lithography the sidewalls form the ﬁnal struc-
ture; the initial structure will be selectively etched away
after spacer formation (Figure 11.14). The width of the
structure is determined by the ﬁlm thickness, which is
easily controlled even in the tens of nanometers range.
Of course additional lithography steps are needed to com-
plete the patterns, but they are not critical lithography
steps.
11.13 Selecting Etch Processes
When narrow lines need to be made, the obvious choice
is plasma etching. But in many applications the choice
of wet vs. plasma etching is a question of convenience:
certain equipment or an etch bath is available or some
suitable masking material is handy. When spherical etch
proﬁles are required, or when undercutting is needed,
isotropic etching must be used. Isotropic etching of sil-
icon can easily be done by SF6 plasmas, and isotropic
etching of silicon dioxide or glass by HF, both at fairly
high rates, even tens of microns per minute.
The microbolometer of Figure 11.15 requires two
lithography and three etching steps in its fabrication.
The ﬁrst lithography step deﬁnes the resistor pattern;
anisotropic plasma etching deﬁnes the resistor. The
second lithography step deﬁnes openings in the oxide,
and the same photoresist serves as a mask for both
anisotropic etching of oxide in CHF3 plasma and isotropic
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 136]
140
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 11.15
Bolometer fabrication process: left, resistor
lithography and etching; right, second lithography, oxide
etching and silicon isotropic etching
silicon etching in SF6 plasma. A SEM micrograph of the
ﬁnished device is shown in Figure 11.16.
11.14 Exercises
1. What would you use as plasma etch gases and etch
masks for etching the following materials: diamond
• TiN
• SiC
• InP
• GaN
• GaAs
• PbZrTiO3
• BCB (benzo cyclobutadiene)?
Figure 11.16
Spiral antenna microbolometer: silicon is
isotropically etched to release the narrow resistor. SEM
courtesy Leif Gr¨onberg, VTT
2. Silicon is etched in plasma according to the reaction
Si (s) + 2 Cl2 (g) ⇒SiCl4 (g). What is the theoreti-
cal maximum etch rate of a 200 mm diameter silicon
wafer when chlorine ﬂow is 100 sccm (standard cubic
centimeters per minute)?
3. Polysilicon etched depth in chlorine plasma is given
in the table below. Determine the etch rate.
Time
Depth
(s)
(nm)
20
70
40
170
60
320
80
415
4. The etch rate of<100>silicon in 20% TMAH is given
below. What is the activation energy?
Temperature
Rate
(◦C)
(μm/h)
60
29
70
36
80
62
90
87
5. How much underlying oxide is lost when a tungsten
ﬁlm 500 nm thick is etched from a sample that has
300 nm steps on it? Tungsten:oxide selectivity is 10:1.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 137]
Etching
141
6. How much dimensional error does chromium wet
etching introduce to (a) 1× photomasks; (b) 5× ret-
icles?
7. What problems will be met in trying to compensate
wet etching undercut by drawing lines on the mask
broader?
8. If oxide ﬁlm thickness is 500 nm, oxide non-
uniformity ±5% and oxide etching non-uniformity
similarly ±5%, plot the underlying silicon loss as a
function of oxide:silicon etch selectivity!
9. Draw cross-sections of silicon etching with oxide
hard mask for the following cases:
(a) KOH etching
(b) Cl1 etching
(c) HF:HNO3 etching
(d) TMAH etching
(e) SF6 etching
(f) H3PO4 etching.
10. How can the following structures be etched?
11. What is the difference in making inside vs. outside
spacers by anisotropic etching?
References and Related Reading
Arana, L. R. et al. (2007) Isotropic etching of silicon in ﬂuorine
gas for MEMS micromachining, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
17, 384–392.
Armacost, M. et al. (1999) Plasma-etching processes for ULSI
semiconductor circuits, IBM J. Res. Dev., 43, 39.
Bell, F. H. and O. Joubert (1996) Polysilicon gate etching in
high density plasmas, J. Vac. Sci. Techol., B14, 3473.
Clawson, A. R. (2001) Guide to references on III-V semicon-
ductor chemical etching, Mater. Sci. Eng., 31, 1–438.
Kiiham¨aki, J. et al. (2000) Depth and proﬁle control in plasma
etched MEMS structures, Sens. Actuators, 82, 234–238.
Lang, W (1996) Silicon microstructuring technology, Mater.
Sci. Eng., R17, 1–55.
Mukerjee., E. V. et al. (2000) Vaporizing liquid microthruster,
Sens. Actuators, 83, 231–236.
Oehrlein, G. S. and J. F. Rembetski (1992) Plasma-based dry
etching techniques in the silicon integrated circuit technol-
ogy, IBM J. Res. Dev., 36, 140.
Sainiemi, L. and S. Franssila (2008) RIE, in D. Li (ed.) Ency-
clopedia of Micro and Nanoﬂuidcs, Springer.
Walker, P. and W. H. Tarn (eds) (1991) Handbook of Metal
Etchants, CRC Press.
Williams, K. R. and R. S. Muller (1996) Etch rates for
micromachining processes, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 5,
256–269.
Williams, K. R. and R. S. Muller (2003) Etch rates for mi-
cromachining processes II, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 12,
761–778.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 138]
12
Wafer Cleaning and Surface Preparation
Microfabrication takes place under highly controlled
conditions: all materials for cleanroom construction,
processing equipment and wafer handling tools are
carefully selected to eliminate particles and to reduce
atomic
contamination.
Water,
gases
and
chemicals
are puriﬁed and ﬁltered. These are, however, passive
precautions, and active wafer cleaning and surface
conditioning must be undertaken before practically every
major process step. These preparatory steps can account
for up to 30% of all process steps.
Wafer cleaning is about removing particles and un-
wanted atoms and ﬁlms, but it is also about leaving the
surface in a known and controlled condition. This means
damage removal, surface chemistry tailoring and proper
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity. As shown in Figure 12.1,
ammonia/peroxide cleaning will render a silicon surface
oxidized and hydrophilic while HF treatment results in a
hydrogen-terminated hydrophobic surface.
In some cases surface preparation involves intention-
ally depositing ﬁlms on the surface rather than removing
material, as the term “cleaning” would hint. Many clean-
ing chemistries result in thin-ﬁlm deposition, for example
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Hd+
d+H
He−
e−H
Si
Si
Si
H
H
Si
Si
H
H
Si
Si
H
H
Si
Si
H
H
H
H
(a)
(b)
2e+
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Figure 12.1
Surfaces treatments: (a) hydrophilic silicon
surface after ammonia/peroxide cleaning attracts water; (b)
hydrophobic silicon surface after HF cleaning repels water.
Reproduced from Hattori (1998)
sulfuric and nitric acids will oxidize silicon surfaces,
resulting in ﬁlms 1 or 2 nanometers thick. The next pro-
cess step after cleaning should commence immediately,
before particle deposition and surface chemical reactions
take place.
12.1 Classes of Contamination
Air cleanliness in an advanced cleanroom is so good that
airborne particles are no longer the main contamination
source. The human contribution has also been reduced sig-
niﬁcantly with correct gowning and working procedures,
or by factory automation. These matters are dealt in more
detail in Chapter 35 on cleanrooms.
The main sources of contamination are the fabrication
processes themselves: ﬁlms ﬂaking from deposition cham-
ber walls, vapors rising from wet benches, resist debris on
wafer edges. Because of device size downscaling, contam-
ination becomes evermore critical. Finer patterns demand
control of ﬁner particles, ultrathin ﬁlms cannot tolerate un-
wanted atoms, and low leakage currents necessitate low
metal contamination levels. The purity of starting ma-
terials is important: liquid chemicals can have impurity
concentrations measured in parts per trillion (ppt) and
sputtering target purities are for example 99.999%. Sim-
ilar “5Nine” purities are typical for many process gases,
but some applications need 99.99999% (7N) purity.
Contamination comes in various forms, which have dif-
ferent sources, effects on device and cleaning methods.
The main classes of contamination are:
• particles
• metals
• organics
• native oxide.
Adsorbed water could be called contamination, too. Bak-
ing at elevated temperature removes water, and baking is
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 139]
144
Introduction to Microfabrication
a standard preparation step in many processes. Water can
be very persistent, and not all water is removed before a
400 ◦C bake.
Particles greater than about a third of minimum
linewidth are potential causes of fatal ﬂaws, for example
shorts between conductors and even smaller particles
can cause pinholes during ﬁlm growth. The minimum
dimension is really the thickness of the thinnest ﬁlm, not
the narrowest line. Particles are also a major concern in
wafer bonding (the subject of Chapter 17).
Metal contamination cannot be avoided as long as ma-
chine parts are made of metals, so it has to be controlled
by cleaning. Metal contamination on surfaces can spread
into the silicon bulk, and metal precipitates in the bulk act
as charge carrier traps. If the metals segregate into the ox-
ide during oxidation, they can prevent, retard or degrade
oxide ﬁlm growth, and result in poor-quality oxides.
Organics often work through prevention of the clean-
ing process. This has to do with the generally hydrophobic
nature of organics and repellency of water-based clean-
ing solutions. Organic materials in cleanrooms include
photoresists, HMDS, various solvents (isopropyl alcohol
(IPA), acetone, MEK, PGMEA), wafer boxes and chemi-
cal containers.
Native oxide ﬁlms grow readily on silicon, aluminum
and titanium, for instance. Growth is not instantaneous,
however, and proper surface ﬁnishing can protect the sur-
faces for extended periods of time. Hydrophobic (HF-last)
cleaning chemistry results in hydrogen-terminated sur-
faces (Figure 12.1) that can survive a week without native
oxide forming, if the oxygen concentration in the ambient
is low enough (e.g.,<0.1 ppm). In normal cleanroom air,
0.5 nm native oxide ﬁlm will grow in a few hours.
Native oxides degrade contacts, prevent epitaxial
growth, cause defects at the substrate/epi interface and
prevent solid state reactions like silicide formation. HF
etching is a typical last step before oxidation and also
before epitaxy. However, in epitaxy an additional in situ
cleaning just prior to deposition is also done (Figure 34.7).
12.2 Chemical Wet Cleaning
Acid, base and solvent wet cleaning are the main methods
of cleaning. Chemical wet cleaning is a simple, yet pow-
erful method with high throughput. Wet benches are cheap
and reliable tools but chemical consumption can become
very high because the chemicals need to be changed reg-
ularly, several times a day, otherwise there is a risk of
redeposition of contaminants from the cleaning solutions
back to the wafers. Obviously, very high-purity chemicals
must be used, otherwise the cleaning baths would become
contamination sources themselves.
Practical
cleaning
processes
use
many
different
chemicals in sequence, each designed to attack diff-
erent contamination: in a classic RCA clean the ﬁrst
ammonia/peroxide clean removes particles and organics,
the hydrogen chloride/peroxide step is effective against
metallic contamination and the HF step removes any
oxide. Table 12.1 presents the most common wet cleaning
chemicals. The water in cleaning solutions is de-ionized
water (DI water), also known as ultrapure water (UPW).
The two main mechanims for wet cleaning are:
1. Dissolution/decomposition.
2. Etching.
They have a very important distinction as far as surface
roughness is concerned: etching processes tend to make
surfaces rougher. This effect can be seen in subsequent
process steps: LPCVD polysilicon deposited on thermal
oxide coming directly from a furnace has larger grain
size than poly that is deposited on freshly cleaned oxide.
Increased surface roughness from peroxide cleaning solu-
tion leads to a larger number of nuclei, therefore smaller
grain size. If the cleaned wafer is annealed, the surface
will become smoother, and subsequently grain size will
be larger.
Ammonia/peroxide solution works by oxidizing the sil-
icon surface, and subsequently etching the oxide away:
2 H2O2 ⇒2 HO2−+ 2 H+
peroxide disproportionation
(12.1)
Si + 2 HO−
2 ⇒SiO2 + 2 OH−
silicon oxidation
(12.2)
Si + 2 H2O2 ⇒SiO2 + 2 H2O
total reaction for oxidation
(12.3)
SiO2 + OH−⇒HSiO3 (aq)
oxide etching
(12.4)
Silicon etch rate in ammonia/peroxide is about 0.5 nm/min
and a typical 10 min clean thus results in about 5 nm sili-
con etching. This leads to undercutting and removal of the
particles. For modern CMOS fabrication, however, 5 nm
silicon loss is unacceptably large.
The compositions given above are the traditional ones,
and recently there has been a trend toward more dilute
and lower temperature cleaning solutions. For example,
RCA-1 clean of composition 0.1:1:5 is also used, and
even ammonia water without peroxide has been used.
Similarly, dilute HCl clean can replace RCA-2 in some
applications.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 140]
Wafer Cleaning and Surface Preparation
145
Table 12.1
Wet cleaning solutions
Name/alias
Chemical composition
Temp./time
RCA-1 (SC-1, APM ammonia-peroxide)
NH4OH:H2O2:H2O (1:1:5)
70–85 ◦C/10–20 min
RCA-2 (SC-2, HPM, hydrochloric acid-peroxide)
HCl:H2O2:H2O (1:1:6)
70–85 ◦C/10–20 min
SPM sulfuric acid peroxide mixture, Piranha
H2SO4:H2O2 (4:1)
120 ◦C/10–20 min
sulfuric peroxide mixture, or. Piranha
DHF (dilute HF)
HF:H2O (1:100–1000)
room temp./30 s
Standard chemicals come in the following concentrations:
HCl
37%
H2SO4
96%
H2O2
30%
NH4OH
29%
HF
49%
Preparation: The order of mixing and heating is important. Water is the ﬁrst component, acids are added later, to prevent excessive heat generation.
Hydrogen peroxide is added to a heated solution just prior to use, to minimize thermal decomposition.
Bath life: RCA clean is often used just once. Alternatively, peroxide can be added to prolong bath life (dubbed “spiking”). SPM bath life is
similarly elongated by adding more peroxide.
Disposal: HF requires a separate disposal system because its health effects are different from other mineral acids, which may all be collected in
the same container (volume and disposal rate limited). Sometimes acids which contain heavy metals must be collected separately (e.g., titanium or
cobalt containing salicide etchants).
Cleaning bare silicon wafers is straightforward and the
results can be measured at ease. Complexity increases
when more materials are present: the cleaning method
has to work on all these materials with similar efﬁciency.
Measurements, too, become more difﬁcult because, for
example, optically transparent and opaque materials
reﬂect laser light differently, and minimum detectable
particle size gets bigger. Various limitations kick in
when the ﬁrst metal is deposited: acid cleans are then
forbidden because acids dissolve and corrode metals.
With deep trenches and other highly 3D structures wet-
ting ability becomes critical, and drying becomes more
difﬁcult too. The use of surfactants can improve wetting
but they introduce problems of their own, namely possible
organic residues. The measurement of surface properties
(sidewall properties, really) in deep narrow trenches is a
formidable task, even in the research phase where time
and effort can be used to measure a few data points.
Monitoring in a manufacturing environment is even more
difﬁcult because measurement speed becomes an issue.
Chemical consumption in wet benches is a major envi-
ronmental concern. With larger wafer sizes, larger tanks
have to be used, with increasing volumes of expensive
high-purity liquids, which are dangerous to handle and
which have to be disposed of under controlled conditions.
CMOS fabrication on 200 mm wafers consumes thou-
sands of liters of ultrapure water and tens of kilograms of
liquid chemicals are required. Hundreds of liters of acid
waste are produced. Rinse water can be recycled, and
acid recovery and reuse are also common practices. Spin
processing (Figure 12.2) is more economical in chemical
consumption.
12.3 Physical Wet Cleaning
Physical cleaning is mostly about particle removal. But
the difference between chemical and physical wet clean-
ing is not clear cut: often chemical cleaning is enhanced
by the application of physical forces, for example ultra-
sonic energy or spraying. Three methods of physical wet
removal of particles are widely used:
1. Brush scrubbing.
2. Jet scrubbing/nozzle.
3. Ultrasonic/megasonic.
In brush scrubbing, nylon or PVA brushes move water
close to the wafer surface and induce ﬂow that brushes
away the particles. This is especially effective when lots
of particles or large particles are present on the wafer.
Therefore, brush scrubbing is very useful in removing
particles after wafer scribing or chemical mechanical pol-
ishing (Chapter 16).
In jet scrubbing, high-pressure water is sprayed on the
wafer. The removal mechanism is similar to brush scrub-
bing. Increasing pressure improves cleaning efﬁciency,
but electrostatic charging can damage thin ﬁlms.
In sonic cleaning, shock waves supply sound energy
that helps in particle removal. Ultrasonic agitation
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 141]
146
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 12.2
Wet cleaning: spin processor. Courtesy VTT
(20–40 kHz) is also beneﬁcial in the wet removal of
photoresist. However, cavitation (exploding bubbles)
may damage the wafers. Above 1 MHz this is not an
issue, and the method is termed “megasonics.” However,
the removal efﬁciency is not very good for particles
smaller than 300 nm.
12.4 Rinsing and Drying
Rinsing in DI water and drying must be considered as
essential parts of any wet cleaning process. As a gen-
eral strategy the wafer should be kept wet all along the
cleaning process and minimize the number of times when
wafers are drawn from liquid to air. When drying is re-
quired, there are a number of methods available: spinning,
nitrogen blowing, vapor drying, lamp drying, vacuum dry-
ing; dry wafers can also emerge by slow removal from
hot DI water. Spinning techniques are prone to charging
and particle adherence, which are inherent in high-speed
spinning equipment. Various isopropyl alcohol (IPA) dry-
ing methods rely on the low surface tension and good
wettability of IPA. In Marangoni drying, the wafer is
drawn from water into an IPA–nitrogen atmosphere, and
water is pulled back, leaving a dry surface. IPA drying
methods must be considered for chemical consumption,
hot vapors and solvent accumulation.
12.5 Dry Cleaning
Gases, vapors and plasmas can be used to clean wafers
(Table 12.2). Because it is easy to integrate process mod-
ules with similar pressure and temperature regimes, it is
attractive to integrate dry cleaning into a plasma and vac-
uum tool, for example plasma etchers, sputters, PECVD,
RTP and single wafer epitaxial reactors.
Compared to wet cleaning, dry cleaning has two very
advantageous features: there are no surface tension effects
in small structures and no drying is necessary.
UV ozone has been tried for organics removal, UV Cl2
for metal removal and HF vapor for native oxides. Argon
and H2 plasmas have also been utilized, in sputtering
systems, to improve contact by etching oxide just prior
to metal deposition. Dry cleaning has a central role in
epitaxial systems where the utmost surface cleanliness is
mandatory. Thin oxides can be desorbed by a hydrogen
bake. The exact temperatures depend on surface termi-
nation: hydrogen-terminated surfaces can be baked at
temperatures as low as 700 ◦C to reveal a perfect surface
for epitaxy. To date, however, dry cleaning has remained
a special method, especially because it is difﬁcult to
remove particle contamination with dry methods.
12.6 Particle Removal
Particle contamination is dangerous in lithography, but
lithography is rather insensitive to metal ion contamina-
tion. Deposition processes are sensitive to small particles
that can “grow” in size during deposition: the ﬁlm encap-
sulates the particle. This may eliminate the particle as an
Table 12.2
Dry cleaning agents
Vapors
Anhydrous HF
Gases
H2, HCl
Ions
Ar+
Atoms
Si
Photons
UV (with Cl2 or O3)
Plasmas
CF4
Aerosols
CO2
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 142]
Wafer Cleaning and Surface Preparation
147
Table 12.3
Sources of particles
• Chemical reactions in deposition and etching
• Moving parts in tools: robot arms, valves, doors
• Static parts: wafer holders, cassettes, O-rings
• Vacuum: pumping, venting, condensation
• Gases, chemicals, water
• Cleanroom personnel
electrical or chemical contaminant but it will be a problem
in lithography and bonding.
Fabrication processes themselves are major sources of
particles. Table 12.3 lists some materials and mechanisms
which contribute to particle contamination.
An electrical double layer forms on the particle surface
in an ionic solution. The zeta potential is the potential
at the ﬁxed charge layer/diffuse charge layer interface
(typically a few nanometers from the surface). It can be
negative or positive, leading to either attraction or repul-
sion of particles toward the surface, depending on the
wafer surface charge. The zeta potential of the particle is
independent of particle size but depends on the electrolyte
pH: in acidic conditions the zeta potential is typically pos-
itive, and in alkaline solution it is negative, as shown in
Figure 12.3. The wafer surface will be oxidized in RCA-1,
and it is negatively charged (Figure 12.1). When etching
undercuts the particle, like charges repel each other and
redeposition on the wafer is unlikely.
Particle removal efﬁciency in RCA depends on etch un-
dercutting. As shown in Figure 12.4, it is really the etched
depth that matters: all the different ammonia/peroxide
compositions result in the same particle removal efﬁ-
ciency when the same amount of silicon is etched.
Cleaning solution composition and time have to be
optimized with respect to both cleaning efﬁciency and
80
60
40
20
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
−20
−40
−60
−80
Zeta potential (mV)
pH
PSL
Si3N4
SiO2
Si
Si
PSL
SiO2
Si3N4
Figure 12.3
Zeta potential: pH inﬂuences particle adhe-
sion and removal (PSL = polystyrene latex). Reproduced
from Hattori (1998)
0
2
4
6
8
1:1:8
0.5:1:8
0.1:1:8
0.05:1:8
10
100
80
60
40
20
0
Etched depth (nm)
Particle removal efficiency (%)
Ratio of NH4OH:H2O2:H2O
Figure 12.4
Etching as a method for particle removal:
about 4 nm undercut etch is enough to remove most parti-
cles. Ammonia dilution as a parameter. Reproduced from
Hattori (1998)
roughness increase. Decomposition of cleaning solutions
and impurities can also catalyse surface reactions leading
to increased roughness.
12.6.1 Wafer particle measurements
Particle measurements on wafers down to 100 nm size
range can be performed by laser scattering equipment
(Figure 2.6). A laser illuminates the wafer surface, and
forward scattered (Mie scattering) and reﬂected light are
measured by a (hemispherical) detector.
Scatterometric particle sizes are calibrated against con-
tamination standards which have polystyrene latex spheres
(PSLs) of certiﬁed sizes on them. These PSLs are nearly
spherical, have tight size distribution and have a known
refractive index of about 1.6. The number of particles is
better calibrated against etched features with known light
scattering properties and known positions on the wafer.
Such standards can be cleaned and reused, whereas con-
tamination standards cannot.
Because real particles are not spheres with known
optical constants, particle sizes cannot strictly be mea-
sured by light scattering. Latex sphere equivalent (LSE)
size should be reported. Mirror polished unpatterned
wafers are good for basic studies, but real wafers present
a number of problems. Because forward scattered light
is reﬂected by the wafer before reaching the detector,
thin ﬁlms on the wafer must be taken into account. On
the oxide, particle calibration needs to be done for each
ﬁlm thickness. On metallized wafers, surface roughness
leads to a decreased signal-to-noise ratio, therefore small
particles cannot be detected. Correlating a scattering
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 143]
148
Introduction to Microfabrication
event to a physical particle is usually difﬁcult, even
though scatterometry produces a map of the wafer. If
particles can be seen in a SEM, chemical identiﬁcation
is possible by either EDX or EMPA analysis. This can
be important for particle source identiﬁcation.
Most of the discussion above has centered on front-side
cleaning and surface preparation, but wafer back-side
cleanliness is becoming increasingly important, too. Big
particles on the back side prevent wafer leveling for
lithography, and make thermal contact to chucks poor.
12.7 Organics Removal
There are many sources of organic contamination in the
cleanroom. Table 12.4 lists some of the most usual ones.
RCA-1 ammonia-peroxide solution is very good at
removing organics because of the oxidizing power of
peroxide. If a lot of organics need to be removed,
sulphuric acid-peroxide (SPM) is used (as in photoresist
stripping !). SPM cleaning leaves difﬁcult-to-remove
sulfur residues, and the RCA-1 step is often carried out
immediately after SPM to turn sulﬁdes into soluble sul-
fates. Organic residues often lead to surface roughening.
Organic ﬁlm protects part of the surface for some time
during cleaning, while etching proceeds elsewhere.
Because sulfuric acid constitutes an environmental con-
cern, and a safety hazard, other candidates have been
sought for organics removal. Ozonated DI water with
10–100 ppm ozone has proven to be very effective. Fur-
thermore, it is a room temperature process, as opposed to
120 ◦C SPM. The ultimate cleaning method for organic
contamination is thermal oxidation: no organic compound
can tolerate 1000 ◦C in an oxygen atmosphere. This pro-
vides a reference surface for analytical methods but of
course is not a practical cleaning process.
12.7.1 Measurement of organic contamination
Organic contamination can be conveniently measured by
FTIR (Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy), which
Table 12.4
Sources of organic contamination
• Liquid chemicals and vapors used in fabrication pro-
cesses: HMDS, IPA, acetone
• Gases, for example according to the reaction n CF4 ⇒
(CF2)n + 2n F*
• Organic ﬁlms (resist, spin-on polymers)
• Wafer holders and boxes
• Vacuum systems: pump oils, O-rings
• Cleanroom materials: sealants
identiﬁes not only elements but also chemical bonds. XPS
can also identify chemical bonds, which is often important
in understanding the origin of the contamination.
Molecular surface contamination can be measured by
thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS). TDS consists of
a furnace connected to a mass spectrometer, and desorp-
tion of contaminants is monitored as a function of furnace
temperature. Silicon surface condition has also been clar-
iﬁed by TDS: at 340 ◦C, water desorbs; at 400 ◦C, the
hydrogen-terminated silicon surface undergoes the reac-
tion SiH2 ⇒SiH + 1/2 H2; and at 500 ◦C, SiH ⇒Si +
1/2 H2.
12.8 Metal Removal
There are numerous sources of metals, even though
other materials like silicon, Teﬂon, SiC and quartz are
extensively used in making process equipment and wafer
handling tools. Table 12.5 lists some common sources of
unwanted metals.
12.8.1 Device effects of metal contamination
Metal contaminants degrade the performance of electronic
devices in various ways depending on their chemical and
physical nature, that is, reactivity with silicon and silicon
dioxide, and diffusion. Harmfulness of metal atoms comes
from the fact that they have their energy levels deep in
the forbidden energy gap of silicon.
Non-electronic devices are less sensitive to metal
contamination, but metals cannot be completely ignored:
metal contamination causes stacking faults in oxidation,
and metals can catalyze peroxide decomposition, which
leads to reduced particle cleaning efﬁciency in RCA-1.
12.8.2 Metal removal
The
acidic
solutions
HCl–H2O2
and
H2SO4–H2O2
are the main methods for metal removal. Dilute HF,
which removes a thin oxide layer, will additionally
remove some metallic contaminants. Ammonia solutions
Table 12.5
Sources of metal contamination
• Tool materials (shutter blades, collimators, chucks)
• System components (pipes, valves)
• Wafer handling (tweezers, robot arms, wafer holders)
• Chemicals (some resist developers contain NaOH as an
essential constituent)
• Human contribution (sodium from sweat, heavy metals
from cosmetics)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 144]
Wafer Cleaning and Surface Preparation
149
(RCA-1) can also form complexes with metals and
remove some metals.
The cleaning efﬁciencies of HCl–H2O2 and HF are
very different, though. Both can reduce Fe and Ni levels
below the detection limit but HF is much more effective
in removing Al, and HCl–H2O2 in removing Cu. Dilute
HF needs to be speciﬁed because various workers use dif-
ferent concentrations. For aluminum removal 0.1% HF is
sufﬁcient, but below that amount the removal efﬁciency
rapidly deteriorates. HCl concentration in HCl–H2O2 has
to be at least 5% for it to remove iron.
The wet chemicals themselves contain metallic impuri-
ties, and at the 10 ppb level their deposition on the wafer
surface is of some concern. For example, iron at 10 ppb
in RCA-1 solution results in a surface concentration of
2 × 1012 atoms/cm2. The use of higher purity chemicals
helps to reduce the effect but it is an expensive way. If
a RCA-1 bath is used several times, contamination from
previous batches remains in the solution. RCA-1 must be
accompanied by a clean that removes metals efﬁciently.
Newer cleaning solutions include HF:H2O2 which has
both oxidizing and metal removal capabilities. It can be
used at room temperature as opposed to 70 ◦C typical of
RCA cleans. HF:H2O2 seems to increase surface rough-
ness, so cleaning time needs to be optimized.
12.8.3 Measurement of metallic contamination
Metal
surface
concentrations
range
from
1010
to
1014 atoms/cm2
depending
on
general
contamination
control strategies and particular process steps. Total
reﬂection X-ray ﬂuorescence (TXRF) uses a grazing
incident angle to probe only the very top layer of the
wafer, at nanometer thickness. It is most sensitive for
medium-mass atoms and less sensitive toward both ends
of the mass range. The detection limit of TXRF is about
1010 atoms/cm2. TXRF is a non-destructive method that
can be done on whole wafers, and it can be used to
generate maps of contamination. This is sometimes very
useful for determining the source of contamination.
In VPD (Vapor Phase Decomposition) and WSA (Wafer
Surface Analysis) methods, surface impurities are ﬁrst
collected in the growing thermal oxide, which is then dis-
solved in HF. This concentrate is analyzed by graphite
furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy (GFAAS), which
is sensitive to picogram quantities, or detection limits of
109–1010/cm2, or by an inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (ICP-MS) which has lower detection limits
by an order of magnitude.
Metallic contaminants can be measured by their effects
on charge carriers. Minority lifetime will be degraded
by contamination. Surface photovoltage (SPV) and mi-
crowave photoconductivity decay (μPC) methods provide
this information. Quantitative iron determination is pos-
sible in p-type silicon by the SPV method because of a
special feature of Fe–B pairs: at 200 ◦C they dissociate,
and the interstitial Fe+ is a much more effective recom-
bination center.
12.9 Contact Angle
Removal of native oxide is easily seen by the behavior
of water on the wafer surface: oxide is hydrophilic
and water spreads evenly, but silicon is hydrophobic
and water droplets form. Quantitative measurement
of contact angle is used to characterize surface hy-
drophilicity/hydrophobicity. Hydrophilic surfaces have
contact angles (CAs) < 90◦, hydrophobic surfaces >90◦
(Figure 12.5). In practice, distinct droplets form on
surfaces with contact angles of 50◦–90◦while uniform
wetting takes place when CA < 10◦.
It is important that cleaning solutions are matched to
surface properties: aqueous solutions will spread and dis-
solve contamination on hydrophilic surfaces, but their
effect is erratic on hydrophobic surfaces. For example,
organic residues from photoresist may render the surface
hydrophobic, and two-step cleaning is required, the ﬁrst
step to remove organic contamination and the second step
to remove particles, for instance. Ammonia/peroxide mix-
ture is the standard solution for making silicon surfaces
hydrophilic.
HF-last clean results in CA ∼70◦, and water droplets
form on silicon. Water sometimes remains on the wafer
after rinsing, resulting in watermarks during drying. These
can be minimized by tailoring the contact angle to either
high or low values.
Hydrophobic surfaces with CA > 90◦are typical of
polymeric
surfaces:
methyl-terminated surfaces
(like
PDMS)
have
CA ∼110◦
and
ﬂuoropolymers
(like
Teﬂon) CA ∼120◦.
High contact angles indicate low surface energies and
vice versa. Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) (Figure
5.14) follow the general rule that the longer the carbon
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 12.5
Examples
of
contact
angles
of
water
droplets: (a) on a hydrophilic surface, 20◦; (b) on a
hydrophobic surface, 95◦; (c) on an ultrahydrophobic sur-
face, 150◦
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 145]
150
Introduction to Microfabrication
chain in the polymer, the more hydrophobic the surface.
The maximum contact angle possible on planar surfaces
is about 120◦. If higher contact angles are desired
(so-called super or ultrahydrophobic surfaces), micro-
and nanostructures coated by ﬂuoropolymers can be used.
The water droplets then rest on top of nanostructures
like a fakir on a bed of nails. Contact angles approaching
180◦can be achieved.
When contact angles are discussed, water contact an-
gles are most often quoted (Table 12.6). It is important
to remember that other liquids have other contact angles,
and even salt concentration in water can drastically change
contact angle: biological buffer solution on silicon has a
contact angle of 35◦, while DI water has 70◦. Similarly,
a surface coated with ﬂuoropolymer DDMS is highly hy-
drophobic, water contact angle 103◦, but the hexadecane
contact angle is 38◦. Contact angle can change during
device operation due to adsorption of material on the
surface: for example, protein adsorption can turn a hy-
drophobic surface into very hydrophilic one.
The values of contact angles depend on surface
treatment details and the values in Table 12.6 are to be
used as rough guides only. First of all, contact angle
measurements are accurate only ±2%. Surface roughness
can also change contact angle.
What is more, contact angles change as time goes by:
native oxide formation on silicon will mean that a freshly
Table 12.6
Water contact angles for various
surfaces and treatments
Ammonia/peroxide cleaned silicon
5◦
Oxygen plasma treated SU-8
5◦–40◦
Sulfuric acid cleaned silicon
10◦
RCA-1 + RCA-2 cleaned silicon
10◦
KOH etched silicon
25◦
Thermal oxide
45◦
Native oxide
45◦
Oxygen plasma treated PDMS
50◦
HMDS coated silicon
60◦
HF dipped silicon
70◦
Polyimide
75◦
Native SU-8
80◦
Native polystyrene
90◦
Native PDMS
108◦
ECT (eicosanethiol)
110◦
Fluoropolymer
120◦
Microstructure + PDMS
150◦
Nanostructure + ﬂuoropolymer
170◦
Note that all the values are approximate and depend on
surface treatment details and duration, and on time delay.
HF-dipped wafer has a 70◦contact angle, but once 1 nm
of native oxide has been formed, the contact angle is
reduced. Oxygen plasma modiﬁed polymer surfaces be-
come hydrophilic but revert back to their original, more
hydrophobic, structure. The timescale of this is very much
dependent on materials and processes: sometimes it takes
less than an hour or it can take months.
12.10 Surface Preparation
Conditioning the surface to a known state is of paramount
importance. HMDS priming before lithography is a proto-
typical example: it leaves the wafer slightly hydrophobic
due to the methyl-terminated surface (Figure 9.2). Resists
are polymers, and a slightly hydrophobic surface makes
good contact with resists. HMDS prevents atmospheric
moisture from condensing on the wafer, improving ad-
hesion. This equalizes wafers: irrespective of underlying
ﬁlm, and irrespective of storage time, the resist will see
the same surface.
Sometimes surface roughening is the goal, for instance
if it is necessary to prevent sticking (to be discussed in
more detail in Chapter 29). Many etching processes lead
to roughening, like RCA-1, and even minor roughening
can prevent bonding. Elimination of particles is essen-
tial in wafer bonding (Chapter 17). Surface smoothness
is also critical. RCA-1 clean is a compromise because
there is some roughening, but good particle removal and
hydrophilic surface ﬁnish.
Plasmas are used as a cleaning method, but it is more
generally to be considered a surface modiﬁcation method.
Plasmas can etch surfaces, and this cleans the surface.
Plasmas are energetic, and as a result the surface has bro-
ken bonds which tend to be reactive. This is advantageous
in many applications: bonding beneﬁts from readily avail-
able bonds, and the same applies to adhesion.
Oxygen plasma can be used to grow oxides on silicon
and aluminum. These oxides are only 1 or 2 nanometers
thick, but they can protect the underlying material. For
instance, the AlCl3 etch product from Cl2 plasma etch-
ing of aluminum reacts with atmospheric water vapor to
produce HCl, which corrodes aluminum. Therefore oxy-
gen plasma treatment after aluminum plasma etching will
stabilize the surface.
Sometimes the treatment only modiﬁes the outermost
atomic layer, replacing some atoms with other, more
suitable, atoms or molecules. Polymer PDMS surface
is methyl terminated (Figure 12.6) but oxygen plasma
treatment will result in some methyl groups being
replaced by hydroxyl groups. Hydroxyl groups are
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 146]
Wafer Cleaning and Surface Preparation
151
OH
Si
O
Si
CH3
O
Si
OH
O
Si
OH
O
Si
CH3
HO
HO
HO
H3C
CH3
Si
O
Si
CH3
O
Si
CH3
O
Si
CH3
O
Si
CH3
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
Figure 12.6
Native PDMS surface with methyl groups
(top); oxidized hydrophilic PDMS surface with hydroxyl
and methyl groups (bottom)
much more reactive (which is important in bonding)
and are hydrophilic, while the methyl-terminated surface
is hydrophobic.
Not only plasmas but also gases can be used for sur-
face conditioning: hot HCl gas etches silicon, revealing
undamaged silicon beneath the original surface (Equation
6.3). Thermal oxidation (Chapter 13) can also be used as
a cleaning method: oxidation and oxide etching in HF will
reveal a new silicon surface that is very clean.
CVD processes can also be used to deposit thin protec-
tive layers. A copper surface can be stabilized by short
exposure to silane and subsequently to ammonia, forming
a CuSixNy layer. This layer will prevent electromigration
at the copper surface (see Chapter 36 for more on
reliability).
Deposition of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) is
used extensively to modify surfaces (Figure 5.14): by suit-
ably selecting the terminating group of the SAM, a wide
range of contact angles can be obtained. SAMs can be
used as adhesion layers too: gold as a noble metal has
poor adhesion, but gold and sulfur form strong bonds,
therefore SAM with sulfur termination will improve gold
adherence (Figure 17.10).
There are also equipment solutions to surface cleanli-
ness: if processes are performed immediately after each
other, or if the wafers are kept under a vacuum or nitro-
gen, there is no time and no chance for contamination and
particles to deposit on the wafers. This will be discussed
in Chapter 31.
Wettability and cleaning are surface issues: in SAMs
the effects are due to a single molecular layer only. In
many other cases it is also only the very surface that
matters. In Figure 12.7 silicon nanograss is shown. On the
left hand side it is coated by ∼1 nm thick silicon dioxide
and the contact angle is close to zero; on the right hand
Figure 12.7
Nanometer thick layers of oxide (left) and
ﬂuoropolymer (right) drastically change contact angle.
Reproduced from Jokinen et al. (2008) by permission of
Wiley-VCH
side a few nanometers of ﬂuoropolymer is deposited, and
the contact angle is ∼170◦.
12.11 Exercises
1. Translate surface iron contamination of 1010 atoms/cm2
into a number of monolayers!
2. If there is one monolayer coverage of organic contam-
ination on a wafer, how much of that is counted as
carbon atoms/cm2? Select one common organic chem-
ical used in microfabrication as an example.
3. How can the structure of Figure 12.7 be made?
4. Calculate the chemical and DI water consumption over
24 hours for the following cleaning cycle
SPM
DIW rinse
RCA-1
DIW rinse
DHF
DIW rinse
RCA-2
DIW rinse 1
DIW rinse 2
when a tank for 25 wafers of 200 mm diameter is used.
Assume a 4 h changing interval for RCA cleans and
24 h bath life for SPM and DHF.
5. What happens to particle contamination in (a) wet etch-
ing and (b) plasma etching?
6. If an Olympic swimming pool is full of UPW, how
many droplets of sweat can be dissolved before Na+
and Cl−exceed the speciﬁcation level of 0.01 ppb?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 147]
152
Introduction to Microfabrication
Make rough estimates of sweat salt concentration
based on your own experiences.
7. Which cleaning chemicals are allowed and which are
forbidden for the following materials, and why:
(a) aluminum
(b) gold
(c) copper
(d) aluminum oxide
(e) polyimide
(f) silicon nitride?
References and Related Reading
Grannemann, E (1994) Film interface control in integrated pro-
cessing systems, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 12, 2741.
Hattori, T. (ed.) (1998) Ultraclean Surface Processing of Sil-
icon Wafers, Springer.
Jokinen, V., L. Sainiemi and S. Franssila (2008) Complex
droplets on chemically modiﬁed silicon nanograss, Adv.
Mater., 20, 3453–3456.
Kern, W. (1990) The evolution of silicon wafer cleaning tech-
nology, J. Electrochem. Soc., 137, 1887.
Kinoshita, K. and T. Hara (2008) A cleaning process for
ﬁne particles of silicon nitride, J. Electrochem. Soc., 155,
H642–H647.
Kitajima, H. and Y. Shiramizu (1997) Requirements for con-
tamination control in the gigabit era, IEEE Trans. Semicond.
Manuf ., 10, 267.
Li, X.-M., D. Reinhoudt and M. Crego-Calama (2007) What
do we need for a superhydrophobic surface? A review on
the recent progress in the preparation of superhydrophobic
surfaces, Chem. Soc. Rev., 36, 1350–1368.
Middleman, S. and A. K. Hochberg (1993) Process Engi-
neering Analysis in Semiconductor Device Fabrication,
McGraw-Hill.
Ohmi, T. et al. (1992) Dependence of thin-oxide ﬁlm quality
on surface microroughness, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
39, 537.
Okorn-Schmidt, H. (1999) Characterization of silicon surface
preparation processes for advanced gate dielectrics, IBM
J. Res. Dev., 43, 351.
Reinhardt, K. A. and W. Kern (2007) Handbook of Silicon
Wafer Cleaning Technology, 2nd edn, William Andrew.
Schroder, D. K. (1998) Semiconductor Material and Device
Characterization, 2nd edn, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Zhang, F. et al. (2000) The removal of deformed submicron
particles from silicon wafers by spin rinse and megasonics,
J. Electron. Mater., 29, 199.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 148]
13
Thermal Oxidation
Silicon dioxide, SiO2, is probably a more important
material in silicon technology than silicon itself: whereas
GaAs and Ge have higher electron mobilities than
silicon, and potentially faster transistors, they do not have
native oxides which protect their surfaces, and neither do
stable, thick oxides exist. Silicon dioxide has functions as
passivation layers, capacitor dielectrics and electric iso-
lation layers in ﬁnished devices. Thin oxides (1–20 nm)
are used for example as capacitor dielectrics (including
the CMOS transistor) and as tunnel electrodes in ﬂash
memories and chemical sensors, while thick oxides
(100–1000 nm) serve as diffusion and etch masks and as
electrical isolation layers. Thermal oxidation is often done
repeatedly during device processing: for example, the ﬁrst
oxide may be used as an etch mask, and it is removed
after etching, but another thermal oxidation is done
immediately. This new oxide is again of high quality.
13.1 Thermal Oxidation Process
Silicon is easily oxidized: a native oxide of nanometer
thickness grows on a silicon surface in a couple of hours
or days, depending on the surface conditions, and similar
thin oxides form easily in oxygen plasma or in oxidizing
wet treatment. These oxides are, however, limited in their
thickness and they are not stoichiometric SiO2. Two ba-
sic schemes are used in thermal oxidation: wet and dry
oxidation, respectively
Si (s) + 2 H2O (g) ⇒SiO2 (s) + 2 H2 (g)
(13.1)
Si (s) + O2 (g) ⇒SiO2 (s)
(13.2)
Thermal oxidation is a slow process: l h of dry oxidation at
900 ◦C produces oxide about 30 nm thick and 1 h of wet
oxidation about 130 nm. Exact values are dependent on
silicon crystal orientation: the oxidation rate of <111>
is somewhat higher than that of <100> silicon; highly
doped silicon oxidizes faster than lightly doped material.
Thin gate oxides, ﬂash-memory tunnel oxides and
DRAM capacitor oxides are grown in dry oxygen at
850–950 ◦C. In addition to better thickness control due
to the lower rate, dry oxides exhibit lower interface
charges and trap states which are important for transistor
operation. Thin oxides also have many auxiliary and
sacriﬁcial roles: a thin oxide under nitride relieves
stresses caused by the nitride ﬁlm. Thicker oxides are
used for device isolation and as masking layers for
ion implantation, diffusion and etching steps. They are
usually 100–1000 nm thick and grown by wet oxidation.
Typical process
temperatures
are
950–1100 ◦C,
and
process times are hours or tens of hours.
Even though silicon is easily oxidized, oxidation
furnaces are by no means cheap or simple equipment.
They involve high-temperature parts which must be
non-contaminating and which must tolerate oxidizing
conditions and hot cleaning gases. Exacting temperature
control
and
ﬁne
mechanics
are
also
required.
In
Figure 13.1 a batch of silicon wafers is being loaded into
a horizontal furnace.
When silicon and oxygen react to form SiO2, the re-
sulting oxide is roughly twice the volume of silicon it
replaces: for a SiO2 layer of thickness D, silicon thick-
ness consumed is 0.45D as can be calculated from molar
volumes:
density of silicon is 2.3 g/cm3
mass 28 g/mol
molar volume 12.17 cm3
density of SiO2 is 2.2 g/cm3
mass 60 g/mol
molar volume 27.27 cm3
The original silicon surface is somewhat below the oxide
midpoint. This volume increase leads to restrictions in
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 149]
154
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 13.1
Wafers being loaded into a horizontal oxida-
tion furnace. Courtesy VTT
the oxidation of structured surfaces, because stresses can
become excessively large in the corners of the structures.
On the other hand, the fact that oxidation consumes silicon
can be used as a cleaning method: thin oxide is grown and
immediately removed by HF etching, to reveal a perfect
silicon surface.
Oxide thickness is usually measured by optical meth-
ods: either by ellipsometry or by reﬂectometry. Thermal
oxides can be grown with very tight speciﬁcations, for an
oxide 10 nm thick the uniformity is 1%, or equal to one
atomic diameter. For thermal oxides a refractive index
value of n = 1.46 is usually used, but for oxides thinner
than 10 nm this is not really accurate. A quick and easy
way to gauge oxide thickness, especially for intermediate
thicknesses of 50–500 nm, is by its color. An oxide color
chart can be found in Appendix C.
Various electrical measurements are also used: break-
down voltage is one of many. High-quality silicon dioxide
can sustain 10 MV/cm, even 12 MV/cm. Oxide defects
and electrical quality are closely connected; this topic will
be discussed further in Chapter 36.
13.2 Deal–Grove Oxidation Model
A model for oxide growth has been developed by Deal
and Grove. It is a phenomenological macroscopic model
which does not assume anything about the atomistic
mechanisms of oxidation. Oxygen diffusion through the
z = 0
z = Z
Cgas
SiO2 film
silicon
Cs
wafer back side
Figure 13.2
Model of thermal oxidation: oxygen diffuses
through SiO2 ﬁlm and reacts at the SiO2/Si interface. Con-
centration of oxygen inside oxide decreases linearly
growing oxide and chemical reaction at silicon/oxide
interface are modeled by the classical Fick diffusion
equation and chemical rate equation. Model geometry
and boundary conditions are shown in Figure 13.2.
Oxidation is modeled as if the boundaries were station-
ary (which is a reasonable assumption because oxidation
is slow). The diffusion equation for oxygen is
dC
dt = 0 = D d2C
dz2
(13.3)
where C is oxygen molar concentration (mol/m3), subject
to boundary conditions
C = Cs
z = 0
at the SiO2 surface
(13.4)
−D dC
dz = R
z = Z
at the SiO2/Si interface
(13.5)
where R is the reaction rate at the interface (in units of
mol/m2-s).
The latter equation speciﬁes that all oxygen reaching
the interface will react there to form oxide: there will be
no build-up of unreacted oxygen inside oxide or silicon.
For a reaction like Si (s) + O2 (g) ⇒SiO2 (s) the rate
is assumed to be ﬁrst order, that is R = kC, directly
related to the concentration of reactive species, C, and
characterized by a rate constant k. We can then rewrite
the second boundary condition as
−D dC
dz = kC
at z = Z
(13.6)
A solution that satisﬁes these conditions is
C = Cs −

kCs
kZ + D

(13.7)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 150]
Thermal Oxidation
155
The rate (at the SiO2/Si interface z = Z) is then
R = kC(Z) =
kDCs
kZ + D
(13.8)
To calculate the thickness growth rate, we must convert
molar concentration to volume through density:
RMSiO2 = ρSiO2
dZ
dt
(13.9)
where the molar volume of SiO2 is υ = MSiO2/rSiO2
(60 g/mol ÷ 2.2 g/cm3 = 27.3 cm3/mol).
When we solve for Z(t) from the rate equation, we get
dZ
dt = kDCsυ
kZ + D subject to Z = 0 at t = 0
(13.10)
This leads to the oxide thickness equation
t =
Z
KCsυ +
Z2
2DCsυ
(13.11)
When thin oxides are considered, we can ignore the sec-
ond term, and the rate is then simply
Z = kCst
(13.12)
or growth is linear in time and linearly related to rate
constant k.
For thick oxides, we can ignore the ﬁrst term and get
Z =

2DCs υt
(13.13)
or growth is parabolic, related to diffusion length
√
Dt.
The thicknesses of wet and dry thermal oxides obtained
by a 1D simulator are shown in Figure 13.3.
The Deal–Grove model thus predicts linear oxidation
rate initially, followed by a parabolic behavior for thicker
oxides. The linear regime covers the initial stages of oxi-
dation, with some success. The model works much better
for thick oxides, and theory and experiment agree that
doubling oxide thickness requires quadrupling oxidation
time in the parabolic regime (this can be used as a quick
estimate for oxidation time once one process is known
and ﬁxed). Alternatively, if thickness and time are known
for one combination, others can be easily calculated from
Equation 13.13: a 200 min dry oxidation results in oxide
165 nm thick, then 50 min corresponds to about 80 nm. It
should be noted that the demarcation between the linear
and parabolic regimes is not clear cut, and this introduces
uncertainty into the simple calculation.
Dry oxidation is slower than wet oxidation even
though diffusion of oxygen molecules through silicon
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
Time (min)
(a)
(b)
Thickness (nm)
250
200
150
100
50
0
0
100
50
Time (min)
Thickness (nm)
150
200
250
1050
950
850
900
1000
1050
950
850
900
1000
Figure 13.3
Oxidation of<100>silicon at temperatures
between 850 and 1050 ◦C, wet and dry. Maximum prac-
tical oxide thickness is 1 or 2 micrometers, because of the
decrease in parabolic oxidation rate
dioxide is faster than diffusion of water molecules.
The explanation lies in the water solubility of silicon
dioxide: it is four orders of magnitude larger that oxygen
solubility, and therefore the concentration of the oxidant
in oxide is much greater.
Generally, when thin oxides are required, a lower
temperature is used. It is not, however, possible to reduce
temperature without affecting oxide quality. Therefore
one solution is to reduce the partial pressure of oxygen:
for instance, in the experiment of Figure 13.4 the gas
mixture is 10% oxygen, 90% nitrogen. If thick oxides are
needed, higher temperature and higher partial pressure
of oxygen are used. HIPOX, for high-pressure oxidation,
can reduce oxidation time signiﬁcantly.
Oxidation rate depends slightly on silicon crystal orien-
tation. Silicon of <111> orientation oxidizes faster than
<100> (and all other orientations fall between these two).
This is speculated to arise from the number of silicon
atoms and bonds at the oxidation front. For thick oxides,
diffusion of oxygen through oxide determines the rate, and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 151]
156
Introduction to Microfabrication
9
8
7
6
5
Thickness (nm)
4
3
2
1
0
0
30
60
Time (min)
90
120
Crystal orientation:
(111)
(100)
Figure 13.4
Initial oxidation of (100) and (111) silicon
at 850 ◦C, in 10% O2 + 90% N2 atmosphere. Reproduced
from Niskanen et al. (2009), by permission of Elsevier
clearly this cannot depend on silicon crystal orientation,
but in the linear regime the rate constant k is different
for <111> and <100>. This is seen in Figure 13.4:
<111> oxidation is faster than <100>. Note also that
a thin oxide is present even at zero oxidation time. It is
difﬁcult to eliminate oxygen altogether: rinsing water has
dissolved oxygen in it, and wafers are loaded into the
furnace under atmospheric conditions. These topics will
be discussed again in conjunction with CMOS gate oxi-
dation in Chapter 26. The initial stages of oxidation are
surprisingly poorly known, in spite of decades of research
and substantial manufacturing experience. Most models
cannot explain the very ﬁrst nanometers of oxidation.
13.3 Oxidation of Polysilicon
Polysilicon oxidation presents a number of complications
compared to single crystal silicon oxidation. Polysilicon
consists of grains of many orientations which have dif-
ferent oxidation rates. Polysilicon grains are most often
of (110) orientation and the oxidation rate of undoped
poly is somewhere between the (100) and (111) silicon
oxidation rates. In polycrystalline materials there are two
different diffusion paths, through the bulk and along grain
boundaries, requiring more advanced models. Grains also
grow during oxidation, further complicating analysis.
The polysilicon surface is rough (Figure 7.4) and oxide
quality will be inferior to single crystal oxides. Roughness
and different oxidation rates of different grains lead to
non-uniform poly oxide thickness (Figure 13.5). While
Figure 13.5
Polysilicon is rough and consists of grains
of different orientations, which oxidize at slightly different
rates, leading to rough oxide with non-uniform thickness
interpoly oxide (thermal)
tunnel oxide
(thermal SiO2)
<Si>
spacer
(CVD oxide)
FG
CG
Figure 13.6
Flash memory cell: interpoly oxide between
ﬂoating and control gates is limited to about 10 nm because
poly oxides are of inferior quality
single crystal oxides can tolerate 10–12 MV/cm electric
ﬁelds, poly oxides break at 3–5 MV/cm.
Poly oxides are intensively used in EPROM/ﬂash
memories (Figure 13.6). Tunnel oxide is clearly thermally
oxidized single crystal silicon, but the ﬂoating gate (FG)
is poly and interpoly oxide between the ﬂoating gate
and control gate (CG) is therefore thermally oxidized
polysilicon. The fact that it is difﬁcult to scale down
poly oxides is partly limiting ﬂash memory scaling.
13.4 Oxide Structure
Thermally grown silicon dioxide is glassy and exhibits
only short-range order, in contrast to quartz, which is crys-
talline SiO2. The basic unit of silica structure is SiO4, as
shown in Figure 13.7.
In a perfect arrangement, such as crystalline quartz,
all oxygen atoms bond to two silicon atoms (oxygen
has valence 2, silicon valence 4) but at the silicon/oxide
interface some bonds are not made, leaving unbonded
charged oxygen atoms (Figure 13.8), making oxide
less stable than quartz. This is also reﬂected in their
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 152]
Thermal Oxidation
157
Figure 13.7
Basic structure of silica: a silicon atom tetra-
hedrally bonds to four oxygen atoms
oxygen
silicon
hydrogen
Figure 13.8
The structure of the silicon/silicon dioxide
interface: single crystalline silicon and amorphous oxide.
There are dangling bonds (not having their full valence)
and some have hydrogen atoms bonded to them
properties: quartz density is 2.65 g/cm3, silicon oxide
density 2.2 g/cm3; Young’s modulus is 107 GPa for
quartz and 87 GPa for oxide.
Incompletely oxidized silicon atoms are positively
charged, and this is known as ﬁxed oxide charge, Qf.
It is located in the oxide in the ﬁrst few nanometers
above the silicon surface. There is also interface trapped
charge Qit which can be either positive or negative.
The defect density at the silicon/oxide interface can be
made very low by proper cleaning and well-controlled
oxidation. Both Qf and Qit densities are 109–1011/cm2,
which should be compared to the silicon surface density
of 1015 atoms/cm2. Thus only one atom in 104 or one in
106 has incomplete bonds.
Thermal oxidation is often complemented by a post-
oxidation anneal (POA) in nitrogen (in the very same
furnace; oxygen gas is switched to nitrogen). This step
densiﬁes the ﬁlm and anneals out some defects. It also
causes diffusion of dopants and it has to be included in
calculation the doping proﬁles. Hydrogen anneal is used
to passivate dangling bonds: hydrogen attaches to the free
valence of the silicon and eliminates further charge trap-
ping. However, high electric ﬁelds can easily accelerate
electrons to such energies that hydrogen atoms become
mobile during device operation.
If post-oxidation anneal is done in ammonia (NH3) or
nitrous oxide (N2O), surface nitridation will take place
(while nitrogen anneal is an inert anneal). Nitridation re-
sults are very much dependent on anneal details, but the
whole oxide is not turned into nitride: only the surface
layer is affected. Nitridation, too, has many effects: the
dielectric constant goes up (nitride εr ≈7 vs. εr ≈4 for
oxide) which increases capacitance; it also improves ox-
ide tolerance to damage caused by hot electrons injected
into the oxide. Nitrided oxide reduces boron diffusion
through it, which is extremely important for thin CMOS
gate oxides. Ammonia anneal also introduces hydrogen.
Oxidation of nitrided oxide is a way to reduce hydrogen
concentration, and the resulting ﬁlm is known as ONO,
for oxidized nitrided oxide.
Dopant atoms have a major impact on oxidation:
high doping level will increase oxidation rate even
by 200% for thin oxides at low temperatures. High
phosphorus concentration in silicon is associated with
high concentration of vacancies, and because the volume
of silicon dioxide is larger than the volume of silicon it
replaces, oxidation consumes vacancies. Highly doped
phosphorus therefore provides plenty of vacancies for
oxidation to proceed. Boron behaves differently: it is
incorporated into the growing oxide, weakening its bond
structure and thus enabling faster diffusion through it.
In doped polysilicon, dopants precipitate at grain
boundaries. Boron doping leads to minor oxidation rate
enhancement, and phosphorus doping to clearly increased
oxidation rate, via increased vacancy concentration, just
as in the case of single crystal material.
13.5 Local Oxidation of Silicon
When local oxidation of silicon is needed, a silicon ni-
tride mask is used. Nitride will prevent oxygen diffusion,
and areas under the nitride will not be oxidized. This is
known as LOCOS, for local oxidation of silicon. LOCOS
is pictured in Figure 13.9.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 153]
158
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 13.9
LOCOS: top, before oxidation, thin-pad
oxide and patterned nitride; bottom, after oxidation, no ox-
idation under nitride but “bird’s beak” at nitride edge. Note
that about half of the oxide will be below the original silicon
surface
LOCOS process ﬂow
• Thermal oxidation (pad oxide)
• LPCVD nitride deposition
• Lithography
• Nitride etching
• Photoresist strip
• Cleaning
• Wet oxidation
LOCOS variables are pad oxide thickness (10–50 nm),
LPCVD nitride thickness (100–200 nm) and oxidation
temperature. Pad oxide serves as a stress-relief layer, and
it diminishes the stress-induced dislocations that thick
nitride exerts in silicon. Nitride acts as a diffusion barrier
for oxygen diffusion and as a mechanical stiffener: the
thicker the nitride, the smaller the oxide growth under
the mask. This lateral extension is known as bird’s beak,
because of its visual appearance. Thinner pad oxide
would help to minimize bird’s beak but at the expense
of silicon damage from nitride stress.
The LOCOS oxide surface will be above the original
silicon surface. If we desire to have the oxide surface
level with the original surface, we can start the LOCOS
process by etching into silicon, with the silicon etched
depth approximately half the desired oxide thickness,
which then will result in approximately equal surface
height for oxide and silicon.
LOCOS isolation has been used for 30 years because
of its simplicity. It has been scaled to much smaller
Si3N4
Si3N4
removal
Lithography
Si etch #1
Si
Si etch #2
SiO2
removal
Oxidation
Sio2
Figure 13.10
LOCOS for a sawtooth structure in (100)
silicon. Nitride ﬁrst acts as a silicon etching mask and then
as an oxidation mask. Second KOH etching and HF oxide
removal result in sawtooth relief. Reproduced from Ribbing
et al. (2003), copyright IOP
linewidths than anybody thought possible. Numerous
modiﬁcations have been tried, but most have failed
because the added process complexity has not offered
enough
improvement
in
isolation.
Today,
transistor
isolation is based on shallow trench isolation (STI),
which uses RIE of silicon and CVD ﬁlling of the
trenches. This will be discussed in Chapter 26.
The fact that nitride acts as an oxidation mask can be
combined with other process steps, for example nitride
also acts as an etch mask for KOH etching of silicon.
In Figure 13.10 a LOCOS-type KOH etching process is
shown for wafers of (100) orientation. KOH etching is
done using a nitride mask, resulting in inverse pyramid
shapes and trenches. The wafer is cleaned and the newly
formed silicon (111) sidewalls are oxidized. Nitride is
then etched away, and a second silicon KOH etching step
is performed. This leads to “period doubling” of trenches.
13.6 Stress and Pattern Effects
in Oxidation
Oxide volume is greater than the volume of the silicon it
replaces. Oxides are therefore under compressive stresses,
and this causes a number of pattern-dependent phenomena
which can be either beneﬁcial or disadvantageous. Typical
stress values are on the order of 300 MPa. Somewhere
between 975 and 1000 ◦C oxide exhibits viscous ﬂow.
Oxidation above that temperature will result in reduced
stress and wafer bow. Below that temperature, oxide needs
to be treated as an elastic material with appropriate elastic
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 154]
Thermal Oxidation
159
<Si>
<Si>
oxide
<Si>
<Si>
Figure 13.11
SOI structure (left) after plasma etching.
After low-temperature thermal oxidation (right) unoxidized
silicon remains because stresses build up. Redrawn from
Heidemayer et al. (2000)
constants. Scaling of LOCOS to smaller linewidths meets
an inevitable limit at submicron dimensions: stresses in
the growing oxide prevent full oxidation of narrow gaps.
Thermal oxidation of small silicon wires (Figure 13.11)
shows a self-limiting effect due to high stresses and this
has been utilized in making nanostructures. This is illus-
trated in the SOI nanowire process.
Process ﬂow for silicon nanowires
• SOI wafer with device silicon 21 nm thick
• Lithography
• Silicon etching
• Photoresist stripping and wafer cleaning
• Thermal oxidation
Thermal oxidation proceeds for a while, but then a
self-limiting effect sets in: a critical stress, which stops ox-
idation, is about 2.6 GPa at 850 ◦C. After the self-limiting
oxide thickness has been grown, no further oxidation takes
place. If oxidation is carried out at higher temperature,
say 1000 ◦C, this stress can be overcome, and the whole
structure will be oxidized.
Stresses are also responsible for non-uniform oxidation
in convex and concave corners as shown in Figure 13.12.
Uneven oxide thickness causes problems for reliability be-
cause electric ﬁeld strength is different in the corners and
planar areas. Etched trenches have concave corners, and
therefore thermal oxidation leads to non-uniform thick-
ness which may be detrimental to for example DRAM
trench capacitors, because the capacitor dielectric has a
weak spot at the corner. Etch processes can be tailored
to some extent for smoother bottom proﬁles, but this is
a limited option because the top corner needs rounding,
too. Oxide and nitride can be deposited by conformal
CVD, but in very deep trenches the conformality may not
be adequate. Sacriﬁcial thermal oxidation can be used to
Original
Si surface
Convex
corner
Concave
corner
Si
SiO2
Figure 13.12
Cross-section of an oxidized silicon step
with oxide thinning at both the convex (top) and concave
(bottom) corner. Reproduced from Minh and Ono (1999)
by permission of AIP
smooth corners. Second thermal oxidation then provides
the actual thin dielectric ﬁlm, which serves for example
as DRAM capacitor dielectric. Anisotropic wet etching
of silicon produces V-grooves, and oxide at the apex of
the V-groove is highly stressed. This oxide has a much
higher wet etch rate in HF than ordinary oxide. This has
been employed to make nanoscopic holes, as shown in
Figure 13.13.
13.6.1 Oxidation sharpening
Sharp tips are used as AFM probes and as ﬁeld emitters
in vacuum microelectronic devices, for high resolution in
the former application and for low operating voltage in
Si(100)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
SiO2
Cr
(g)
Cr
Figure 13.13
Oxide thinning at the apex is used as a
method to fabricate nanoscopic holes: the apex can be
etched open while leaving oxide elsewhere because oxide
is thin and stressed at the apex. Reproduced from Minh and
Ono (1999) by permission of AIP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 155]
160
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 13.14
Silicon tip fabrication: left, isotropic sili-
con etching with an oxide mask; middle, thermal oxidation;
right, silicon tip recovery by HF etching
the latter. Such tips can be fabricated by isotropic etch-
ing, but the ﬁnal part of tip release is difﬁcult: the mask
will fall off. Thermal oxidation can help as shown in
Figure 13.14: after initial isotropic (or KOH anisotropic)
etching, the ﬁnal sharpening takes place during oxidation.
Mask removal is done by isotropic etching, but this is a
non-critical, non-patterning etch. Thermal oxidation pro-
cess control is also much tighter than shape control in an
etch process.
13.7 Simulation of Oxidation
Oxidation simulation, together with diffusion simulation,
is the backbone of all process integration simulators. Ther-
mal oxidation is well understood and can be accurately
modeled. However, the atomistic mechanisms of thin ox-
ides (and early stages of oxidation in general) are still
under intensive study.
Oxidation simulation requires as input:
• wafer orientation <100>/<111>
• doping level
• temperature
• time
• oxidizing ambient wet/dry.
Additional model parameters such as oxygen partial
pressure (1 atm as default), high concentration effects
and viscous/elastic models can be used instead of default
models.
The Deal–Grove model (Equation 13.1) is the default
model for wet oxidation and for thick oxides in general.
It is not, however, applicable to thin dry oxides. A power-
law model from Nicollian and Brews (2002) can be used
for this regime. Oxidation is modeled as
xox = a
 t
t0
b
(13.14)
Simulators produce results that are accurate within exper-
imental error for 1D oxidation. Additionally, simulators
can account for segregation, the distribution of dopants at
the oxide/silicon interface.
13.7.1 Segregation
Dopants which are initially in the silicon are redistributed
between silicon and the growing oxide during oxide
growth. As shown in Figure 13.15, boron is depleted
and phosphorus accumulated in the silicon side of the
interface. Segregation has a major effect on device
properties: if the dopant is mostly incorporated in the
oxide and depleted in the silicon near the interface,
inversion of silicon doping type may occur. Segregation
proceeds as long as the chemical potentials of the
dopants differ in the oxide and silicon. The equilibrium
segregation coefﬁcient, m, is deﬁned as the ratio of
dopant in silicon to that in oxide.
Metal atoms experience segregation just like the dop-
ants: for example, Al and Ca are segregated preferentially
into the oxide (and cause oxide quality problems) whereas
Ni and Cu diffuse into the bulk (and cause defects which
act as lifetime killers).
13.8 Thermal Oxides vs. other
Oxides
Thermal oxidation of silicon produces high-quality oxide
(in terms of uniformity, density, electric breakdown ﬁeld,
etc.) but thermal oxidation is a high-temperature process.
CVD oxides are sometimes indispensable because they
allow lower process temperatures, but CVD oxides have,
however, lower breakthrough voltage, higher wet etch rate
in HF and rougher surfaces than thermal oxides. Some-
times CVD oxides have to be used because thermal oxides
cannot be used. One such situation concerns very thick ox-
ides: thermal oxidation of micrometer layers takes hours
or days while CVD oxides of identical thicknesses can be
done in a matter of minutes or an hour, depending on the
particular equipment.
Very few materials can tolerate oxidizing ambients at
about 1000 ◦C. Metals cannot usually withstand such con-
ditions. Tantalum is an exception: thermal oxidation of
tantalum can produce device-quality Ta2O5 thin ﬁlms in a
standard oxidation furnace (for reasons of contamination,
a separate oxidation tube needs to be reserved for such an
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 156]
Thermal Oxidation
161
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
(a)
(b)
1.00
1.20
Depth (µm)
Depth (µm)
1010
1011
1012
1013
1014
1015
1016
Concentration(cm−3)
SiO2
SiO2
 
Boron
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1010
1011
1012
1013
1014
1015
1016
Concentration(cm−3)
 
 
Phosphorous
Figure 13.15
Segregation of dopant at silicon/oxide interface during wet oxidation (1000 ◦C, 60 min): (a) boron-doped
wafer shows dopant loss at interface; (b) phosphorus-doped wafer shows accumulation of dopant at the interface. Substrate
resistivity is 10 ohm-cm in both cases
exotic process). Silicides will thermally oxidize to form
SiO2, with the exception of TiSi2, which will turn into
TiO2. Tungsten polycide gates (WSi2/poly) can be oxi-
dized similarly to polysilicon gates. Making the silicide
silicon rich, WSi2.2, will ensure proper oxidation. Sili-
con carbide, SiC, can be oxidized to produce SiO2 with
standard silicon oxidation processes but the rate is very
low compared to silicon oxidation.
In addition to thermal oxidation, there are other ox-
idation processes in microfabrication, namely chemical
oxidation in acidic solutions, as discussed in the previous
chapter; for example, nitric acid will oxidize silicon and
form a SiO2 layer 1 nm thick. This has been used as a
depth proﬁling method: after each oxidation cycle oxide
is removed and the surface analyzed, and with contin-
ued oxidation and HF etching cycles depth information is
obtained, for example on dopant distribution. Anodic ox-
idation of silicon produces silicon dioxide, and similarly
aluminum is anodically oxidized in acidic solutions (to
alumina, Al2O3) which can be used for example as a tun-
nel dielectric in chemical sensors. Plasma is often used to
grow thin oxides, for example aluminum oxide formed by
oxygen plasma treatment is 2 nm thick and useful as a tun-
nel oxide in Josephson junction superconducting devices.
Similar plasma oxide is used as a passivation layer after
chlorine plasma etching of aluminum.
13.9 Exercises
1. A wet oxidation of 250 minutes results in oxide 1 μm
thick. How long will it take to grow 10 μm oxide
under the same conditions? How long will it take to
grow oxide 0.1 μm thick?
2. Holes are etched in thermal oxide 1 μm thick. The
wafer is then given 1 hour of wet oxidation at
1000 ◦C. All oxide is then etched away. What is the
resulting step height in silicon?
3. Recessed LOCOS has the ﬁnal oxide surface at the
same level as the original silicon surface. Its fabrica-
tion starts by etching through nitride and oxide into
silicon as shown below. Calculate the required etched
depth and choose proper oxidation conditions which
will give the ﬁnal oxide thickness. Draw a cross-
sectional ﬁgure of the resulting structure.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 157]
162
Introduction to Microfabrication
4. Explain where thermal oxide will grow in the struc-
ture shown below.
n+ substrate
p− epi layer
oxide 
poly-Si
nitride
a-Si
n+
5. Draw the following structure after thermal oxidation.
Assume 500 nm height for the oxide islands and new
oxide 500 nm thick.
6. What difference do the following materials have in
1000 ◦C dry oxidation:
(a) lightly doped single crystalline silicon
(b) highly phosphorus-doped single crystal silicon
(c) phosphorus-doped polysilicon
(d) undoped amorphous silicon
(e) lightly doped epitaxial silicon?
Simulation exercises:
7. The Deal–Grove oxidation model is not valid for
thin oxides. Experimental data for dry oxidation is
shown below. Check how your simulator works for
thin oxides!
Time (min)
850 ◦C
1000 ◦C
20
6 nm
26 nm
40
8 nm
42 nm
60
11 nm
56 nm
80
13 nm
68 nm
Data from Massoud et al. (1985a).
8. Phosphorus-doped polysilicon (20–80 ohm/sq) oxida-
tion produces 50 nm oxide in 30 min of dry oxidation
at 1000 ◦C. At 900 ◦C dry oxidation results in 10 nm
oxide. How do these values compare to single crystal
silicon oxidation?
9. High-pressure oxidation (HIPOX) increases oxidation
rates. Data for dry oxidation at 900 ◦C is as follows.
Pressure (atm)
Time (min)
Thickness (nm)
10
30
40
10
60
65
10
120
100
20
30
55
20
60
100
20
120
180
Data from Lie et al. (1982).
How does your simulator handle HIPOX oxides?
10. What is the segregation behavior of n-type dopants
As, P, Sb?
References and Related Reading
A¨ıt-Kaki, A. et al. (2002) Characterization of sub-micrometre
silicon ﬁlms (Si-LPCVD) heavily in situ boron-doped and
submitted to treatments of dry oxidation, Semicond. Sci.
Technol., 17, 983–992.
Chabal, Y. J. (ed) (2001) Fundamental Aspects of Silicon
Oxidation, Springer.
Green, M. L. et al. (1999) Understanding the limits of ultra-
thin SiO2 and Si-O-N gate dielectrics for sub-50 nm CMOS,
Microelectron. Eng., 48, 25.
Heidemayer,
H.
et al.
(2000)
Self-limiting
and
pattern
dependent oxidation of silicon dots fabricated on silicon-
on-insulator material, J. Appl. Phys., 87, 4580.
Kameda, N. et al. (2007) High quality gate dielectric ﬁlm on
poly-silicon grown at room temperature using UV light ex-
cited ozone, J. Electrochem. Soc., 154, H769–H772.
Krzeminski, C. et al. (2007) Silicon dry oxidation kinetics at
low temperature in the nanometric range: modeling and ex-
periment, J. Appl. Phys., 101, 064908.
Lie, L. N., R. R. Razouk and B. E. Deal (1982) High pressure
oxidation of silicon in dry oxygen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 129,
2828.
Massoud, H. Z., J. D. Plummer and E. A. Irene (1985a) Ther-
mal oxidation of silicon in dry oxygen growth-rate enhance-
ment in the thin regime, Part I, J. Electrochem. Soc., 132,
2685.
Massoud, H. Z., J. D. Plummer and E. A. Irene (1985b) Ther-
mal oxidation of silicon in dry oxygen: growth-rate enhance-
ment in the thin regime, Part II, J. Electrochem. Soc., 132,
2693.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 158]
Thermal Oxidation
163
Minh, P. N. and T. Ono (1999) Non-uniform silicon oxidation
and application for the fabrication of aperture for near-ﬁeld
scanning optical microscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 75, 4076.
Nicollian, E. H. and J. R. Brews (2002) MOS Physics and
Technology, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Niskanen, A. et al. (2009) Ultrathin tunnel insulator ﬁlms on
silicon for electrochemiluminescence studies, Thin Solid
Films, 517, 5779–5782.
Plummer, J. D., M. D. Deal and P. B. Grifﬁn (2000) Silicon
VLSI Technology, Prentice Hall.
Ribbing, C., Cederstr¨om B. and Lundqvist M. (2003) Micro-
fabrication of saw-tooth refractive x-ray lenses in low-Z
materials, J. Micromech. Microeng., 13, 714–720.
Shimidzu, H. (1997) Behavior of metal-induced oxide charge
during thermal oxidation in silicon wafers, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 144, 4335.
Suryanarayana, P. et al. (1989) Electrical properties of thermal
oxides grown over doped polysilicon thin ﬁlms, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., B7, 599.
Vollkopf, A. et al. (2001) Technology to reduce the aperture
size of microfabricated silicon dioxide aperture tips, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc., 148, G587.
Watanabe, T., K. Tatsumura and I. Ohdomari (2006) New
linear-parabolic rate equation for thermal oxidation of
silicon, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 196102.
Zhang, C. and K. Najaﬁ(2004) Fabrication of thick silicon
dioxide layers for thermal isolation, J. Micromech. Micro-
eng., 14, 769–774.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 159]
14
Diffusion
The power of silicon microelectronics technology stems
from the ability to tailor dopant concentrations over eight
orders of magnitude by introducing suitable n- or p-type
dopants into the silicon. The upper limit is set by the solid
solubility of the dopants (about 1021 cm−3), the lower
limit (about 1012 cm−3) by impurities which result from
the silicon crystal growth. This enables a wealth of mi-
crostructures and devices, witnessed by the multiplicity
of diode, transistor, thyristor and other semiconductor de-
vice designs. In silicon IC technology dopant diffusion is
such a key step that the country of origin of semicon-
ductor devices is deﬁned as the country where diffusions
were made.
Dopants can be introduced into silicon by ﬁve different
methods:
• during crystal growth
• by neutron transmutation doping (NTD)
• during epitaxy
• by diffusion
• by ion implantation.
The ﬁrst two techniques are applied to whole ingots, and
epitaxy results in a uniformly doped layer all over the
wafer. Diffusion and ion implantation are techniques to
locally vary the dopant concentration, and they are the
topics of this and the following chapter.
14.1 Diffusion Process
Diffusion is the movement of atoms along concentration
gradients. Atoms from high-concentration areas move
to areas of lower concentration (and if we wait long
enough, there will be no concentration gradients). In
microtechnology diffusion is a technique to introduce
and drive boron, phosphorus and other dopant atoms into
the silicon lattice.
Thermal diffusion is a high-temperature process: dif-
fusion temperatures for the common dopants are in the
range of 900–1200 ◦C. Diffusion furnaces are identical to
oxidation furnaces, and diffusion is a batch process where
long process times are compensated by a huge loads, 100
or even 200 wafers, in a batch.
Thermal diffusion can be done from the gas phase.
In gas phase doping the wafers are put in a furnace
and a suitable doping gas, POCl3
for phosphorus
doping, or BBr3 for boron doping, is introduced. The
wafers are exposed to dopant atom vapors and doped
(Figure 14.1). The alternative technique is diffusion from
doped thin ﬁlms. For example, boron-doped polysilicon,
phosphorus-doped silica glass (PSG) or doped spin-on
glass is deposited on the wafer, which is then put into
a furnace. Dopants from the doped ﬁlm diffuse into
the silicon. The junction depth (xj) is the depth where
diffused dopant concentration equals substrate dopant
concentration. Solid solubilities of dopants in silicon
are shown in Figure 14.2. If the dopant concentration
exceeds the solubility limit, the dopant will precipitate,
and it does not contribute to electrical conductivity.
If only certain areas need be doped, oxide is used as
a diffusion mask. Even though the dopants do not dif-
fuse through the oxide, they do modify it to the extent
that diffusion mask oxides are practically always etched
away after diffusion and new oxide is grown. Oxide mask
thicknesses are typically around 500 nm, but might have
to be thicker if it is absolutely required that no dopants
penetrate the mask. This might be the case if very high-
resistivity starting wafers are used: their initial doping
level is very low, and a very small amount of dopant will
easily counterdope them.
Typical diffusion process at at 1000 ◦C for a few hours
will result in roughly 1 μm diffusion depth. Much longer
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 160]
166
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(c)
(b)
concentration
depth
xj
Csurf
Figure 14.1
Thermal diffusion: (a) gas phase diffusion with oxide mask; (b) diffusion from doped thin ﬁlm with oxide
mask; (c) dopant proﬁle and junction depth xj
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
700
800
900
1000
1100
Temperature (°C)
log solubility (cm−3)
P
As
B
Sb
Al
Ga
Cu
In
Au
Fe
Zn
Figure 14.2
Solid solubilities of the most important
dopants and impurities in silicon technology
diffusions are also common: CMOS well diffusion could
be 16 hours at 1150 ◦C, for 5 μm depth.
Diffusion
is
often
carried
out
in
two
steps:
pre-deposition (or pre-diffusion) and drive-in. In pre-
deposition a known and limited number of dopants are
introduced on the wafer, and during drive-in they will
diffuse deeper. In gas phase diffusion this means that
POCl3 gas is switched off during drive-in, and nitrogen
or oxygen introduced. Ion implantation, where ionized
dopants are accelerated into silicon, can be considered as
a pre-deposition step for diffusion. Diffusion is therefore
the general term for doping processes, irrespective of the
actual mechanism of dopant introduction.
Doping can be performed many times over, and silicon
doping type may change from p- to n-type and back again,
depending on the process sequence. The device shown in
Figure 14.3, a UV photodiode, is made in a modiﬁed
npn–bipolar process. UV photons are absorbed in the top
p+ diffusion layer. The process ﬂow will only show the
diffusion aspects of the device.
Substrate
contact
AIR
Anode
Cathode
P+
P+
N+
P+
N+
N+
P
N
P substrate
UV-photodiode
Figure 14.3
UV photodiode with shallow p+ anode dif-
fusion. The structure is based on an npn–bipolar transistor.
Reproduced from Zimmermann (1999) by permission of
Springer. Note that lateral and vertical dimensions in the
ﬁgure are not true: diffusion is isotropic and for example
5 μm vertical diffusion leads to 5 μm lateral (sideways) dif-
fusion on both sides!
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 161]
Diffusion
167
p-base
n+ cathode 
depth into
silicon 
n-collector
epi
substrate water 
p+ anode 
Csubst
n+ buried layer
Figure 14.4
UV photodiode doping proﬁle along the an-
ode of Figure 14.3
Process ﬂow for UV photodiode
(lithography, etch and oxidation
steps omitted)
• p-type substrate wafer
• n+ buried layer diffusion
• n epitaxial layer deposition
• p+ substrate contact diffusion
• n+ diffusion to contact buried layer
• p+ base contact enhancement diffusion (under AIR)
• p base diffusion
• n+ cathode diffusion
• p+ anode diffusion
The area directly underneath the anode changes its
doping type three times: it is originally n-type epilayer,
doped by PH3 gas during epitaxy. Base diffusion changes
it to p-type when the boron concentration exceeds the
phosphorus concentration in the epilayer; n-cathode
diffusion turns it back to n-type because the phosphorus
concentration is higher than the boron concentration; and
ﬁnally the surface anode diffusion with the highest boron
concentration of all results in p+ silicon. Figure 14.4
shows the dopant depth proﬁle underneath the anode of
Figure 14.3.
14.2 Diffusion Mechanisms
Fairly
simple
mathematical
models
can
describe
concentration proﬁles in solids, but at the atomistic level
diffusion
remains
to
be
fully
explained.
This
has
consequences for simulators, because mechanisms are
not fully known, therefore modeling remains inaccurate.
Dopant atoms move with the help of point defects:
they jump to vacancies and interstitials. Substitutional
dopants are fairly stable without point defects. Vacancies
are always present through thermal equilibrium processes:
Figure 14.5
Diffusion mechanisms: left, interstitial; mid-
dle, substitutional/vacancy; right, interstitialcy
vacancies are thermodynamic defects, and their nature
is different from for example dislocations and stacking
faults, which are “frozen.” Vacancies as a fraction of all
sites can be estimated by
f = e(−Ea/kT )
(14.1)
For 1 eV activation energy it gives about 0.01% vacant
sites at 1000 ◦C (1273 K).
Here we outline some mechanisms for diffusion
(Figure 14.5). In interstitial diffusion atoms jump from
one interstitial site to another interstitial site which
is always available. This is the diffusion mechanism
for small atoms, like sodium and lithium. Substitu-
tional/vacancy
diffusion
necessitates
that
an
empty
lattice site is available next to the diffusing atom. At
high
temperatures
substitutional
sites
are
thermally
created. Antimony and arsenic demonstrate substitutional
mechanisms. The interstitialcy mechanism is related
to the substitutional mechanism: self-interstitial atoms
move to lattice sites, and knock dopants out to interstitial
sites, and from there they move to lattice sites. Boron
and phosphorous are expected to diffuse via interstitialcy
mechanism, but there are still some open questions even
in diffusion of the most widely used dopants.
The substitutional and interstitialcy mechanisms with
activation energies of about 3.5–4 eV are the most impor-
tant for doping in silicon technology. Boron, phosphorus
and arsenic as well as antimony, indium and gallium all
have activation energies in this range. Therefore, doping
by diffusion must take place at high temperature.
Many metallic impurities diffuse with the interstitial
mechanism (Ea 1–1.5 eV), and nickel for instance can
diffuse through the wafer (500 μm) at 750 ◦C in one hour.
14.3 Doping of Polysilicon
Polysilicon can be doped almost like single crystal silicon.
Again, the difference arises from the grain boundaries.
Grain boundaries attract and lock dopants, and a propor-
tionately smaller concentration of dopant ends up in the
grains. Therefore polysilicon resistivity is never as low
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 162]
168
Introduction to Microfabrication
10
1016
1017
1018
Doping concentration [Cm−3]
1019
1020
Single
crystal silicon
610° C
deposition
560° C
deposition
1
0.1
Resistivity [Ω-cm]
0.01
0.001
0.0001
Figure 14.6
Silicon doping. Single crystal silicon resis-
tivity is lower than poly for same doping concentration.
True poly (610 ◦C) and a-Si (560 ◦C) resistivities also dif-
fer. From French (2002) by permission of Elsevier
as that of single crystal (Figure 14.3). This is true for in
situ doping during poly deposition at all temperatures, as
well as diffusion doping and ion implantation. Another
feature seen in Figure 14.6 is the effect of poly depo-
sition temperature: at 570 ◦C “poly” is amorphous, and
at 610 ◦C poly is truly polycrystalline. They crystallize
differently and end up with different grain sizes, hence dif-
ferent resistivities. The lowest possible n-type poly doping
is achieved with phosphorus, resulting in 400 μ ohm-cm
resistivity, while for boron-doped poly the low limit is
about 2000 μ ohm-cm.
14.4 Doping Proﬁles in Diffusion
Concentration-dependent diffusion ﬂux is described by
Fick’s ﬁrst law:
j = −D
∂N
∂x

(14.2)
where D is the diffusion coefﬁcient (cm2/s) and N is
concentration (in cm−3). The unit of ﬂux is atoms/s-cm2.
Diffusion coefﬁcients can be presented by
D = D0 e(−Ea/kT )
(14.3)
where D0 is the frequency factor (related to lattice vibra-
tions, 1013 −1014 Hz), Ea is the activation energy (related
Table 14.1
D0 and Ea values for
boron and phosphorus
Boron
Phosphorus
D0 (cm2/s)
0.76
3.85
Ea (eV)
3.46
3.66
to the energy barrier that the dopant must overcome), k
is Boltzmann’s constant, k = 1.38 × 10−23 J/K or 8.62 ×
10−5 eV/K, and T is temperature in kelvin.
Values of D0 and Ea for boron and phosphorus are
given in Table 14.1. From those values the boron diffu-
sion coefﬁcient D can be calculates as 4 × 10−15 cm2/s at
950 ◦C and as 4.7 × 10−14 cm2/s at 1050 ◦C.
The characteristic diffusion length is given by
x ≈2
√
Dt
(14.4)
so that 1050 ◦C boron diffusion for 1 h corresponds to
roughly 0.26 μm diffusion depth. This distance is a char-
acteristic length scale only: diffusion proﬁles are gently
sloping and there is no clear cut-off depth.
The sheet resistance of doped layers in the general case
is given by Equation 14.5a, and is approximated for a
box proﬁle (assuming constant dopant level up to junction
depth, and then zero dopant) by Equation 14.5b. The box
proﬁle can be quite a reasonable assumption: for example,
the arsenic proﬁle of Figure 2.12 is fairly box-like.
1
Rs
=
xj

0
qμ(N(x) −Nb) dx
(14.5a)
1
Rs
= qμxjN(x)
(14.5b)
where q is elementary charge, μ the mobility, N(x) the
dopant concentration, Nb the background concentration
and xj the junction depth. Mobilities of n- and p-type
silicon
are
about
1400 cm2/V-s
and
500 cm2/V-s,
respectively, at low concentrations (<1015 cm−3), and
about 50 cm2/V-s at high concentrations (>1019 cm−3),
irrespective of dopant. Sheet resistances of doped areas
are typically from 10 /sq to 10 k/sq.
14.4.1 Inﬁnite dopant supply (constant surface
concentration of dopant)
Inﬁnite dopant supply corresponds to gas phase doping
where new dopant is constantly being injected into the dif-
fusion tube. A heavily doped thin ﬁlm (doped polysilicon
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 163]
Diffusion
169
or PSG or BSG CVD oxide) can be approximated as an
inﬁnite source when diffusion times and temperatures are
moderate. The concentration proﬁle of the dopant in sili-
con is given by the complementary error function (erfc):
N(x, t) = N0 erfc
 x
4Dt

(14.6)
where N0 is the dopant concentration (1/cm3) in the
surface layer, x the depth (cm), t the time (s) and D
the diffusion constant at given temperature (cm2/s).
Longer doping times will lead to deeper diffusions but
the surface concentration is unchanged.
14.4.2 Limited dopant supply (constant dopant
amount)
Limited
dopant
supply
describes
the
case
of
pre-
deposition: a small amount of dopants is introduced in
the ﬁrst step. In the second step they diffuse deeper but
because no new dopants are available, peak concentration
at the surface will get lower as time goes by. Ion
implantation, to be discussed in the next chapter, can
be used to introduce a controlled number of dopants
into silicon. The concentration proﬁle of limited source
diffusion is Gaussian:
N(x, t) =
Q0
√
πDt
exp

−x2
4Dt

(14.7)
where Q0 is the total amount of dopant on the surface
(1/cm2). The junction depth xj is given by
xj =
√
4Dt × ln

Q0
Csubs
√
πDt

(14.8)
Equation 14.8 cannot be solved in analytical form for
diffusion time. An approximate solution for diffusion time
can be obtained by a graphical solution: calculate xj for
a few diffusion times, plot the results, and estimate the
junction depth from the graph. Simulators should be used
for more accurate estimates.
14.4.3 Diffusion proﬁle measurement
Diffusion proﬁles are measured either physically or elec-
trically. The standard physical measurement is secondary
ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). The dynamic range of
SIMS is up to eight orders of magnitude, that is dopant
concentrations down to 1014 cm−3 can be detected (sili-
con atom density is 5 × 1022 cm−3). Spreading resistance
proﬁling (SRP) measurement (Figure 2.10) measures re-
sistance with probes at the surface, and then beveling or
anodic oxidation is done in order to have access to dopants
deeper inside the silicon. SRP data needs some major cal-
culations before dopant proﬁles are obtained. Both SIMS
and SRP are sample destructive methods. Simple four-
point probe measurement gives sheet resistance, which is
good for monitoring diffusion.
14.5 Diffusion Applications
Gas phase doping by POCl3 gas for n-type and BBr3 gas
for p-type was used in the early years of semiconductor
manufacturing for steps where a high degree of control
was required, for example bipolar base diffusion. Solid
source doping was used when high dopant concentration
(near or at the solid solubility limit) was required, for
example in bipolar emitters and MOS source/drain.
Solid source doping has the problem that it is often
very difﬁcult to remove the dopant source material after
diffusion, and residues may be left.
Resistors can be made easily if diffusion is part of the
process. Polysilicon, with its higher resistivity, is better
suited for making high-resistance resistors.
Bipolar devices and power transistors (Figure 1.14) rely
on diffusion as the key element in their fabrication. As
shown for MOS-controlled thyristor (Figure 14.7), many
diffusions, some of them very deep, are needed.
G
G
P
A
n
n
n+
n−
p+
p+
p+
K
ON-FET
CHANNEL
OFF-FET CHANNELS
Oxide
Oxide
Poly
Poly
Figure 14.7
MOS-controlled thyristor. Reproduced from
Sankara Narayanan et al. (2004), copyright © 2004 by per-
mission of Elsevier
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 164]
170
Introduction to Microfabrication
There are concentration and electric ﬁeld effects
which make actual device diffusions more complex than
the simple Fick models predict. In the emitter push
effect phosphorus diffusion enhances boron diffusion
(see Figure 14.8). Boron diffusion alone would result
in a proﬁle predicted by simple theory, but boron
diffusion under a phosphorus-doped region is much
faster. This is explained by self-interstitial generation in
the phosphorus diffusion process, and these interstitials
enhance boron diffusion.
In oxidation-enhanced diffusion (OED) the vacancies
generated by volume changes associated with thermal ox-
idation lead to enhanced diffusion underneath the oxide.
This is pictured in Figure 14.9. Simulators can handle
the emitter push effect, OED and high dopant concen-
tration effects among other subtleties. We will see in the
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.8
Emitter push effect: (a) unimpeded boron dif-
fusion; (b) phosphorus diffusion pushes boron diffusion
deeper under the same conditions
Si3N4
SiO2
Si     Substrate
ΔXj
Xjfo
Xji
Xjf
Figure 14.9
Oxidation-enhanced diffusion (OED): va-
cancy injection during oxidation enhances dopant diffusion
under oxide. Reproduced from Taniguchi et al. (1980) by
permission of Electrochemical Society Inc.
next chapter that ion implantation produces vacancies, and
these vacancies will similarly enhance diffusion.
14.6 Simulation of Diffusion
All high-temperature process steps contribute to diffusion,
therefore diffusion is the omnipresent process to be sim-
ulated in the front-end of the process. There can easily be
tens of steps that contribute to dopant proﬁles. Segregation
effects during oxidation and dopant outdiffusion from free
surfaces add to the computational and modeling loads.
The simulation of phosphorus diffusion needs to con-
sider at least ﬁve species:
• phosphorus (P)
• vacancies (v)
• interstitials (i)
• phosphorus–vacancy pairs (P–v)
• phosphorus–interstitial pairs (P–i).
Vacancies and interstitials are not permanent species
like phosphorus atoms, and we must account for the
annihilation of point defects, for example vacancy meets
interstitial and annihilation takes place (v + i = nil).
Point defects can also form pairs like v–v. To make the
situation even more difﬁcult to analyze, many of the
species are charged: diffusion models have to account
for equilibrium processes like P−+ v0 ⇔Pv−(charged
phosphorus–vacancy pair) or P−+ i0 ⇔Pi−. Clustering
and precipitation of dopants lead to inactivation. These
phenomena are especially important when concentrations
are near the solid solubility limit.
A standard simulator requires as inputs for diffusion
simulation:
• wafer orientation <100>/<111
• wafer doping level/resistivity
• dopant type
• concentration of dopant (gas phase/solid phase/im-
planted)
• temperature
• ambient (oxidizing/inert/reducing).
The doping proﬁles of Figure 14.10 have been calculated
with the 1D simulator ICECREM.
Longer diffusion time of course leads to deeper diffu-
sion, but the two cases of limited and inﬁnite supply have
differences. In the case of limited dopant supply the sur-
face concentration decreases the longer the diffusion time.
The area under the depth-concentration curve is constant:
the number of dopant atoms is constant. In the inﬁnite
supply case the surface concentration remains constant:
there is an ample supply of new dopant atoms.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 165]
Diffusion
171
13:22:24 24-JAN-:3
24-JAN-:3
BORON
P-diffusion: 1e21/1 predep, 1000 C inert
100 min in inert atmosphere
200 min in inert atmosphere
300 min in inert atmosphere
Phosphorous diffusion from solid source at 1000 C
100 min in inert atmosphere
200 min in inert atmosphere
300 min in inert atmosphere
PHOSPHORUS
PHOSPHORUS
PHOSPHORUS
BORON
PHOSPHORUS
PHOSPHORUS
PHOSPHORUS
1018
1017
1016
1015
1014
1013
1018
1019
1020
1021
1017
1016
1015
1014
1012
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
DEPTH IN UM
DEPTH IN UM
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
CONC.IN CM**(−3)
CONC.IN CM**(−3)
12:36:20
SiO2
oxthi = 0.1000
Figure 14.10
Diffusion at 1000 ◦C, for 100, 200 and 300 min in inert atmosphere for boron-doped substrate: (a) diffusion
from a limited source, implanted dose 1013 cm−2; (b) diffusion from phosphorus-doped oxide ﬁlm (with 1020 cm−3
phosphorus concentration, approximating an inﬁnite source)
14.7 Diffusion at Large
Diffusion is of course a much larger concept than
described above: it includes many processes where
concentration gradients are reduced by atom movements;
for example, in microﬂuidics two parallel liquid ﬂows
will mix due to diffusion, and hydrogen in a fuel cell is
spread uniformly by a gas diffusion layer, an intricate
web of nanotubes or microﬁbers.
Diffusion is inevitable in all high-temperature steps, but
it can be minimized by minimizing process time. In rapid
thermal annealing (RTA; or RTP for Rapid Thermal Pro-
cessing) wafers are heated rapidly by powerful lamps, and
2
√
Dt is brought down by annealing for very short times
at high temperatures: a furnace diffusion of 950 ◦C for
30 min, might be replaced by a RTA process of 1050 ◦C
for 10 s.
Many processes in addition to diffusion are tempera-
ture dependent: grain growth, interfacial chemical reac-
tions, surface oxidation, etc., all experience higher rates
at higher temperatures. Also, unwanted processes like im-
purity diffusion are accelerated. Metallic impurities have
diffusion coefﬁcients that lead to 500 μm diffusion dis-
tances during typical heat treatments. This means that
back-side contamination can reach the wafer front, and
destroy device functionality there. Therefore wafer clean-
ing before any high-temperature step is very important.
In solar cell fabrication, cost reduction pressures are
high. Diffusion steps have been simpliﬁed and shortened.
P-type diffusion can be done by spin coating phosphoric
acid on the wafer, and then performing 950 ◦C diffusion
for 15 min. This resembles in some sense the result of
incomplete cleaning: whatever is left on the surface will
be driven inside the silicon by subsequent annealing.
14.8 Exercises
1. What is the diffusion time required to form a pn
junction at 1 μm depth at 1000 ◦C when boron
pre-deposition is 1014 cm−2 and a phosphorus-doped
wafer (1015 cm−3) is used.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 166]
172
Introduction to Microfabrication
2. Polysilicon sheet resistance is 50 ohm/sq. What is the
polysilicon thickness?
3. What is the sheet resistance of diffusion after the an-
neal shown in Figure 2.12?
4. If deep n-type diffusions are needed, which n-type
dopant should be used?
5. How far will metallic impurities diffuse during ther-
mal oxidation?
6. Explain the order of the fabrication steps for the
spreading resistance thermometer shown below.
aluminum
n
n+
7. Explain step by step the fabrication process for the
triple diffused bipolar transistor shown below.
p−
n
p
base
emitter
collector
n+
n+
8. Explain the order of diffusion steps in the fabrication
of the MOS-controlled thyristor of Figure 14.7.
Simulator exercises:
9. Boron-doped oxide ﬁlm (200 nm thick, concentration
1021 cm−3) is deposited on a phosphorus-doped wafer
(1015 cm−3 phosphorus concentration). What is the
junction depth doping after a 300 min, 1100 ◦C diffu-
sion step?
10. What is the magnitude of the emitter push effect?
11. What is the magnitude of OED? Run some simula-
tions to ﬁnd which process parameters are important.
References and Related Reading
Baliga, J.B. (2001) The future of power semiconductor device
technology, Proc. IEEE, 89, 822 (special issue on power
electronics technology).
French, P.J. (2002) Polysilicon: a versatile material for mi-
crosystems, Sens. Actuators, A99, 3–12.
Ghandhi, S.K. (1994) VLSI Fabrication Principles, 2nd edn,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Kim, D.S. et al. (2006) Development of a phosphorus spray dif-
fusion system for low-cost silicon solar cells, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 153, A1391–A1396.
MRS Bulletin (2000) Defects and diffusion in silicon technol-
ogy, MRS Bull., 25 (June), special issue.
Naganawa, M. et al. (2008) Accurate determination of the in-
trinsic diffusivities of boron, phosphorus, and arsenic in sil-
icon: the inﬂuence of SiO2 ﬁlms, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 47,
6205–6207.
Plummer, J.D., M.D. Deal and P.B. Grifﬁn (2000) Silicon
VLSI Technology, Prentice Hall.
Sankara
Narayanan,
E.M.
et al..
(2004)
Progress
in
MOS-controlled
bipolar
devices
and
edge
termination
technologies, Microelectron. J ., 35, 235–248.
Taniguchi, K. et al. (1980) Oxidation enhanced diffusion of
boron and phosphorus in (100) silicon, J. Electrochem. Soc.,
127, 2243.
Zimmermann, H. (1999) Integrated Silicon Optoelectronics,
Springer, p. 36.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 167]
15
Ion Implantation
Ion implantation (I/I) is a process where accelerated
ions hit the silicon wafer, penetrate into silicon, slow
down by collisional, stochastic processes, and come to
rest within femtoseconds. Implantation today is the main
method of introducing dopants into silicon, and in CMOS
fabrication, it has replaced thermal diffusion almost
completely.
Typical ion implantation energies are 10–200 keV, and
doses are 1011 to 1016 ions/cm−2. Because implantation
depths are of the order of hundreds of nanometers, the cor-
responding concentrations are ca. 1015 cm−3 to 1020 cm−3.
In 1 μm CMOS technology source/drain diffusions are
made by 5 × 1015 cm−2 ion implant doses, and the depth
is ca. 200 nm, which translates to ca. 25 Ohm/sq. For more
advanced CMOS technologies S/D sheet resistances are
rapidly increasing because S/D depths are scaled down.
Lateral conﬁnement of implanted dopants is better than
in diffusion: sideways spreading under the mask is consi-
derably less, as a rule of thumb, it is one-third of vertical
range. This is especially important in advanced CMOS
where extremely small dimensions are fabricated. In
thermal diffusion the depth and the lateral extension are
identical in the ﬁrst approximation.
Photoresist can mask ion implantation, an obvious ad-
vantage iover thermal diffusion which requires an oxide
mask. However, implantation is always connected with a
high temperature anneal step. Implantation damages the
silicon crystal, and in order to recover defect-free single
crystalline state, this damage has to be annealed away.
Second, dopants must be activated, that is they have to
be in substitutional lattice sites. Activation of dopants and
damage removal both take place simultaneously, but the
process cannot always be optimized for both, as will be
discussed in Chapter 26.
15.1 The Implantation Process
Ion implantation is depicted in Figure 15.1a. Ions pene-
trate into silicon and into the mask, too. The mask has
to be thick enough so that it will block ions. Photoresist,
oxide, nitride and polysilicon are typically used as mask
materials. The higher the implantation energy, the deeper
the ions will penetrate, and the lighter the ion, the deeper
it will go. The range of ions in matter (Rp) is statistically
distributed and rather broad. This is described by straggle,
R, in Figure 15.1b.
Implanted ions scatter stochastically, traveling a dis-
tance R (range). However, we are more interested in
projected range, Rp, the depth ions reach underneath the
silicon surface (Figure 15.2). Straggle R is the devia-
tion in range, the width of the depth distribution. As a
rule of thumb, the concentration at Rp ± 2R is 10%
peak concentration, and at Rp ± 3R it is 1% of peak
concentration. Also of interest is lateral straggle, RL, or
the deviation from the incident direction.
Ions are decelerated in the lattice by nuclear and
electronic stopping, that is by collisions with atomic
nuclei of atomic number Z and mass M, and by collisions
with the electronic cloud, respectively. Under a number
of simplifying assumptions (about the nature of material,
interaction potentials, energy independence of various
variables, etc.) the Linhard solution to nuclear stopping
for projectile (M1, Z1) hitting a wafer of (M2, Z2) is
Sn = 2.8 × 10−15 Z1Z2
Z
M1
(M1 + M2) eV cm2
(15.1)
where
Z
is
the
reduced
atomic
number,
Z =
(Z2/3
1
+ Z2/3
2
)3/2. Nuclear energy loss is independent of
ion energy in this approximation. Electronic stopping is
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 168]
174
Introduction to Microfabrication
ΔR
Rp
concentration
(a)
(b)
depth
Figure 15.1
(a) Implantation: mask layer blocks selected
areas; (b) dopant concentration proﬁle inside silicon, with
projected range Rp and straggle R
incident
ion beam
target surface
RL
Rp
R
Figure 15.2
Key concepts for implanted ions: R: range is
the length of ion travel; Rp is the projected range, and RL
lateral straggle
proportional to the square root of energy:
Se = 3.3 × 10−17(Z1 + Z2)

E
M1
eV cm2
(15.2)
Total energy loss is calculated as
dE
dx = −(Sn + Se)N
(15.3)
where N is silicon atom density, 5 × 1022 cm−3.
Table 15.1 lists the nuclear and electronic energy losses
in silicon. Equation 15.3 can now be used to estimate
ranges. As a rough guide, the projected range is 90% of
the range.
The combined energy loss from nuclear and electronic
stopping for 100 keV phosphorus is thus 724 keV/μm.
Equation 15.3 then gives a range of about 140 nm and
a projected range of about 126 nm. Boron ions are light
and they penetrate deep into silicon, with 100–500 nm as
typical implanted depth, while heavy arsenic ions pene-
trate only 10–50 nm when standard implant energies of
10–200 keV are used.
Table 15.1
Energy loss of implanted ions in silicon
Nuclear energy loss in silicon (independent of
energy) in keV/μm:
Boron
92
Phosphorus
447
Arsenic
1160
Electronic energy loss in silicon in keV/μm:
E (keV)
Boron
Phosphorus
Arsenic
10
65
88
90
50
145
196
200
100
205
277
283
200
290
391
401
Figure 15.3 shows dopant concentration proﬁles: the
high peak concentration is usually below the surface
(while in diffusion it is always at the surface) and there
is a long tail deep into the silicon. Note that not only
does higher energy result in deeper projected range,
but also the peak concentration will be lower. Thinking
visually of Figure 15.3, the areas under the concentration
vs. depth curves must be identical for identical doses:
the same numbers of dopant atoms are just distributed
differently.
Masking layers for ion implantation have to be substan-
tially thicker than projected ranges, to ensure that the ions
in the tail of distribution do not penetrate the mask. Mask
thickness is especially important when working with high-
resistivity substrates: it does not take many dopant atoms
to change dopant type.
Dose control in ion implantation is superior to thermal
diffusion. Another beneﬁt of ion implantation compared
to thermal diffusion is doping through oxide. When
energy is high enough, a sizable proportion of ions
penetrate through the oxide and dope silicon, as shown
in Figure 15.4. Both 50 keV and 150 keV boron ions will
penetrate through the oxide into silicon. However, 50 keV
arsenic ions are completely stopped and only a very
small dose of 150 keV arsenic ions will reach silicon.
15.1.1 Measurements for implantation
Implanted wafers can be measured by a four-point probe
for sheet resistance. It is a natural control measurement
for doping. It is, however, a fairly slow feedback loop
because the wafer has to be cleaned and annealed be-
fore 4PP measurement. Sheet resistance measurement sees
only electrically active dopants, and annealing is therefore
not just an auxiliary step for measurement but an essential
part of ion implantation doping. What is more, the wafer
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 169]
Ion Implantation
175
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Depth (µm)
Concentration (cm−3)
(a)
Arsenic
Phosphorous
Boron
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
Concentration (cm−3)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Depth (µm)
(b)
Phosphorous
Phosphorous
Phosphorous
Figure 15.3
(a) The 50 keV implantation of arsenic, phosphorus and boron: the lighter ions will penetrate deeper.
(b) Phosphorus implantation with 50, 100 and 150 keV energies
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
Concentration (cm−3)
Depth (µm)
Arsenic
Arsenic
Boron
Boron
SiO2
Figure 15.4
Implantation through oxide: 250 nm oxide
will block 50 keV arsenic ions and most of 150 keV arsenic,
too, but both 50 keV and 150 keV boron ions penetrate the
oxide and dope silicon underneath
has to be discarded after 4PP measurement because it is a
contact measurement and likely to cause contamination.
Alternatively, the dose can be monitored by modu-
lated photoreﬂectance (also known as the thermal wave
method). A modulated laser beam heats the wafer and
the periodic heat waves are monitored by another, small-
power laser. Dissipation lengths are correlated to implant
damage and hence to dose. This is a fast, non-contact
measurement which needs no wafer preparation and can
be done even on photoresist patterned wafers.
If the dopant depth distribution needs to measured,
the wafer destructive methods of spreading resistance
proﬁling (SRP) and SIMS are available (Chapter 2). Both
measurements are long and tedious and used mostly in
the research phase of process development. Point defects
created by implantation cannot be seen by physical
analysis, but extended defects like dislocations can be
seen by a TEM. Amorphization can be measured by a
TEM or by XRD.
15.2 Implant Applications
Ion implantation emerged in the 1970s when accurate
low-dose doping was required for CMOS threshold volt-
age control. Implantation excelled over thermal diffusion
for this, and it opened up the way for implantation to
start penetrating the doping business. Whenever shallow-
doped structures are needed, ion implantation is used. This
applies to piezoresistors on AFM cantilevers as well as
advanced CMOS source/drain diffusions.
Actually, diffusion is never displaced by implantation
because some diffusion takes place during implant ac-
tivation anneal. And in many applications, like CMOS
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 170]
176
Introduction to Microfabrication
wells, implantation and thermal diffusion are used in tan-
dem: the accurate dose control of implantation is used to
perform pre-diffusion, which determines the number of
dopants, and long thermal drive-in, which determines the
ﬁnal dopant proﬁle. This is necessary because implanta-
tion depths are shallow (<1 μm) and wells used to be
rather deep, in the 5 μm range.
Self-aligned polysilicon gate was one of the great in-
novations of CMOS fabrication in the 1970s. Previously,
source and drain (S/D) were formed by thermal diffu-
sion, using an oxide mask. After oxide mask removal
and new thermal oxidation, aluminum gate was deposited
and aligned on S/D, leading to inevitable alignment er-
rors, as shown in the left column of Figure 15.5. In the
self-aligned gate process (right column of Figure 15.5)
the polysilicon gate is patterned and acts as a mask for
S/D doping. Suitably selecting the implant energy so that
the thin oxide is penetrated but the thick poly is not, the
channel area under the gate is not doped, and the S/D
areas are automatically aligned with the poly gate. This
reduces overlap capacitances and resistances. Aluminum
cannot be used in the self-aligned gate process because
the annealing step after implantation requires temperatures
about 1000 ◦C.
Doping polysilicon is one of the applications where
implantation offers multiple choices. Most manufactur-
ers prefer to deposit undoped LPCVD poly because of
better process control. Traditionally, poly doping was by
Figure 15.5
Non-self-aligned aluminum gate MOS pro-
cess (left) with thermally diffused S/D vs. ion-implanted,
self-aligned, polysilicon gate MOS process (right)
POCl3 gas phase doping, resulting in heavily doped n-
type polysilicon. This is an application where thermal
diffusion excels: namely, high doping concentration (e.g.,
1020 cm−3) blanket deposition. In the self-aligned pro-
cess the poly becomes phosphorus doped during NMOS
S/D implantation, and no separate poly doping step is
needed. Similarly, when PMOS S/D are implanted by
boron, PMOS gate poly becomes p-type as well. Of course
such a dual gate structure could be done by two lithog-
raphy and two doping steps before poly etching, but the
self-aligned process eliminates two lithography steps. In
another approach, n+ doped LPCVD poly is deposited,
but lithography is done next, and PMOS areas are im-
planted by a heavy boron dose that is so high that dopant
type inversion n+ →p+ occurs.
Photoresist masking works nicely for implants: it is
easy to spin-coat thick enough resists to block ions. There
are, however, a few issues to tackle. Accelerated ions
break bonds due to their high energy. This can lead to re-
sist carbonization, especially if high doses are used. The
wafers also heat up during implantation because acceler-
ated ions carry a lot of energy. This heating will further
bake the resist and change its structure. Both of these
processes make stripping of implanted resist difﬁcult.
Channeling is a phenomenon where ions are channeled
between silicon crystal planes, rather like light in optical
ﬁbers. This effect is more pronounced for light ions,
and especially for <100> crystal orientation which
has a very open structure (Figure 4.6). In order to
avoid channeling, many implanters tilt the wafers by
7◦, so that the ions hit the wafer obliquely, avoiding
channeling. However, this leads to device asymmetry
(Figure 15.6). Lateral diffusion during damage removal
anneal is becoming very small in advanced devices, and
this makes the problem more serious than before.
Another way to reduce channeling is to implant through
thin oxide (e.g., 10 nm). Thin oxide randomizes incom-
ing ions, reducing channeling. These oxides serve another
Figure 15.6
Doping asymmetry due to tilted implantation
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 171]
Ion Implantation
177
function, too: implantation is a high-energy process, and
accelerated ions can sputter metal atoms from implanter
hardware. Thin oxide prevents these metal atoms from
penetrating the silicon. In the post-implantation clean, this
thin oxide and the metals on it can easily be removed by
a HF dip.
15.3 Implant Damage and Damage
Annealing
Nuclear stopping displaces atoms from the silicon lattice:
a 100 keV arsenic ion displaces about 2000 silicon atoms
along its trajectory. Damage creation depends on:
• implant species (heavy ions produce more damage)
• energy (more energy, more damage)
• dose (above about 1014 cm−2 extended damage set in)
• current (high current leads to overlapping collision cas-
cades).
At low doses (below 1014 cm−2) the predominant damage
type is point defects such as vacancies and interstitials, or
clusters of point defects. At high doses extended defects
are created. Dislocation loops are created in the crystalline
silicon just next to the amorphous/crystalline interface.
These are known as end-of-range (EOR) defects. If the
concentration of dopants is above the solid solubility limit,
dopants precipitate.
Boron does not cause appreciable amorphization, irre-
spective of dose, because it is a light-mass ion. High-dose
phosphorus and arsenic implants can amorphize silicon,
but if amorphization is needed without doping, germa-
nium, a group IV element isoelectronic with silicon, can
be used. The critical dose for amorphization is about
1014 cm−2. Note that channeling is therefore not an issue
for high implant doses because the amorphized surface
layer will block the crystal channels.
The annealing temperature must be so high that atoms
move. But contrary to thermal diffusion, atoms do not
need to move signiﬁcant distances. The dopant atoms
could in theory ﬁnd a suitable lattice site within an
atomic distance. This is not possible in practice, though,
because the defects created by implantation enhance
diffusion.
Activation refers to dopant atoms being electrically
active after annealing. They then occupy lattice sites
in the crystal and act as donors or acceptors. A high
concentration of active dopants is needed for low resis-
tance. Dopant atoms above the solid solubility limit form
precipitates or are found as interstitial atoms, and they
do not contribute to electrical conductivity. The interplay
implant damage
dopant diffusivity
electrical activity
dopant solubility
Figure 15.7
Implantation–diffusion
interaction
matrix.
Redrawn from Jones (1993)
between damage and doping is shown graphically in
Figure 15.7.
15.4 Tools for Ion Implantation
Ion implantation acceleration voltages used to range
from 10 to 200 kV but low-energy implanters (1 kV min-
imum) and high-energy implanters (max. 3 MV) exist.
Low-energy implants are needed to fabricate shallow
S/D junctions (below 100 nm) in deep submicron CMOS.
High-energy implanters (HEIs) implant deep into silicon,
1 micrometer or even deeper. The ability to fabricate
retrograde proﬁles, that is to have low concentration at
the surface and high concentration deep down, exactly
the opposite to thermal diffusion, offers some interesting
possibilities, for example as a replacement for buried
layers and epitaxy.
Medium-current
implanters
(MCIs)
are
1 μA
to
5 mA, 20–200 keV, single wafer machines. High-current
implanters (HCIs) are batch machines, with for example
13 wafers on a rotating wheel.
The minimum energy in a HCI is 80 keV. Extraction
beam current scales as V3/2 which explains why a
low-voltage HCI is not practical. This scaling means
difﬁculties
for
low-energy,
high-dose
implantations
which are needed for advanced CMOS S/D implants.
Implant currents can be anything from 1 μA to 30 mA,
and with doses from 1011 to 1016 cm−2 implantation times
are seconds or minutes. Beam currents are limited if pho-
toresist is used as a mask: currents that are too high will
damage the resist, and removal of the resist becomes difﬁ-
cult. Cooled wafer stations can be used to minimize resist
damage. Implanter throughput can be up to 500 wafers
per hour for low-dose applications.
Scaling down ion energy involves a number of
techniques. One of the oldest is to implant molecular
ions instead of simple ions: BF2+ has a mass of 49 vs.
11 for B+, and its range is about one-ﬁfth the boron
range to a ﬁrst approximation. Carborane molecular
ions (C2B10H12+) provide 10 times more boron ions
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 172]
178
Introduction to Microfabrication
per molecule, and energy can be high, yet range will be
small. Replacement of boron ions with BF2+ or carborane
is not straightforward, however, because the behavior of
ﬂuorine or carbon during annealing and further process-
ing needs to be assessed. True low-energy implanters
must accept the fact that only low beam current is
available. In the limit of 1 kV, the sputtering of surface
atoms becomes important: because low implant energy
equals low penetration depth, every atom layer removed
from the surface will affect the ﬁnal implant proﬁle.
15.4.1 Implanter design and operation
Implantation requires ions, and these are generated in ion
sources which are plasma discharges. Dopants have be va-
porized or be in a gaseous state before ionization. Dopant
gases include PH3, AsH3, BF3, but evaporation of solids
in a furnace can also be used, and almost all elements
in the periodic table can be implanted. However, the efﬁ-
ciency of solid sources is low and switching between ions
slow. Ions are extracted from the source by voltage and
enter the selection magnet (Figure 15.8).
Ion selection is based on a mass spectrometric separa-
tion according to radius of curvature r in a magnetic ﬁeld
B balanced by the centrifugal force:
|F| = |q(v × B)| = m|v|2/r = qV
(15.4)
where m is mass and q is charge, which can be solved for
B =

(2 mV/qr2). By adjusting the magnetic ﬁeld of the
selection magnet, the ion of the desired mass is selected.
The magnet selection can be fooled by similar ion masses,
termed mass contamination. Doubly charged molybdenum
ions Mo+2 can pass along with BF2+ ions (molybde-
num is a common construction material for vacuum
equipment). The 11BHF+ ion behaves like 31 P+ for the
selection magnet. This situation might emerge when PH3
gas is used after BF3 gas and some residual gas remains
in the ion source. Energy purity refers to the spread of
ion energies in the beam and consequently their range
in silicon.
The acceleration tube must be kept under high vacuum
in order to steer the beam toward the wafer in a collision-
less fashion. After acceleration either electromagnetic or
mechanical scanning spreads the beam over the wafer.
Implantation is an inherently slow process because of the
scanning nature of operation. Alternative implantation
techniques which work in parallel mode have been
devised: plasma immersion ion implantation (PIII) is
a process where the wafer is immersed in plasma, and
biased. Very high dose rates are possible, but energy
purity is sacriﬁced because the selection magnet has
been eliminated from the system. PIII may have uses in
large-area applications like ﬂat-panel displays because of
its high throughput.
Wafers will be charged when ions are implanted.
Current ﬂows from the beam to the wafer holder, and it
passes any oxides on its way. Also, beam non-uniformity
between
wafer
centre
and
edge
can
cause
lateral
currents. Charging is compensated by ﬂooding: electron
gun-generated electrons hit the wafer and neutralize
charges. This approach is prone to overcompensation
and problems with electron charging. Plasma discharge,
which produces an ion density an order of magnitude
higher than the beam, is used in neutralization. Charge
neutrality is inherent in the plasma system.
Implant dose is monitored during implantation by Fara-
day cup current measurement.
Ion source 
Extraction
Selection magnet 
Acceleration tube
Gas 1
Gas 2
Wafer
chamber
Faraday
cup
Load 
lock
Ion optics 
Figure 15.8
The main elements of an implanter. Adapted from Current (1996) by permission of AIP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 173]
Ion Implantation
179
15.4.2 Safety aspects
Ion implanters pose a number of safety issues that have
to be tackled. The obvious one is the high voltage that is
present inside the machines. The second issue is X-rays,
which are produced as ions decelerate. Lead radiation pro-
tection is routinely used around the parts where X-rays
are generated. If hydrogen is implanted, as in the Smart-
cut process (Chapter 22), nuclear reactions are possible
at fairly low energies of 150 keV and gamma rays are
then generated.
Implant gases AsH3, PH3 and BF3 are extremely toxic.
Hydride detectors are placed inside the system to sniff for
leaks. The operation and maintenance of an implanter are
therefore for highly trained staff only. More safety issue
discussion can be found in connection with cleanrooms
in Chapter 35.
15.5 Ion Implantation Simulation
Implantation simulation must make a critical ﬁrst choice
on how to treat matter: amorphous matter is easy to model,
but silicon really is single crystalline. Many simulators use
single crystal silicon material parameters, but ignore the
actual crystal structure.
Monte Carlo (MC) simulation offers many advantages
over semianalytical implantation simulations because it
can truly take silicon crystal structure into account. MC
simulations not only can predict ranges and straggle, but
enable physically based damage prediction, including
amorphization. MC simulations are, of course, much
more computationally intensive than semianalytic ones.
SRIM (Simulation of Ranges of Ions in Matter) is one
widely used MC simulator for implantation and other ion
beam processes.
The input for a prototypical semianalytical implantation
simulation includes:
• wafer orientation
• dopant concentration
• ion species
• energy
• dose.
The accuracy of simulation is very good in the surface and
peak concentration regimes, but worse in the tail of the
distribution (Figure 15.9). This is partly due to ion chan-
neling, which is not readily implemented in semianalytical
simulators. For heavier elements discrepancies can come
from the amorphization treatment: single crystal may be
used initially but, as the dose increases, the simulator
adopts amorphous silicon material parameters for further
Boron 20 keV, 1e15 cm−2
1E + 14
1E + 15
1E + 16
1E + 17
1E + 18
1E + 19
1E + 20
1E + 21
0
100
200
300
400
Depth (nm)
Concentration (cm−3)
SIMS
Simulation
Figure 15.9
Boron implantation into silicon, 20 keV,
1015 cm−2. SIMS measured data shown by small diamonds,
ICECREM simulation by large squares. The discrepancy in
the tail results partly from ion channeling and partly from
model deﬁciencies. SIMS data courtesy Jari Likonen, VTT
calculations. This approach is depicted in Figure 15.10
for increasing phosphorus doses.
15.6 Implantation Further
Implantation is used everywhere where doping is needed,
from resistor fabrication (Chapters 25 and 30) to CMOS
(Chapter 26) to advanced bipolar doping (Chapter 27).
Implantation enables heavily doped shallow junctions for
MOS S/D. Implantation is also a key technology in SOI
wafer fabrication, with both oxygen and hydrogen im-
plantation serving special roles, as will be described in
Chapter 22. The thermal processes for annealing implant
damage will be presented in Chapter 32.
15.7 Exercises
1. What will be the implant time for a wafer of 200 mm
diameter when arsenic ions are implanted with a dose
of 1015 cm−2 and implant current of 100 μA?
2. How much will wafer temperature rise during the im-
plantation of arsenic ions of energy 100 keV and dose
1015 cm−2 with a current of 1 mA on a 200 m wafer?
Make simplifying assumptions as needed.
3. Under the conditions of 1015 cm−2 phosphorus implant
dose, 200 mm wafer size, PH3 bottle volume 3 liters
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 174]
180
Introduction to Microfabrication
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
1015
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Concentration (cm−3)
Depth (μm)
Phosphorous
Phosphorous
Phosphorous
Figure 15.10
Different
phosphorus
doses
compared:
1012 cm−2, 1014 cm−2 and 1016 cm−2 at 200 keV. The shape
is different for 1016 cm−2 because it is above the amorphiza-
tion limit, and different stopping parameters are applied for
the amorphized region
(STP), how many wafers can be implanted? If the
ion current is 1 mA, what is the interval for bottle
changing?
4. What is the range of 20 keV 11B+, 49BF2+ and carbo-
rane C2B10H12+ ions?
5. What needs to be considered if boron implantation is
replaced by BF2+ implantation?
6. What is the range of 100 keV germanium implantation?
7. How deep will boron, phosphorus and arsenic of
100 keV penetrate into a photoresist mask?
8. Translate implant dose 1016 cm−2 into ﬁlm thickness
assuming the thin ﬁlm is made of implanted atoms
only.
Simulator exercises:
9. How thick an oxide layer is needed to mask boron im-
plantation? Present your results as a function of boron
energy.
10. Check by simulator the range of 100 keV phosphorus
ions and compare it to the simple estimate discussed
in the text.
References and Related Reading
Brodie, I. and J.J. Muray (1982) The Physics of Microfabri-
cation, Springer.
Chanson, E. et al. (1997) Ion beams in silicon processing and
characterization, J. Appl. Phys., 81, 6513–6561.
Current, M. (1996) Ion implantation for silicon device manu-
facturing: a vacuum perspective, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A14,
1115.
Fair, R.B. (1996) Conventional and rapid thermal processes,
in C.Y. Cheng and S.M. Sze, ULSI Technology, McGraw-
Hill.
Jones, K.S. (1993) Extended defects from ion implantation and
annealing, in R.B. Fair, Rapid Thermal Processing: Sci-
ence and Technology, Academic Press.
Kawaguchi, M.N., J.S. Papanu and E.G. Pavel (2006) Low
temperature, ion-enhanced, implanted photoresist removal,
J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B24, 651–656.
LeCoeur,
F.
et al.
(2000)
Ion
implantation
by
plasma
immersion: interest, limitations and perspectives, Surf.
Coating Technol., 125, 71.
Mok, K.R.C. et al. (2005) Ion-beam amorphization of semicon-
ductors: a physical model based on the amorphous pocket
population, J. Appl. Phys., 98, 046104.
Pelaz, L. et al. (2010) Simulation of pn-junctions: present and
future challenges for technologies beyond 32 nm, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., B28, p. C1A1
Pelletier, J. and A. Anders (2005) Plasma-based ion implan-
tation and deposition: a review of physics, technology, and
applications, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 33, 1944–1959.
Rubin, L. and J. Poate (June/July 2003) Ion implantation in
silicon technology, The Industrial Physicist, p. 12
Suzuki, K. (2009) Extended Lindhard–Scharf–Schiott theory
for ion implantation proﬁles expressed with Pearson func-
tion, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 48, 046510.
White, N.R. (1996) Moore’s law: implications for ion implant
equipment – an equipment designer’s perspective, Proceed-
ings of the 11th International Conference on Ion Implantation
Technology, Austin, TX, p. 355.
Zechner, C. and V. Moroz (2008) Simulation of doping pro-
ﬁle formation: historical evolution, and present strengths and
weaknesses, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B26, 273–280.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 175]
16
CMP: Chemical–Mechanical Polishing
Polishing is a key technology in silicon wafer manu-
facturing where ﬁnal polishing yields wafers with RMS
roughness as small as 0.1 nm, but it emerged elsewhere
in microfabrication only in the late 1980’s. It has several
different uses:
• polishing of deposited ﬁlms
• planarization of topography (step height reduction)
• removal of hard-to-etch materials
Polishing in microfabrication is a decendant of glass pol-
ishing which is an established technology since 400 years.
Abrasive particles are dispersed in a suitable liquid to cre-
ate a slurry, which is fed in between a polishing pad and
the piece to be polished. In the case of a blanket wafer
surface irregularities are smoothed out.
In the case of a wafer with topography, the elevated
structures are preferentially removed since the local pres-
sure is highest there. This leads to planarization. Both
mechanical force and chemical etching are needed for
high rate polishing, and the technology has been named
CMP: chemical–mechanical polishing.
Grinding may look similar to CMP, but the two are
quite different. In grinding abrasive particles of 1–100 μm
size are mounted in resin, and micrometer-sized chunks
of material are removed by crack propagation and brittle
fracture. Grinding is fast, but also very coarse: the
substrate is damaged due to mechanical forces acting
on the microstructures. This subsurface damage extends
even 20 μm deep. Grinding is used when hundreds of
micrometers need to be removed, as in wafer thinning.
CMP is used to remove micrometers only. In CMP
abrasive particles of 10–300 nm are dispersed in a slurry.
The mechanism is different from grinding, as CMP
works in the atomic regime. Atomic bonds are weakened
or broken, and removal is based on chemical reactions
between the slurry and the surface and the mechanical
effect of the abrasive particles. Surface roughness after
CMP is of the order of nanometers, orders of magnitude
better than with grinding.
The ﬁrst application of CMP in microfabrication was in
multilevel metallization: oxide and tungsten were polished
in order to planarize wafer topography, easing the next
lithography step. As shown in Figure 16.1, two sequences
result in identical ﬁnal structures.
Copper cannot be plasma etched, but copper polishing
is reasonably easy. Oxide is plasma etched, and copper is
deposited into the grooves, with extra copper removed by
CMP. Copper minimum linewidth is determined by oxide
plasma etching, and no copper etching is needed. The
difference between copper and tungsten is that tungsten
can be plasma etched (Figure 11.10).
Figure 16.1
Metal deposition, metal etching, oxide depo-
sition, oxide polishing (left); oxide deposition, oxide etch-
ing, metal deposition, metal polishing (right)
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 176]
182
Introduction to Microfabrication
16.1 CMP Process and Tool
The CMP tool consists of a solid, extremely ﬂat platen, on
which the polishing pad is glued (Figure 16.2). The wafer
chuck, which holds the wafer upside down, is situated
on a spindle. A slurry introduction mechanism feeds the
slurry onto the pad. Both platen and spindle are rotated,
and the linear velocity (used in Preston’s equation) is the
sum of two velocities.
There are four major elements in a CMP process:
• topography
• materials
• polishing pad
• slurry.
The machine parameters that can be used to control them
are listed in Table 16.1.
Local polishing pressure is down force divided by con-
tact area. For a ﬂat wafer the pressure is low because
load is evenly distributed over the whole geometrical area,
but on a structured wafer the effective contact area is
only a fraction of wafer area, and local pressure is much
higher (Figure 16.3). The polishing rate is thus not con-
stant: when the contact area is small, local pressure is high
and the polishing rate is high. As polishing continues, the
steps are reduced and contact area increases, leading to a
decrease in polishing rate.
down
force
spindle
chuck
wafer
slurry
pad
platen
slurry
dispense
Figure 16.2
Schematic structure of rotary CMP equip-
ment. Wafer is held face down in the spindle chuck
Table 16.1
CMP tool parameters and process responses
Platen rotation
10–100 rpm
Velocity
10–100 cm/s
Down force (applied pressure)
10–50 kPa
Slurry supply rate
50–500 ml/min
Polish rate
100–1000 nm/min
Selectivity
1:1 to 100:1
Uniformity across wafer
10%
Wafer-to-wafer repeatability
10%
wafer
metal lines
CVD oxide
slurry
asperities
pad
Figure 16.3
Close-up of CMP set-up: the wafer, upside
down, is pressed against the pad with slurry in between.
Pad asperities make contact with the wafer
Structure height obviously affects CMP, but pattern
density is also important because it determines the effec-
tive contact area: denser patterns are polished at a lower
rate due to lower pressure. Polishing a single material is
easier than polishing stacks of materials, or structures with
different materials present simultaneously. The mechani-
cal properties of the wafer itself must also be considered:
if it is bowed, pressure will be different at the center and
the edges, leading to non-uniform polishing. Pressure can
be applied through the chuck to the wafer back side: this
will equalize center–edge differences and compensate for
wafer bow.
The pad should be rigid so that it uniformly polishes
the wafer. However, such a rigid pad would have to be
aligned and kept in alignment with the wafer surface at
all times. Therefore pads are often stacks of hard and
soft materials which conform to the wafer topography to
some extent. Pads are porous polymeric materials (with
30–50 μm pore size) which are consumed in the process
and must be reconditioned regularly. Polyurethane is com-
monly used for pads. Pads are very much proprietary, and
are usually referred to by their trade names, rather than
by any chemical or physical property.
Slurries incorporate both mechanical elements via
abrasive particle size and hardness, and chemical effects
via reactivity and pH of the ﬂuid. Typical abrasive
particles are silica (SiO2), alumina (Al2O3) and ceria
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 177]
CMP: Chemical–Mechanical Polishing
183
(cerium oxide, CeO2). The abrasive particle size distri-
bution is related to smoothness: monodispersed slurry
leads to smoother surfaces.
The ﬂuids in CMP are alkaline and acidic solutions,
and the abrasive particle concentration can be for example
a few percent. Copper is polished by 2% NH4OH with
2.5 wt % alumina particles.
Slurries are a cause of concern for post-CMP: particles
must be cleaned away after polishing. Like pads, slurries
are often proprietary, and the information given is often
restricted to pH value, base liquid (for instance, NH4OH
based) and abrasive particle size. Slurries can be buffered
against consumption in the process (cf. etching in buffered
HF). At the end of CMP a soft polishing step is often
done: no slurry is used, just water. This step does not
remove solid material but it is effective in washing away
abrasive particles and corrosive chemicals.
Pad type, compressibility, hardness and elastic modu-
lus, conditioning, pore size and ageing can be considered
variables, too. Because there is a chemical component in
CMP, temperature will have an effect on polishing re-
sults. CMP process factors resemble those encountered in
etching: overpolishing (cf. overetching), selectivity and
pattern density effects (see Chapter 21 for etch-related
pattern density effects).
Plasma etching and CMP resemble each other also in
the sense that both depend on the interaction between
chemical and physical processes: in etching ion bom-
bardment removes reaction products from the surface; in
CMP mechanical abrasion removes surface layers which
have been modiﬁed chemically, for instance by oxida-
tive slurries.
Polish rate can be limited by the transport of reactants,
or by surface processes, just like in etching or CVD. This
can be found out by varying the input variables: if the
rate is unaffected by a change in a variable, it cannot be
the rate controlling factor. Another similarity to etching is
pattern dependency: small pattern density leads to higher
rates. Pattern size effect is, however, the opposite: in CMP
small patterns are polished faster, but in etching small
patterns will be etched slower than large ones.
16.2 Mechanics of CMP
There are three modes in polishing, depending on
the degree of contact between the pad and the wafer,
Figure 16.4. In direct contact (boundary lubrication)
mode the pad makes contact with the wafer, resulting in
high and constant friction because there is no lubrication
from the slurry. Polish rate is very high. In rolling
contact mode (mixed lubrication mode) slurry particles
occasionally roll on the wafer surface. In non-contact
friction
log velocity 
direct
 
hydrodynamic
mixed
Figure 16.4
Stribeck diagram of CMP: three different
lubrication modes
mode (hydrodynamic lubrication mode) slurry particles
are accelerated hydrodynamically and impart energy to
the wafer surface, weakening the surface so that chemical
attack can occur. Hydrodynamic lubrication takes place
at high velocities where the load is borne by the ﬂuid,
and the system is well lubricated. The friction force
between the pad and the wafer is very different in these
modes and it is classiﬁed in a Stribeck diagram.
The penetration depth of the abrasive particles into
the substrate is very small indeed: this is the reason for
smooth surfaces with no visible grooves or scratches. The
penetration depth is given by
Rs = 3
4 d ×
3
 P
2kE
2
(16.1)
where d is the abrasive particle diameter (for example,
100 nm), k is the ﬁlling factor of abrasive particles (for
instance, 50%), P is local pressure (not down force, which
is 10–50 kPa) and E is Young’s modulus of the surface
being polished. Penetration depths are on the order of a
nanometer, which is similar to surface roughness after
polishing, as would be expected. Increasing pressure will
lead to deeper penetration but also to higher removal rate.
Sometimes the abrasive particles agglomerate into huge
chunks, which leads to much larger penetration depths,
and microscratches tens of nanometers deep will result.
16.2.1 Preston model
Polish rates were measured experimentally by Preston (in
1927) and found to obey
R = H
t = Kp × P × s
t
(16.2)
where H is the change in the height of the surface, P
the pad pressure, Kp the Preston coefﬁcient and (s/t)
the linear velocity of the pad relative to the wafer.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 178]
184
Introduction to Microfabrication
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Cu polish rate (nm/min)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Velocity (cm/sec)
Figure 16.5
Copper polish rate as a function of veloc-
ity (15 kPa pressure). Reproduced from Steigerwald et al.
(1997) by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Experimental results (Figure 16.5) show a fairly good
ﬁt to Preston’s equation, especially in the low-pressure/
low-velocity regime, that is in the direct contact mode.
The Preston coefﬁcient is related to the elastic proper-
ties of the material, and it can be approximated by
Kp = 1
2E
(16.3)
where E is Young’s modulus. With Young’s moduli in the
range of 100 GPa for many inorganic and metallic solids,
values of Kp are on the order of 10−11 Pa−1. Applied
pressures are on the order of 10 kPa and velocities on the
order of 0.10 m/s, which lead to polish rates on the order
of 10 nm/s or 600 nm/min, which is the correct order of
magnitude. This estimate is, however, not accurate enough
to be of predictive use. But it does explain many basic
features of polishing, for instance the fact that tungsten is
polished at a lower rate than oxide.
16.3 Chemistry of CMP
In CMP there are two components: in addition to the
mechanical pressure, chemical modiﬁcations and etching
take place. For instance, a tungsten surface is turned into
tungsten oxide according to the reaction
W + 6 Fe(CN)63−+ 3 H2O
→WO3 + 6 Fe(CN)64−+ 6 H+
(16.4)
Tungsten oxide has two important roles: it is a protective
layer, and in the valleys it protects tungsten from further
chemical attack. But it is mechanically weaker and more
brittle material than tungsten, and in the high points it can
be removed by mechanical abrasion. The same mecha-
nism is at work in copper polishing: Cu2O is removed by
mechanical action while copper is not. For hard materials
like tungsten and tantalum the mechanical effects are usu-
ally important, whereas for soft materials like aluminum
and polymers the chemical effects often dominate.
When WO3 is removed by polishing, the underlying
metal is etched according to
W + 6 Fe(CN)63−+ 4 H2O
→WO42−(aq) + 6 Fe(CN)64−+ 8 H+
(16.5)
Corresponding reactions in copper polishing are
Cu ⇔Cu2+ + 2 e−
(16.6)
2 Cu2+ + H2O + 2 e−⇔Cu2O + 2 H+
(16.7)
Copper
polishing
is
carried
out
with
slurries
like
Fe(NO3)3
and
H2O2.
Hydrogen
peroxide
oxidizes
copper, which enhances the removal rate. Typical rates
are 100–1000 nm/min, selectivity to oxide ranges from
40:1 to 200:1 and residual step height 100–300 nm.
Copper polishing uniformities can be 10–15%, which
is among the worst uniformities of any microfabrica-
tion process.
Aluminum polishing can be done in acidic solutions,
for instance phosphoric acid (pH about 3–4) with alu-
mina abrasive. Aluminum CMP proceeds by aluminum
oxidation and mechanical removal of the oxide, not un-
like copper and tungsten polishing. Selectivity to oxide
can be 100:1.
Oxide polishing slurries are ammonia or KOH based,
for instance 1–2% NH4OH in DI water, with up to 30%
silica abrasives of 50–100 nm. Oxide polishing slurries are
mildly alkaline, with pH values of about 11. The oxide
polishing mechanism depends on surface modiﬁcation of
the oxide: leaching of oxide by the slurry softens the top
layer, and the mechanical abrasion rate goes up.
CMP slurries do etch without mechanical polishing, just
like ﬂuorine will etch silicon without plasma, but in both
cases it is the interaction between chemical and mechani-
cal processes that leads to the desired total process: slurry
etch rates of 10 nm/min are typical, but CMP removal
rates of 500 nm/min are standard.
16.4 Non-Idealities in CMP
CMP is an interplay between many process factors. Pres-
sure, velocity, slurry composition, etc., can be varied for
optimization, but device design cannot usually be changed
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 179]
CMP: Chemical–Mechanical Polishing
185
(even though sometimes dummy patterns are made in or-
der to eliminate pattern density effects). Polish stop layers
add process complexity too, but improved process control
can balance the cost. Polish selectivities are not dissimi-
lar from etch selectivities: they range from 1:1 to 200:1.
Copper to tantalum selectivities are so high that measure-
ments are difﬁcult. Oxide to nitride selectivities can be
50:1, and this is useful in shallow trench isolation, which
will be discussed in Chapter 26.
Because of ﬁnite selectivity some underlying layer loss
is unavoidable. This is termed erosion and it is pictured
in Figure 16.6. Another non-ideality is the dishing. It is
caused by two factors: the pad conforms to some extent to
the structures on the wafer, and softer material is polished
faster than the surrounding hard material. Recess etching
is a chemical effect. Recess in CMP can be as low as a few
tens of nanometers, and in this respect CMP is superior
to etchback.
Copper dishing is strongly feature size dependent, but
rather insensitive to pattern density. Oxide erosion, on
the other hand, is strongly pattern density dependent, but
feature size independent.
On the practical side, slurry cost is a major problem.
Slurries are consumables with very low utilization: in
some processes it is estimated that only 2% of slurry
actually participates in the process, the rest being swept
away by platen rotation. Various solutions to this problem
are being investigated: structured pads with grooves and
channels of various shapes retain the slurry better, and
also result in more uniform slurry distribution, leading to
better uniformity. Another solution is to use a ﬁxed abra-
sive: the abrasive particles are attached to the pad, and
the slurry is replaced by particle-free chemicals.
Temperature is not constant during CMP: friction leads
easily to a 10 ◦C temperature rise which is detrimental
to reproducibility and uniformity. Rates of chemical
reactions go up as expected, and this temperature
(c)
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.6
(a) Ideal CMP result; (b) erosion and dishing;
(c) plug recess (chemical attack)
rise can easily double the removal rate. Pad hardness
decreases as temperature goes up, which leads to more
asperities in contact with the wafer and reduced local
contact pressure. This effect, is, however, not signiﬁcant
compared to chemical rate increase.
16.5 Monitoring CMP Processes
Top view microscopy, either optical or with a SEM,
can be used for gross checking of CMP. Stains from
slurry residues, scratches, layer peeling and other coarse
problems can be identiﬁed. Scanning probe methods,
mechanical stylus and the AFM are widely used to study
nanoscale phenomena. Submicron resolution is needed
because many CMP effects are strongly feature size
dependent. Many optical, electrochemical, mechanical,
thermal and acoustic methods are being developed to
monitor CMP in real time.
16.5.1 Post-CMP cleaning
The introduction of CMP was obviously resisted by many
people because the very idea of bringing myriads of parti-
cles intentionally onto the wafer was against all accepted
cleanroom and manufacturing policies. Post-CMP clean-
ing was, and remains, a topic of paramount importance.
Brush cleaning and other physical cleaning techniques are
good for removing large particles, but the smaller parti-
cles pose problems. RCA-1 cleaning is efﬁcient in particle
removal, but it is of limited use on metallized wafers. In
addition to the particle problem, there is metal contam-
ination: potassium hydroxide is a common slurry liquid,
and copper residues may be embedded in PSG, which is
a soft material. HF etching can remove a thin top layer of
PSG and reduce the amount of copper. In order to min-
imize the spread of particle and chemical contamination,
the CMP section is usually separated from the rest of the
cleanroom, and DI water is drained immediately after use,
even though used DI water is normally recycled.
16.6 Applications of CMP
From a single application in multilevel metallization,
CMP has expanded into a major technology which
is used not only in IC fabrication but also in optics,
MEMS, superconducting devices, micromagnetics and
other areas. Polishing processes have been developed
for tens of new materials, including but not limited to
oxides of all sorts, noble metals, III–V semiconductors,
Ge, SiGe and SiC, and polymers.
Conformal deposition processes replicate underlying
topography dutifully and step height is unchanged after
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 180]
186
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 16.7
Planarization: (a) thin conformal deposition,
no planarization; (b) thick conformal deposition, gap ﬁll-
ing but no planarization, (c) local planarization by spin-on
ﬁlm; (d) global planarization by CMP of thick conformal
deposition
conformal deposition, as shown in Figure 16.7a. Thick
conformal deposition completely ﬁlls small gaps between
lines but there is no step height change in large spaces,
Figure 16.7b. Spin-on dielectrics ﬂow over topography,
resulting in smoothing but incomplete planarization,
Figure 16.7c. CMP of thick conformal ﬁlm is the closest
we can get to global planarity, Figure 16.7d.
Planarization length (Figure 16.8) is deﬁned by
R =
h
tan 
(16.8)
Planarization lengths are in the range of micrometers or
tens of micrometers in the maximum.
Polishing rate and planarization rate are two different
concepts. Polishing rate is applicable to one material. Pla-
narization rate is the rate of decrease in step height: the
high peaks are polished, which decreases step height, but
some material is removed from the valleys too, which de-
creases planarization rate. Toward the end of the process
planarization rate drops to zero, even though the overall
polishing rate is still ﬁnite.
Θ
R
t1
t2
h
Figure 16.8
Planarization relaxation distance R
Selectivity in CMP bears a close resemblance to etch-
ing: we need to know the polishing rates of the top and
bottom ﬁlms in order to calculate, for instance, substrate
loss during overpolishing. As in etching, it is sometimes
beneﬁcial to have the same 1:1 selectivity between ﬁlms,
but most often it is desirable to remove one ﬁlm relatively
rapidly, and to have high selectivity against the bottom
ﬁlm, which can then be processed in a separate step.
Oxide polishing is the oldest and most widely practiced
CMP process. Its main application is planarization in mul-
tilevel metallization in advanced ICs, where it provides a
planar surface which makes subsequent lithography and
deposition steps easy. One problem with oxide polish-
ing is the lack of an end point: there is no clear end for
polishing. This is called blind polishing. The opposite is
stopped polishing, where for instance a nitride layer acts
as a polish stop (cf. etch stop layer) but selectivities are
not necessarily very high.
Tungsten polishing is another CMP process that
was adopted rapidly. Contact holes and via holes
are ﬁlled by CVD tungsten, which is then removed
from planar areas, leaving just the contact plug ﬁlled
with metal (Figure 16.1). The same structure can of
course be obtained by tungsten etchback, and the ﬁrst
implementations of the tungsten plug process did use
etchback. CMP has proven to be better than etchback
with respect to plug loss: at the etching end point the
etchable area decreases dramatically, and the etchant will
attack the tungsten in the plug, leading to severe plug
recess. CMP is much better in this respect, but naturally
process optimization with either technology can bring
about improvements.
CMP is used whenever global planarity is required.
In addition to multilevel metallization for ICs, other
applications have sprung up. In superconducting quantum
interference devices (SQUIDs) CMP planarization of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 181]
CMP: Chemical–Mechanical Polishing
187
4
2
4
2
4
2
<001>
<110>
<110>
2
3
1
1
1
1
Si substrate
3
3
w
d
c
Figure 16.9
The infrared wavelength selective photonic lattice has been made with the help of CMP: oxide deposition,
oxide trench etching, polysilicon LPCVD and polysilicon CMP have been repeated ﬁve times to create the lattice. As the
last step all oxide has been etched away in HF. Reproduced from Lin et al. (1998) by permission of Nature
PECVD oxide is performed before metallization to
eliminate step coverage problems and conductor cross-
section variation to ensure high and constant current
density, up to 107 A/m2, an order of magnitude higher
than in IC metallization.
Photonic crystals (photonic band gap materials) are
artiﬁcial lattices where electromagnetic wave propagation
is selectively restricted due to forbidden energy levels.
There are many ways to fabricated photonic lattices and
CMP is just one approach. Grooves are etched in the
oxide and ﬁlled by CVD polysilicon. Poly is polished
and another CVD oxide is deposited. Lithography and
oxide etching are followed by another cycle of poly CVD
and CMP and the process is continued until the desired
number of layers has been made. Oxide is ﬁnally etched
away to create the air gaps. The resulting structure is
shown schematically and in the SEM micrograph in
Figure 16.9.
Wafer bonding (Chapter 17) depends on surface
smoothness (and ﬂatness). Bonding two silicon wafers
with 0.1 nm RMS roughness is easy, but bonding
two CVD oxide layers with 3 nm RMS roughness is
impossible. CMP can bring smoothness of deposited ﬁlms
to a level comparable to silicon wafers (Figure 16.10),
enabling bonding of many new materials. Polishing is
also used in layer transfer applications (Chapter 22):
(a)
1
2
x   1.000 μm/div
z   15.000 nm/div
LTO oxide, 16.1.2002
lto-ox.001
μm
(b)
1
2
x   1.000 ∝m/div
z   15.000 nm/div
waspkl.001
μm
Figure 16.10
AFM scans of PECVD oxide: (a) as-deposited ﬁlm peak-to-valley height is 26 nm, with RMS roughness
of 3.3 nm; (b) after CMP peak-to-valley height is 2 nm and RMS roughness is 0.2 nm. Courtesy Kimmo Henttinen, VTT
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 182]
188
Introduction to Microfabrication
thin layers of semiconductor are cut from the substrate
and bonded to another wafer. The cut surface is fairly
smooth but polishing is needed to put it on par with
silicon wafers.
Polycrystalline ﬁlms are generally rough, and thicker
ﬁlms rougher than thinner. One application of CMP is
copper polishing in GMR magnetic head fabrication:
thin ﬁlms a nanometer thick need to be deposited on an
electroplated copper layer a micrometer thick. The
roughness of plated copper can be 100 nm, and this needs
to be brought to nanometer level. CMP of copper can
achieve this.
16.7 CMP as a Whole
CMP is a relatively young microfabrication technique,
and one with very complex phenomenology. As shown
in Figure 16.11, there are issues related to chip design
(density of patterns, pitch, die size), basic mechanical is-
sues like material hardness as well as practical mechanical
issues like platen rotation. Materials issues are also very
much involved in the choice and processing of dielectric
thin ﬁlms, like ﬁlm composition and stress, and gap ﬁll,
which is also a design issue.
16.8 Exercises
1. What is the Preston coefﬁcient for copper on theoret-
ical grounds? What is the experimental value of the
Preston coefﬁcient? Use data from Figure 16.5.
2. How do the polish rates of tungsten, silicon dioxide
and polymers compare?
3. How do polish rate and planarization rate measure-
ments differ from each other?
4. If a titanium layer 20 nm thick is used as a polish stop
underneath tungsten 500 nm thick, and ﬁlm thickness
non-uniformities are ±5% and CMP non-uniformity is
±10%, what must polish selectivity be?
5. Work out a step-by-step fabrication process for the
photonic crystal shown in Figure 16.9. Include ﬁlm
thicknesses, too.
References and Related Reading
Hernandez, J. et al. (1999) Chemical mechanical polishing of
Al and SiO2 thin ﬁlms: the role of consumables, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc., 146, 4647.
Jindal, A. et al. (2003) Chemical mechanical polishing of
dielectric
ﬁlms
using
mixed
abrasive
slurries,
J.
Electrochem. Soc., 150, G314.
Interconnect
Levels
Metal
Thickness
Underlying
Film
Carrier
Adhesion
Curvature
Hardness
Material
Polish Pad
Perforation
Lifetime
Removal
Rate
Uniformity
Single/Multiple
            Wafer
Platen
Rotation
Material
Size
Polish
Metal
Pitch
Design
Rules
Die
Size
Gap Fill
Stress
Uniformity
Film
Type
Step
Coverage
Slurry
Lifetime
pH
Vendor
Wet Cleans
Particles
Wafer Edge
Effects
Contamination
Scratches
Composition
Composition
Thickness
Step Height
Step
Coverage
TOPOGRAPHY
MECHANICAL
CHEMICAL
DEFECTS
CMP
PLANARIZATION
DIELECTRIC
Interconnect
Density
Figure 16.11
Fishbone diagram of CMP planarization. Reproduced from Rao (1993) with the permission of The
McGraw-Hill Group of Companies
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 183]
CMP: Chemical–Mechanical Polishing
189
Lin, S. Y., et al. (1998) A three-dimensional photonic crystal
operating at infrared wavelengths, Nature, 394, 251.
Rao, G. P. (1993) Multilevel Interconnect Technology,
McGraw-Hill.
Steigerwald, J. M., S. P. Murarka and R. J. Gutman (1997)
Chemical Mechanical Planarization of Microelectronic
Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Stine, B. E. et al. (1998) Rapid characterization and model-
ing of pattern-dependent variation in chemical-mechanical
polishing, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 11, 129.
Suni, I. I. and B. Du (2005) Cu planarization for ULSI pro-
cessing by electrochemical methods: a review, IEEE Trans.
Semicond. Manuf ., 18, 341–349.
Tas, D. K. et al. (2005) Online end point detection in CMP
using SPRT of wavelet decomposed sensor data, IEEE Trans.
Semicond. Manuf ., 18, 440–447.
Wrschka, P. et al. (2000) Chemical mechanical planarization
of copper damascene structures, J. Electrochem. Soc., 147,
706.
Yasseen, A. A. et al. (1997) Chemical-mechanical polishing for
polysilicon surface micromachining, J. Electrochem. Soc.,
144, 236.
Zantye, P. B., A. Kumar and A. K. Sikder (2004) Chemical
mechanical planarization for microelectronics applications,
Mater. Sci. Eng., R45, 89–220.
Zhang, F. et al. (1999) Particle adhesion and removal in chem-
ical mechanical polishing and post-CMP cleaning, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc., 146, 2665.
Zhong, Z. W., Z. F. Wang and B. M. P. Zirajutheen (2005)
Chemical mechanical polishing of polycarbonate and poly
methyl methacrylate substrates, Microelectron. Eng., 81,
117–124.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 184]
17
Bonding
Bonding mates two wafers. This can be done at wafer
manufacturer, to create more versatile starting wafers. It
can be done as part of wafer processing, just like any other
process step, and there is no need to limit it to two wafers:
bonding can be continued with more and more wafers
added. It can also be done at the end of the process to en-
capsulate the ﬁnished structures. Bonding is also essential
in layer transfer: thin slices of material can be detached
from substrate wafers and bonded to other wafers.
Bonding together two wafers with different properties
(crystal
orientations,
doping
levels,
doping
types),
or wafers of two different materials, opens up new
possibilities for the device engineer. Bonding dissimilar
wafers is, however, difﬁcult because lattice mismatches
and thermal expansion differences create stresses and
surface chemistries that are not always suitable for
bond formation.
Bonding of structured wafers is used to create channels,
cavities and gaps, for example for microﬂuidic channels,
capacitive pressure sensors and RF switches. The gaps
formed by bonding can be 500 μm, wafer thickness, as in
Figure 17.1, or as small as submicron, as in Figure 17.2,
and anything in between. Gases trapped inside closed
Figure 17.1
Wet etched silicon microreactor bonded to a
glass wafer. Heater resistor on nitride membrane, catalyst
metal inside channel
cavities need careful consideration because bonding tem-
peratures can be quite high, up to 1200 ◦C.
There are other uses of the bonding technologies in
microtechnology: wire bonding is about attaching leads
to ﬁnished chips, and ﬂip-chip bonding is about attaching
fully processed chips to suitable substrates and carriers.
Some of the techniques are common with wafer bonding,
like thermocompression bonding, but in this chapter we
will concentrate on wafer-level bonding applications only.
17.1 Bonding Basics
Two wafers can be joined by a number of methods, but
two main classes can be distinguished:
• direct bonding (also known as fusion bonding or ther-
mal bonding)
• bonding with intermediate layers (glasses, metals, ad-
hesives).
At least theoretically, a wafer of any material can be
bonded at room temperature to another wafer of any
material via van der Waals intermolecular forces. This
bonding requires that the bonding surfaces are sufﬁciently
smooth, ﬂat, clean and the surface chemistry is suitable
for bond formation. A strong bond can then develop
across the bonding interface. Two ﬂat and smooth
wafers with 0.3 nm RMS roughness do not actually
have a very large contact area with each other: 0.3 nm
RMS roughness translates to perhaps 3 nm peak-to-peak
heights, and the weak van der Waals forces only work at
distances of 0.5 nm.
In order to bring the wafers into intimate contact, sev-
eral strategies are available: one of the wafers can conform
to the other, and this can be done by heating. It is easy
for polymers, but requires about 500–600 ◦C for glasses,
while silicon wafers require about 1000 ◦C before viscous
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 185]
192
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.2
Narrow gap bonding: left, tunable aluminum plate capacitor by silicon–glass bonding, adapted from Etxe-
berria and Gracia (2007); right, capacitive accelerometer, bonding of a silicon wafer between two glass wafers
ﬂow takes place. A second alternative is wetting: suitable
treatment will allow one material to cover the surface, for
example solder ﬂow upon heating or solvent treatment of
a polymer wafer. A third method is to apply external force
to ensure intimate contact.
When dissimilar materials with different thermal ex-
pansion coefﬁcients are bonded, high stresses can emerge.
This prevents many bonding processes. In anodic bonding
silicon and glass CTEs have to be similar, and this can
be done for some glasses but not for all of them (more on
glass properties in Chapter 19). Quartz-to-silicon bonding
remains much more difﬁcult because there is no possibil-
ity to tailor the quartz CTE.
Direct bonding usually involves two identical wafers:
silicon to silicon, glass to glass, PMMA to PMMA, etc.
It results in identical chemical bonds at the interface as
inside the material itself, and if breakage occurs, it takes
place inside the wafers, not at the bond interface. The
bond strength is then the same as the tensile strength of
the material. The bonded wafers can be processed further
as if they were one wafer.
If the temperatures involved are low enough, CTE-
induced problems are minimal and dissimilar wafers can
be bonded. There is constant progress toward lower and
lower bonding temperatures, that is for lower tempera-
tures without sacriﬁcing bond strength. Direct bonding is
preferred, because all the additional materials at the in-
terfaces increase the possibilities for unwanted reactions,
during either processing or device use.
Silicon–glass bonding is a special case of the direct
bonding process. Usually different materials cannot be
direct bonded. Silicon and glass are bonded permanently
and hermetically by the application of elevated tempera-
ture and high voltage in a process called anodic bonding.
The applied voltage creates a strong electrostatic ﬁeld
which pulls the wafers together. The sodium and oxygen
ions in the glass become mobile at about 300–500 ◦C,
and the mobile oxygen ions move toward the silicon in-
terface, where they react with silicon and form strong
Si–O bonds.
Indirect bonding uses three classes of materials as
“glues”: metals, glasses and polymers. Depending on the
intermediate material, the force and temperature needed
to effectuate bonding are very different: with polymer
adhesives
mild
pressure
and
temperatures
around
100–200 ◦C are sufﬁcient, but with metal intermediates
pressures of several megapascals and temperatures of
300–400 ◦C are typical. Glass frit bonding requires
similar temperatures but less pressure.
Adhesive bonding can be used to bond anything to
anything. Gluing is a form of adhesive bonding but in
microfabrication more advanced methods are used. Poly-
mer ﬁlms (like epoxy SU-8) are spin coated on a wafer,
patterned lithographically. This way the thickness of the
adhesive is well controlled and narrow lines can be made.
Thermal curing and UV curing can both be used.
Self-adhesive bonding is found with the polymer
PDMS. It is an elastomer, and its softness allows
intimate contact. The bond strength is small, and the
bond is easily debonded, and bonded again, as long as
the surfaces remain clean. PDMS is much used to create
microﬂuidic channels. Either planar PDMS is attached
as a roof to channels etched in silicon or glass, or
structured PDMS is bonded to a planar silicon or glass
wafer. Such bonding is simple because no alignment
is needed. The great beneﬁt of this process is that it is
a room temperature process. This is important if, for
instance, proteins are handled: they denaturate quickly
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 186]
Bonding
193
Table 17.1
Bonding process steps
Particle removal
Surface chemistry modiﬁcation
Vacuum pumping (optional)
Wafer alignment (optional)
Room temperature joining
Application of force/heat/voltage
Wafer thinning (optional)
above 40 ◦C. Bonding of PDMS to glass and to PDMS
is much practiced in microﬂuidics, as will be discussed
in Chapter 18.
The basic requirements for good wafer bonding are as
follows:
• The materials being bonded form chemical bonds across
their interface.
• High stresses are avoided.
• No interface bubbles develop.
The driving force for bonding can be temperature, pres-
sure, electric ﬁeld or a combination of these. Irrespective
of the details of various bonding processes, the general
outline is the same. The basic steps of bonding are listed
in Table 17.1.
If closed cavities are formed, the behavior of gases
needs to be analyzed. Gases are trapped inside cavities
when wafers are mated, but additional gases are released
from reactions (especially during high-temperature bond-
ing) and outgassing from cavity materials contributes to
the ﬁnal cavity atmosphere, too. To a ﬁrst approximation
these gases are treated by the ideal gas law, for example
to calculate cavity pressure during annealing.
17.2 Fusion Bonding Blanket
Silicon Wafers
When bonding is done to produce more advanced
starting wafers, it is usually about blanket wafers
(wafers with prefabricated cavities will be discussed in
Chapter 30).
Silicon direct bonding to an oxidized silicon wafer
results in strong silicon–oxygen bonds. The resulting
material now has an oxide layer in between two silicon
wafers, and this property is very useful: it is the basis of
silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers. The basic steps of SOI
wafer formation by bonding are shown in Figure 17.3.
This type of SOI is known as BESOI, for bond etchback
SOI, or simply as BSOI. There are other techniques for
Figure 17.3
Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer fabrication
by bonding an oxidized wafer to a bare silicon wafer: left,
surface preparation; middle, room temperature joining and
annealing for bond improvement; right, top wafer thinning
SOI formation, to be discussed later on in this chapter
and in Chapter 22. The SOI top layer, known as the
device wafer, is electrically insulated from the bottom
wafer, known as the handle wafer. This opens up many
possibilities to optimize device properties in the device
layer, and separate device and handle processing from
each other, because the oxide acts as electrical insulation
and as an etch stop layer.
Fusion bonding, like all bonding processes, begins with
a cleaning step. RCA-1 cleaning with ammonia/peroxide
mixture takes care of two requirements at the same time:
it is effective in particle removal and it leaves the surface
in a hydrophilic condition, with silanol groups (Si–OH).
RCA-1 cleaned surfaces are smooth, and roughness re-
mains smaller than 0.5 nm. CVD oxides are usually not
smooth enough for bonding, and CMP must be done to
achieve surface roughness below the 1 nm required for
successful bonding (see Figure 16.10).
Surface energy (γ ) is the energy required to break a
bond and to create two new surfaces. It can be estimated
from bond strengths (Ebond) and bond densities (dbond):
γ = 1
2Ebonddbond
(17.1)
The factor 1/2 comes from the fact that when a bond is
broken, two surfaces are created. Two wafers in close
contact are bonded via water molecules, Figure 17.4.
We can get an estimate for surface energies from silicon
atom surface density, about 1015 cm−2, and hydrogen
bond energies, 25–40 kJ/mol, which translate to about
200–350 mJ/m2. Measured values for room temperature
hydrogen-bonded silicon wafers are between 50 and
80 mJ/m2. This indicates that less than maybe 20–30%
of area is in contact with hydrogen bonds. This is
understandable because the wafer surfaces are neither
perfectly ﬂat nor smooth but have local roughness and
waviness, and hydrogen bonds have short range. The
saturation value of surface energy after mild thermal
treatment or extended time has been measured to be
about 250 mJ/m2, in very good agreement with the
simple bond strength calculation.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 187]
194
Introduction to Microfabrication
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
1.63 Å
1.63 Å
2.76 Å
2.76 Å
11.54 Å
Surface 1
Surface 2
Bonding interface
2.76 Å
Si
Si
Figure 17.4
Bonding of hydrophilic silicon surfaces via
intermediate water molecules. Reproduced from Tong and
G¨osele (1999) by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Si
Si
H
H
H
H
H
Surface 1
Surface 2
1.63 Å
1.63 Å
2.76 Å
3.18 Å
Si
Si
Si
Si
H
6.02 Å
Figure 17.5
Water removal and siloxane bond formation.
Reproduced from Tong and G¨osele (1999) by permission
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
The reaction that takes place during annealing (for
silicon–silicon fusion bonding is typically about 1000 ◦C)
is siloxane bond (Si–O–Si) formation (Figure 17.5)
Si–OH + HO–Si ⇒Si–O–Si + H2O
(17.2)
Siloxane bonds are much stronger than hydrogen bonds,
and measured surface energies are about 1300 mJ/m2.
This surface energy is almost constant from 150 to
800 ◦C.
However, surface energies calculated from Si–O bond
energies (4.5 eV/bond or 430 kJ/mol) translate to about
3000 mJ/m2. This discrepancy is due to the fact that the
surfaces are not yet fully bonded but have some areas
which bond via hydrogen bonds only, and somewhere
above 1000 ◦C thermal oxide becomes viscous and ﬂows,
which increases contact area and leads to higher surface
energy. Surface energies of 3000 mJ/m2 are not encoun-
tered in experiments, however, because wafer breakage
will take place inside the silicon because Si–Si bonds are
weaker than the Si–O bonds.
Silicon-to-silicon bonding without oxides is possible.
Hydrogen bonds are involved, again. Surface treatment
with HF leaves the wafers hydrophobic with either H or
F termination. Because HF does not remove particles like
ammonia/peroxide solution, hydrophobic bonding is in-
ferior to hydrophilic bonding. Silicon-to-silicon bonding
without oxides can yield abrupt pn junctions when p- and
n-type wafers are bonded.
17.2.1 Low-temperature direct bonding
Low-temperature bonding is needed for instance when
there are structures on the wafer, and these structures do
not tolerate standard fusion bonding temperatures, or be-
cause two dissimilar materials are being bonded and low
temperature will keep CTE problems at bay.
Plasma activation is the main method to allow low-
temperature bonding. It is not fully clear why plasma
surface treatment is so beneﬁcial. There are a number of
processes that may contribute: ion bombardment breaks
bonds at the surface, leaving surface atoms in reactive
states; UV from plasma discharge also breaks Si–O and
Si–H bonds; the surface is oxidized in oxygen plasma,
but the oxide is porous and diffusion through it beneﬁcial
for water removal, Equation 17.2.
Plasma activation will enable bonding at 400 ◦C, which
is low enough for fusion bonding to compete with anodic
bonding. Bonding has been done at 200 ◦C, and even room
temperature has been reported, but no such process has
become standard procedure. Low-temperature bonding is
even more sensitive to surface roughness than standard
fusion bonding, and wafers with 0.1 nm RMS roughness
are used.
17.3 Anodic Bonding
Anodic bonding of silicon to glass (also known as ﬁeld-
assisted thermal bonding, FATB) is the oldest bonding
technique in microfabrication. It has many features which
make it easy: glass is a soft material which will conform at
400–500 ◦C bonding temperatures, sealing structures and
irregularities of up to 50 nm hermetically. Native oxides,
and thin grown or deposited oxides, do not prevent bond-
ing. Anodic bonding can be visually checked through the
glass side: bonded surfaces look black, and non-bonding
areas are lighter.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 188]
Bonding
195
Not all glasses are amenable to anodic bonding
(see Chapter 19 for a discussion on glass properties).
Thermal mismatch between silicon and glass needs to be
considered at two temperatures: the bonding temperature
and
room
temperature/operating
temperature
of
the
device. Glasses have higher coefﬁcients of thermal
expansion than silicon, but a match at two temperatures
is approximately met with glasses like Schott 8339 and
8329 and Corning 7070 and 7740 (Pyrex). The CTE
of 7740 is almost constant at 3.3 × 10−6/◦C from room
temperature to 450 ◦C, and that of silicon increases from
2.5 × 10−6 to 4 × 10−6/◦C.
When glass is heated to about 400 ◦C, sodium oxide
(Na2O) decomposes into sodium and oxygen ions. The
bonding process uses 300 to 1000 V applied to the glass
wafer (Figure 17.6). Sodium ions (Na+) move toward the
glass top surface and oxygen ions (O2−) toward the silicon
wafer. This will create a depletion layer and electrostatic
force pulls the glass and silicon wafer together. The re-
sulting electrostatic forces are very strong: if the thickness
of the depletion region is 1 μm, the ﬁeld is on the order of
500 MV/m (E = 500 V/1 μm) and the electrostatic force
is proportional to E2.
Oxygen ions react at the glass/silicon interface accord-
ing to
Si + 2 O2−⇒SiO2 + 4 e−
(17.3)
and sodium ions are neutralized at the cathode. If higher
temperatures are used, more sodium atoms are ionized
and participate in the process, and will diffuse faster, so
the depletion width is greater, leading to stronger bonds.
Na+ O2−
Na+
O2−
silicon
heater block
Figure 17.6
Anodic bonding: at about 350 ◦C glass ion-
izes partly, and the voltage of about 400 V drives oxygen
ions toward the glass/silicon interface, creating a depletion
region and a strong electrostatic ﬁeld which pulls the wafers
together
Bonding initiation is by applying pressure at the wafer
center, but if bonding is done in vacuum, it is possi-
ble to bond without an initiation point. Typical bonding
times are tens of minutes. It consists of alignment, cham-
ber evacuation, temperature ramping, actual bonding and
cooling. Total time is for example 30–60 minutes. This
is fairly long for a single wafer operation, and special
wafer holders have been designed so that wafer loading
and unloading can be done while another wafer is be-
ing bonded.
There is usually the option for trading bonding temper-
ature, voltage and time for each other. Microscope glass
slides have been anodically bonded to silicon at 150 ◦C
(typically microscope slides have CTEs of 7–9 ppm/◦C).
One hour bonding was done, which is quite long, using a
fairly high voltage of 500 V.
Anodic bonding leads to a hermetic bond seam. Vac-
uum cavities, or others with controlled atmosphere, can
be sealed. A “collar” around the cavity is necessary, but
there are no standardized design rules for this. The size
of bondable area can be very small. For instance, anodic
bonding has been used to make pillar frits: silicon pillars
5 μm in diameter (Figure 21.9) can be bonded to glass.
Oxidizable metal ﬁlms like aluminum can be sealed
between glass and silicon if the ﬁlms are thin enough
(<300 nm). Metals like gold or chromium will prevent
bond formation because either they do not oxidize (like
gold) or their oxides are conductive (CrO). Signal lines
out of a bonded structure can be done by diffused lines
in the silicon wafer. The resistance of diffused wires will
be high, but the surface remain planar, and these wires
tolerate all possible processing steps. This method is also
suitable for fusion bonded wafers.
Anodic
bonding
of
multilayer
structures
is
also
possible: glass/silicon/glass systems (Figure 17.2, right)
can be made in a single bonding step. Heating uniformity
is important, and double side heating is usually em-
ployed. Contacting the middle wafer electrically requires
special jigs.
17.4 Metallic Bonding
Thermocompression bonding (TCB) applies pressure and
heat simultaneously to the samples. This is the standard
wire bonding technique for attaching gold or aluminum
leads to ICs. Gold is suitable because it is a noble metal:
there are no gold oxides on the surface preventing TCB,
and the softness of gold (low yield point) is also advan-
tageous. Typical pressures and temperatures for wafer-
level TCB are in the range of 1–10 MPa at 300–400 ◦C.
Bonding times are then minutes or tens of minutes. An
example of gold–gold bonding can be seen in Figure 30.8:
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 189]
196
Introduction to Microfabrication
the two wafers forming the microphone have been bonded
together by 300 ◦C, 15 min Au–Au bonding. Wafer-level
TCB is difﬁcult because uniform pressure is needed over
a large area.
Another metallic bonding method is eutectic bonding.
It is based on the fact that eutectic alloys have low melt-
ing points: for example, Au–Si eutectic alloy (19 at. %
Si) melts at 363 ◦C even though the pure gold and sil-
icon melting points are 1063 and 1421 ◦C, respectively.
When gold dissolves into silicon, the eutectic point shifts
to higher temperature, stopping the reaction. If silicon
wafers with gold thin ﬁlms are bonded, there is an ample
supply of silicon, but if thin ﬁlms are used, their thick-
nesses need to be designed so that eutectic composition is
achieved. Any oxides on silicon will have to be carefully
removed, otherwise Au–Si alloying will not take place.
There are tens of technologically important eutectic
compositions that have been tested for bonding and
many are useful in microsystem bonding. Aluminum–
germanium and gold–tin systems are common. While
Au–Si and Au–Sn are easy and well established, gold is
a contamination source in silicon electronics. And even
if there were no electronics on the wafers, gold would
spread around in process tools, and therefore lab policy
may prevent gold being used in equipment.
17.5 Adhesive Bonding
Adhesive bonding with a polymeric intermediate layer
offers several advantages for bonding:
• temperatures from 20 ◦C to a few hundred degrees
• tolerant to (some) particle contamination
• bonding of structured wafers
• low-cost simple process.
Many negative resists have good bonding capabilities:
SU-8, polyimides and benzocyclobutene have all been
successfully used for adhesive bonding. Because poly-
mers are soft materials they conform to particles, and
voids are not a similar problem as with stiffer materials
like silicon. The main problem with adhesive bonding is
limited long-term stability and limited thermal range, with
100–400 ◦C maximum depending on polymer. Because of
the low temperatures and benign processes, CMOS wafers
can be used as substrates. A mirror array with individu-
ally addressable pixel elements steered by electronics in
the bottom wafer is shown in Figure 17.7.
Prototypical steps in adhesive bonding are as follows:
1. Surface
cleaning
(optional
adhesion
promoter
application).
Reflective coating
Bulk silicon
Nitride
Spacer material
Electronics
Figure 17.7
Aluminum mirror on nitride membrane is
addressed pixel-wise by electronics in the bottom wafer.
Photoresist serves the roles of both spacer and adhesive.
Reproduced from Sakarya et al. (2002) by permission of
Elsevier
2. Spin coating of polymer.
3. Initial curing (solvent bake).
4. Evacuating vacuum and joining the wafers.
5. Final curing of the polymer: pressure/heat/UV.
Initial curing is important to remove excess volatile ma-
terial and thus reduce interface bubbles later on. The ﬁnal
curing temperature has to be above the glass transition
temperature Tg of the polymer, otherwise no bonding
will take place. Adhesive bonding, and bonding of poly-
meric materials in general, will be further discussed in
Chapter 18.
17.6 Layer Transfer and Temporary
Bonding
In layer transfer methods thin slices of material are cut
from a donor wafer and bonded to a handle wafer. This
cutting can be accomplished by weakening the wafer with
ion-implanted hydrogen and then mechanically rupturing
the top layer. SOI wafer fabrication by an ion cutting
method (Smart-cut) will be discussed in more detail in
Chapter 22.
Layer transfer can also be based on thin ﬁlms. As an
example of transferring a thin ﬁlm, microchannel fabrica-
tion by transfer bonding of the photopolymer Ormocer is
discussed. Ormocer ﬁlm is spin coated on a polymer sheet
(e.g., PDMS or PET) and bonded to a patterned Ormo-
cer channel wafer. UV exposure through the transparent
polymer sheet causes a reaction at the photopolymer in-
terface. If the polymer sheet is inert, the bond strength
between the sheet and the photopolymer is less than the
bond strength between two photopolymer layers, and the
carrier polymer sheet can be peeled away, leaving a struc-
ture made completely out of photopolymer. The process
is shown in Figure 17.8.
As in all bonding, surface preparation is the key:
the receiving surface must be able to form chemical
bonds with the transferred layer. In the case of gold
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 190]
Bonding
197
Figure 17.8
Channel formation by transfer bonding: pho-
topolymer on a polymer sheet is bonded to a channel wafer
and detached after curing the photopolymer by UV light
Figure 17.9
Transfer of gold ﬁlm from a PDMS stamp:
the silicon surface is functionalized by thiol groups, and
gold–sulphur bonds are stronger than gold–PDMS bonds
transfer, Figure 17.9, the receiving surface is coated by a
thiol–SAM: a monomolecular layer with a sulfur atom at
the end of the carbon chain, because gold forms a strong
bond with sulfur (Figure 17.10) and this bond is stronger
than the van der Waals hydrogen bonds which hold gold
to PDMS.
Temporary bonding is used to assist handling very thin
wafers, or to make very thin wafers: the wafer to be
thinned is bonded to a carrier, thinned down and possibly
processed further, while being bonded to the carrier. Then,
at a suitable later stage, the temporary bond is detached,
and the thin wafer may be bonded to its ﬁnal carrier, as
shown in Figure 17.11. This is common in 3D packaging
applications. The ﬁnal carrier is chosen for example be-
cause it has high thermal conductivity (used for laser heat
sinks) or because it is a dielectric and eliminates parasitic
capacitances (as in RF devices).
Bonding and layer transfer have many applications. In
power transistors heating is a major issue, as is insulation
voltage. While silicon is a good thermal conductor, it
is a semiconductor and leakage currents will increase
with temperature. Glass would solve this issue, but it is
a thermal insulator. A solution is to deposit a thermally
conducting but electrically insulating interlayer before
bonding the power transistor to the glass. Aluminum
nitride can be used (Figure 17.12). For this application
Au
S
Si
Si
O
CH2
CH2
S
Si
Si
O
CH2
CH2
S
Si
Si
O
O
O
O
O
CH2
CH2
Au
Au
Figure 17.10
Gold–thiol bonds
Interim carrier
Final carrier
Interim carrier
Device wafer
Interim carrier
Device wafer bonding
and thinning
Figure 17.11
Temporary bonding: device wafer and in-
terim carrier bonded by adhesive; device wafer thinned by
grinding/etching/polishing; adhesive bonding to ﬁnal car-
rier; detachment of interim carrier
Glass
Al/Si(1%)
AIN
Oxide
SiNx
tAIN
Si
Back–wafer
Front–wafer
B
E
B
Glass substrate
500 µm
Adhesive
Adhesive
C
Figure 17.12
Bipolar transistor with AlN heat spreader
layer transferred to glass, with silicon wafer removed. Re-
produced from La Spina et al. (2008), copyright © 2008
by permission of Elsevier
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 191]
198
Introduction to Microfabrication
the AlN deposition process has to be optimized so that
thermal conductivity is maximized while the piezoelectric
effect is minimized.
Temporary bonding is a key element in 3D integration:
fully processed wafers are joined together temporarily,
thinned and metallized, for greater functionality. More
examples will be shown in Chapter 39. Flexible, wearable
electronics have been demonstrated by laminating thinned
silicon chips on metallized polymers. One example is
shown in Figure 39.13.
17.7 Bonding of Structured Wafers
Blanket wafer bonding requires smoothness and ﬂatness,
and if one (or both) of the wafers have been structured,
they may be compromised from a bonding point of
view. If etching has been done to make microchannels
(Figure 17.1), the etch mask has to be removed somehow.
If this removal process, for example wet or plasma
etching,
introduces
microscale
roughness,
bonding
properties may be compromised. On a wafer scale, metal
deposition may introduce stresses which will bend the
wafer, making bonding difﬁcult or even impossible.
17.7.1 Bond alignment
Attaching a blanket capping wafer to the top of a struc-
tured wafer is easy. If both wafers have structures they
need to be aligned to each other. Perfect alignment is as
difﬁcult as in lithography, and processes must be designed
to work with less than perfect alignment (Figure 17.13).
Glass and PDMS are very good with respect to bond
alignment: transparency makes optical alignment straight-
forward. Anodic bonding alignment resembles standard
lithography: the glass wafer with its metal patterns can be
aligned to the bottom silicon wafer (photomasks are glass
plates with metal patterns).
In the microturbine (Figure 1.17) ﬁve silicon wafers
have been bonded together with about 1 μm alignment
to create air and fuel channels, rotors and stators. Bond-
ing of structured silicon wafers requires a double-sided
alignment tool. Alignment marks on the ﬁrst wafer are
registered, the second wafer is aligned to those marks and
Figure 17.13
Bond alignment: none, perfect and mis-
aligned
wafers are then brought into contact. Alternatively, in-
frared through-wafer alignment can be used with silicon,
because it is transparent in the infrared. The critical step
is to maintain the alignment while the wafers are trans-
ferred to the bonding equipment. This is accomplished by
a special ﬁxture that ﬁts both the aligner and the bonder,
therefore wafers need not be handled after alignment.
17.7.2 Gas entrapment
Silicon and glass are impermeable to gases, therefore the
pressure inside a cavity needs to be understood. This is
especially important when thin membranes are made, be-
cause they will deﬂect due to any pressure difference
between the cavity and the outside world (Figure 17.14).
With polymer devices the issues are quite different and
mostly concerned with keeping gases outside the cavity,
that is hermeticity of the bond. In both cases gases desorb
from the structures themselves during bond anneal. Poly-
mers are more prone to outgassing, but then, on the other
hand, polymer bonding temperatures are much lower.
When wafers with cavities are joined together, three
possibilities for the cavity atmosphere are commonly
encountered: air, nitrogen and vacuum. When vacuum-
bonded wafers are cooled down and taken to atmospheric
pressure, the membrane will be deﬂected down. In fusion
bonding oxygen has reacted with silicon and formed
oxide (this is dry oxidation, Equation 13.2). Nitrogen
remains, resulting in a pressure of about 0.8 atm, since
air is roughly 80% nitrogen, 20% oxygen. Joining the
wafers under a nitrogen atmosphere will result in equal
pressure after bond annealing. The ideal gas law is a
good approximation for gas pressures inside cavities.
The pressure inside microcavities can be calculated
from membrane bending and Equation 17.4, which gives
circular membrane centerpoint deﬂection (w) under
applied pressure:
w = 0.662a ×
3

P × a
Et
(17.4)
Figure 17.14
Deﬂection of membrane due to vacuum
cavity: atmospheric pressure bends the membrane. Note that
the design on the right retains parallelism of the gap
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 192]
Bonding
199
where a is membrane radius, t the thickness and E
Young’s modulus. Alternatively, the chips can be placed
in a vacuum chamber which is pumped down. The
ﬂat-membrane condition is equated to gas pressure inside
the cavity.
However, gases are not just trapped inside cavities
and desorbed from walls – some gases are generated in
the bonding process itself. The direct bonding reaction
products of silicon are hydrogen and water. These
gases behave differently: hydrogen dissolves into silicon
dioxide, and if the oxide is thicker than 50 nm it can
absorb all the hydrogen, but in the case of thin oxide,
hydrogen bubbles may evolve. Water oxidizes silicon
(wet oxidation !), because the temperature of bond
annealing is similar to the oxidation temperatures.
If CVD oxide is used in bonding, it will release
gases when annealed: remember that hydrogen is always
embedded in CVD oxides. These oxides have to be
annealed above the bonding temperature before bonding.
This is even more pronounced when polymeric materials
are present: polymers can absorb quite considerable
amounts of water, and this will be released upon heating.
In anodic bonding oxygen is diffusing toward the inter-
face, and oxygen gas accumulates in the cavity. Bonding
pressure needs some attention when anodic bonding is
done on wafers with cavities. At millitorr pressures a glow
discharge can be initiated in the cavity. Therefore either
a good vacuum or atmospheric pressure is desirable.
17.7.3 Mechanical strength
Even when bonding is successful from the surface chem-
istry/bond strength points of view, there may be problems:
it is not guaranteed that the cover wafer is strong enough
for the span intended (Figure 17.15). Membranes will de-
ﬂect because of a pressure difference, but this is elastic,
and when pressures are equalized, ﬂat membranes will
result. But with thin membranes at elevated temperatures
there is the danger (and possibility) of irreversible plastic
deformation. First of all, thin membranes are mechani-
cally not very rigid, and, second, yield stresses are much
Figure 17.15
Sagging over a long span
reduced at elevated temperatures. See Figure 19.15 for a
discussion on irreversible membrane deﬂection.
Span and gap are related: if narrow gaps with long
spans need to be made, bending of the wafers can result
in closure of the gap. This can be circumvented by us-
ing stiffer materials (higher Young’s modulus) or thicker
wafers. The design also affects strength: circles are stur-
dier than long lines, for instance. The ratio of span to gap
can be for instance 1000:1 (millimeter span for micro-
meter gap) for anodically bonded sturdy designs.
17.8 Bond Quality Measurements
Cleanliness is paramount in wafer bonding: particles at
the bond interface will prevent bonding locally. Anodic
bonding can easily be observed through the glass side, but
if the wafers are not transparent, infrared optical mea-
surement through the wafer is possible. For silicon this
translates to 1.1 μm wavelength and above. The height
of voids can be inferred from interferometric rings, with
λ/4 as the minimum detectable height, or about 0.28 μm
for silicon.
Acoustic microscopy (SAM, Scanning Acoustic Mi-
croscopy) can be used to check voids in the ﬁnished wafer
stack non-destructively. The wafer is immersed in water
and high-frequency ultrasound is aimed at it. Theoretical
resolution is down to micrometers, but full wafer scan-
ning is often desirable, and scanning time can be traded
for resolution so for example a 1 min scan with 100 μm
resolution is done.
Bond strength can be measured by a simple crack open-
ing method: a razor blade is inserted between the wafers
and the crack opening length is measured. Bond strength
γ is given by
γ = 3Ed3t2
b
32L4
(17.5)
where E is Young’s modulus, d the wafer thickness, tb
the blade thickness and L the crack length. This method
is quick and easy with no wafer preparation, but because
of the L4 dependence on crack length, any uncertainties
in crack length determination will lead to erratic results.
Debonding the wafers and visual or microscopic exam-
ination reveal bond interface quality. Bond strength can
also be checked by pull tests. In a pull test the two wafers
are torn apart, and the debonding force is measured. This
is better than the crack method because it measures bond
strength all over the wafer, not just at the edge (where
the bond might be of inferior quality). The problem with
a bond test is that the bond may be stronger than the
attachment of the pulling set-up, and only a lower limit
is obtained.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 193]
200
Introduction to Microfabrication
Anodic bonding bond strengths are 20–30 MPa, similar
to the best polymer-to-polymer bonds. The usual poly-
mer bonds are 1–10 MPa and PDMS self-adhesive bonds
about 0.5 MPa. Bond tightness can be measured by gas
leakage. When patterned and etched silicon wafers have
been direct bonded to form cavities, etched depths of 6 nm
can be sealed gas-tight, but 9 nm grooves will result in
leakage. Higher anneal temperature will seal slightly bet-
ter. Anodic bonding is much more ﬂexible: even 50 nm
grooves can be sealed in a gas-tight manner.
17.9 Bonding for Packaging
Bonding is also a typical method to create zero-level pack-
ages for MEMS devices. A cavity with controlled ambient
is needed for several reasons: damping of mechanical
resonators depends on pressure; clogging of movable
structures by particles must be prevented; and surfaces
have to be protected from atmospheric water vapor
condensation. With all the sensitive, delicate microme-
chanical parts covered by a capping wafer, subsequent
operations of dicing, encapsulation, mounting, etc., can
be generic, whereas packaging of unprotected chips with
vibrating beams or bending plates would have to be
developed for each and every design separately. The
alternative method for cavity formation is deposition.
This will be discussed in Chapter 30. Deposition avoids
one of the main drawbacks of bonding, which is the
extra cost of an additional wafer.
Glass-frit bonding is an old established technique for
fairly low-temperature hermetic bonding. Hermeticity
equals low leakage and long-term stability of the cavity
atmosphere. The glass frit consists of a powder of
low-melting-point lead glass and polymeric binder. It is
screen printed on a wafer (making it amenable to large
linewidths only) and baked to remove binder. The glass
frit is then pressed against the wafer to be bonded and
heated to about 400 ◦C. The glass frit is quite thick, for
example 15 μm, which makes it insensitive to particles
and microstructures. It is easy to have metallization run
Figure 17.16
MEMS resonator enclosed by a silicon cap
wafer and glass-frit bonding: metallization runs under the
glass frit from a vacuum cavity. Glass frit conforms to some
extent to height differences
Table 17.2
Bonding techniques compared
Method
Advantages
Disadvantages
Direct Si bonding
Strong bond
Smooth and ﬂat surface needed
Hermetic sealing
Very high temperature >1000 ◦C
Low-T Si direct
Hermetic at low T
Very ﬂat and smooth surface needed
CMOS compatible
Sensitive to surface preparation
Fusion, glass
Strong bond
650 ◦C needed for Pyrex
Hermetic seal
Wafer deformation a problem
Fusion, polymer
Strong bond
Depends on Tg
Identical materials
Flow of material may block cavities
Anodic
Strong bond
High voltage and discharge danger
Hermetic
Sodium accumulation on cathode
Seals small irregularities
Requires CTE matched glass
Thermocompression
Non-ﬂat surface OK
High forces needed
Hermetic
Difﬁcult on wafer level
Eutectic
Hermetic
Flat surface needed
Strong bond
Requires special metals
Glass frit
Hermetic
Large-area bond seam
Covers metallization
Lead may be contamination source
Adhesive
Versatile
Non-hermetic
Covers metallization
Low-temperature uses only
Insensitive to particles
Reactions with ﬂuids
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 194]
Bonding
201
under the glass frit, thus enabling electrical contacts to
hermetic cavities (Figure 17.16). The poor thickness
control prevents the use of glass-frit bonding in appli-
cations where bonding deﬁnes device-critical vertical
dimensions. Glass-frit bonding is utilized in many bulk
micromechanical
applications
like
pressure
sensors
and accelerometers.
Adhesive bonding can be used in much the same way
as glass-frit bonding; for example, structures resembling
exactly Figure 17.15 can be made by adhesive bonding.
However, the polymer seal is not hermetic, and the long-
term reliability of adhesively bonded structures has to be
assessed for each application. All polymers are permeable
to some degree, even though Teﬂon-like polymers have
permeabilities 10 000 times less than that of PDMS, but
metals have permeabilities another 10 000 times less than
the densest polymers.
17.10 Bonding at Large
Because there are so many different bonding techniques
available, some bonding solution is almost invariably ap-
plicable. All methods have their pros and cons, and they
depend on device requirements. Table 17.2 lists some im-
portant issues of major bonding techniques.
17.11 Exercises
1. Which materials can be present on a wafer undergoing
silicon–silicon fusion bonding?
2. Calculate the gas pressure inside an anodically bonded
cavity when bonding has been done at ambient pres-
sure and 400 ◦C temperature!
3. Outline the fabrication sequence for the tunable capac-
itor of Figure 17.2! Which process steps contribute to
gap size?
4. Design a fabrication process for the accelerometer of
Figure 17.2 (right).
5. What is the resolution of a 160 MHz acoustic measure-
ment of voids?
6. Which measurements could reveal the role of sodium
ion depletion in anodic bonding?
7. How much will a silicon membrane 0.5 μm thick and
1 mm in diameter bend due to 0.2 atm pressure differ-
ence? What about a 5 μm membrane?
8. Calculate the bond strength from Equation 17.5 for
two silicon wafers when a blade of 50 μm has opened
a crack of 8 mm.
References and Related Reading
Berthold, A. et al. (2000) Glass-to-glass anodic bonding with
standard IC technology thin ﬁlms as intermediate layers,
Sens. Actuators, 82, 224.
Christiansen, S. H., R. Singh and U. G¨osele (2006) Wafer
direct bonding: from advanced substrate engineering to fu-
ture applications in micro/nanoelectronics, Proc. IEEE, 94,
2060–2106.
Dziuban, J. A. (2006) Bonding in Microsystem Technology,
Springer.
Etxeberria, J. A. and F. J. Gracia (2007) Tunable MEMS vol-
ume capacitors for high voltage applications, Microelectron.
Eng., 84, 1393–1397.
Henttinen, K. et al. (2000) Mechanically induced Si layer trans-
fer in hydrogen-implanted Si wafers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 76,
2370.
Huff, M. A. et al. (1993) Design of sealed cavity microstruc-
tures formed by silicon wafer bonding, J. Microelectromech.
Syst., 2, 74.
Jourdain, A. et al. (2002) Investigation of the hermeticity of
BCB-sealed cavities for housing (RF-)MEMS devices, Pro-
ceedings of IEEE MEMS 2002, p. 677.
La Spina, L. et al. (2008) Aluminum nitride for heatspreading
in RF IC’s, Solid-State Electron., 52, 1359–1363.
Lee, B. et al. (2003) A study on wafer level vacuum packaging
for MEMS devices, J. Micromech. Microeng., 13, 663.
Mack, S. et al. (1997) Analysis of bonding-related gas en-
closure in micromachined cavities sealed by silicon wafer
bonding, J. Electrochem. Soc., 144, 1106.
Niklaus, F. et al. (2006) Adhesive wafer bonding, J. Appl.
Phys., 99, 031101.
Sakarya, S. et al. (2002) Technology of reﬂective membranes
for spatial light modulators, Sens. Actuators, A97–98, 468.
Tong, Q.-Y. and U. G¨osele (1999) Semiconductor Wafer
Bonding, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Tsau, C. T., S. M. Spearing and M. A. Schmidt (2002) Fab-
rication of wafer-level thermocompression bonds, J. Micro-
electromech. Syst., 11, 641–647.
Vallin, ¨U, K. Jonsson and U. Lindberg (2005) Adhesion quan-
tiﬁcation methods for wafer bonding, Mater. Sci. Eng. R50,
109–165.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 195]
18
Polymer Microprocessing
Polymer
microprocessing
employs
a
wide
variety
of methods, some of them scaled-down versions of
macroscopic polymer processing, like injection molding
and casting, and some borrowed from microfabrication
and applied to novel materials like CVD of parylene,
plasma deposition of Teﬂon and lithography of epoxy.
Polymers are essential in optical lithography and newer
patterning methods like embossing and nanoimprint
lithography (NIL) also make patterns in polymers. Most
of the time photoresist or NIL polymer is stripped away
after it has served as etch, implant or plating mask, but
it is also possible to leave the polymer structure as a
permanent part of the ﬁnished device. Such structures
are central in this chapter. In Figure 18.1a epoxy
pillars 300 μm tall, 30 μm in diameter made by optical
lithography are shown, and in Figure 18.1b imprinted
epoxy grating with 60 nm feature size is shown.
Polymers are soft materials (have small Young’s modu-
lus) and this property is utilized when ﬂexible structures or
sensitive mechanical elements are needed. Polymers can
have exceptional combinations of properties, like optical
transparency and elasticity (PDMS); or a refractive index
of 1.34 and low loss tangent in RF (amorphous ﬂuoropoly-
mer); or low thermal expansion and excellent solvent
tolerance (polyimides). But then some other properties
might be disadvantageous: water absorption is high and
solvent tolerance often poor. Because of the wide range of
polymers existing, it is often possible to ﬁnd a material
with a suitable mix of properties. Polymers are cheap,
which is important when disposable devices are made.
The main drawback of polymers is their limited stability
(mechanical softness, limited thermal range, porosity) and
this applies to both device processing and operation.
Polymer processing methods can be divided into two
gross categories: direct fabrication and replication. Direct
fabrication results in the ﬁnal structure, as in lithographic
patterning. Replication methods rely on a master or
mold, which is used to force the polymer into the desired
shape. These two methods can result in exactly the
same ﬁnal structures, as shown in Figure 1.9. There are
many different implementations, and the terminology is
somewhat diffuse. Embossing and imprinting both use
a 3D stamp to force the structure into softened polymer,
while molding (also spelled moulding) and casting both
describe processes where polymer is ﬂowing (because
either it is molten or the monomer is ﬂuid) and ﬁlling
a master/mold. This difference between imprinting and
molding is depicted in Figure 18.2.
Various hybrid methods exist, like UV embossing,
where liquid photopolymer is stamped and cured by
UV radiation. Molding techniques can be applied not
only to polymers, but also to inorganic materials, like
steel powder. These will be discussed in Chapter 23 on
special processes.
18.1 Polymer Materials
Polymer molecules are long chains of repeating monomer
units. In polyethylene (PE) the C2H4 monomer unit
is repeated thousands of times, resulting in molecular
weights (MWs) of for example 30 000 or 300 000.
Polymerization processes do not produce exact chain
lengths but result usually in rather wide distributions,
and in addition to chemical formula, it is important to
know MW. Many polymer properties are a function
of MW, for example viscosity, which is important in
micromolding and stamping processes.
The bonds between carbon atoms in the chain are
strong, but the chains interact only via weak hydrogen
bonds. Polymers are held together also by mechanical
entanglement of the chains.
Because
of the weak
hydrogen
bonds,
polyethylene
easily
softens
when
heated: the polymer chains slide past each other.
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 196]
204
Introduction to Microfabrication
(b)
(a)
Figure 18.1
(a) ﬂuidic sieve with 300 μm high, 30 μm diameter pillars made by photolithography, courtesy Santeri
Tuomikoski, Aalto University; (b) optical grating, 60 nm linewidth made by nanoimprint lithography, reproduced from
Martinsen (2008) by permission of Elsevier. Both structures are made of SU-8 polymer
Figure 18.2
Molding (left): material ﬂow into mould
master. Imprinting/embossing (right): the stamp is pressed
against solid (but softened) polymer
In polyvinyl chloride (PVC) the repeating unit is
CHCl–CH2, and in polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) C2F4
units are repeated. Parylene-C has the repeating unit
consisting of a benzene ring with chlorine. Such aromatic
benzene rings render polymers thermally stable. BCB
(benzocyclobutadiene) is
another
aromatic
thermally
stable polymer widely used in microsystems. Epoxy
SU-8 consists of aromatic rings and eight epoxy groups
which will result in tight crosslinking upon heating. The
bonds are strong covalent bonds which are not weakened
by heating, therefore cross-linked SU-8 does not ﬂow.
The chemical formulas of common microfabrication
polymers are shown in Figure 18.3.
Polymers are available in many formats: they are avail-
able as sheets and wafers, with thicknesses ranging from
a few micrometers to millimeters. They serve as sub-
strates for processing. Some are available as solutions
and can be applied by spin coating, while others can be
synthesized from monomers in liquid phase, vacuum and
plasma processes, and applied as thin ﬁlms not unlike
sputtered or PECVD ﬁlms. Some polymers are avail-
able in many formats: polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
is used in wafer format for hot embossing, and as spin-
coated thin ﬁlm it serves as electron beam resist. More
commonly PMMA is known as Plexiglas. Similarly, poly-
imides are used as substrates 50 μm thick for ﬂexible
electronics under the trade name Kapton, and as high
thermal stability spin-coated negative resists, as well as
spin-coated non-photoactive ﬁlms.
Silicon
is
also
present
in
many
polymers,
and
because of its chemical similarity to carbon (both are
column IV elements that form four bonds), there are
interesting silicon-based polymers, for example siloxanes.
Poly(dimethyl)siloxane (PDMS) has the basic repeating
unit of –(O–Si(CH3)2–O–). Its backbone consists of
silicon and oxygen, but the side chains are organic
groups. Similar polymers with different organic groups
have been synthesized with interesting properties ranging
between polymers and SiO2. These materials can some-
times combine the best of both worlds: for example,
low dielectric constant and improved thermal stability.
One such hybrid polymer is Ormocer (for organically
modiﬁed ceramic) which can be processed like negative
resist, but which results in oxide-like material, for
instance a low contact angle compared to polymers, and
much higher temperature stability than most polymers.
Polymers can be divided into two major classes:
thermoplasts and thermosets (or duroplasts). Thermoplast
molecules have only weak bonds between the polymer
chains and, when heated, the polymer ﬂows (like
polyethylene). Thermoplasts can be repeatedly heated
and cooled, with no permanent change. Many common
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 197]
Polymer Microprocessing
205
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
H2
H2
H2
H2
H2
H2
H2
Si
O
Si
O
CH3
CH3
Si
F
C
C
F
F
F
n
n
C
C
C
C
C
C
Cl
H2 C
C
CH2
C
n
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
N
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
N
C
O
C
C
C
C
C
O
O
O
O
n
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
C
C
C
O
Figure 18.3
Polymer chemical structures. Left column: PE, PDMS, PFTE, parylene. Right column: polyimide, SU-8
epoxy
polymers are thermoplasts: PE, polycarbonate (PC),
PMMA, COC (Cyclic Oleﬁn Copolymer), PET, PEEK,
PVC and PS.
Thermosets are polymers that react upon heating and
form strong covalent bonds between the chains. Ther-
mosets will ﬂow for a while when heated for the ﬁrst
time, but then crosslinking and hardening take place. The
resulting crosslinked material will not ﬂow even above
Tg because of the rigidity of their structure. Thermosets
include photoresists, epoxies (like SU-8), PTFE, poly-
imides, polyesters, parylene and BCB.
Elastomers form a third group. In these materials the
bonds between the chains are ﬂexible and the material
returns to its shape even after 1000% elongation. Rub-
bers are typical elastomers. In microfabrication PDMS
and Viton are common elastomers.
There are other classiﬁcations, too. Some polymers are
amorphous. They are glassy, in the same sense as glasses,
they exhibit no long-range order and they are optically
transparent. Amorphous polymers include PMMA, PC,
COC, PI, PDMS and PVC. Semicrystalline polymers
show local crystallinity in the midst of amorphous
areas. Sometimes they are called crystalline polymers
for short, but there are really no crystalline polymers.
In
semicrystalline
polymers
the
crystal/amorphous
interfaces diffract and reﬂect light, and the resulting
material is opaque. Semicrystalline polymers include PP,
PET, PEEK, PVDF and PTFE.
Polymers are often called by their trade names, in-
creasing confusion. Teﬂon is PTFE, Topas and Zeonor
are COC, PMMA is Plexiglass and PC Lexan. Kapton is
polyimide and Mylar is polyester. Viton and CYTOP are
ﬂuoropolymers, AZ resists are novolak resins and Sylgard
184 is PDMS.
Polymer properties vary a lot, and Table 18.1 gives just
a glimpse of typical values. It indicates the major prop-
erties of polymers in general. Table 18.2 lists in a little
more detail the properties of common microfabrication
polymers. In both tables the values do not cater for all
blends and varieties; for instance, imides are a large class
of polymers with wide-ranging properties. Temperature
limits are partly set by the glass transition temperature Tg,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 198]
206
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 18.1
Typical polymer properties
Value
Comments
Density (kg/m3)
∼1000
Teﬂon ∼2000
Dielectric constant
2–4
SiO2, ε ∼4
Volume resistivity
(ohm-cm)
1014–1017
Similar to SiO2 and
Si3N4
Index of refraction
1.35–1.65
Resists ∼1.6
Dielectric strength
(MV/cm)
2–3
SiO2 ∼10
Young’s modulus
(GPa)
1–5
PDMS ∼0.01, SiO2
∼76
Tensile strength
(MPa)
10–100
Imides even higher
Residual stress
(MPa)
10–30
PDMS very low
Water contact angle
(deg)
70–100
Imides 50◦, PTFE
114◦
and partly by thermal degradation temperature, or melt-
ing. Additional properties and selection criteria will be
discussed below.
It must stressed that different manufacturers offer poly-
mers of the same basic formula with different properties,
and any values in this chapter are indicative of major
trends only.
Note
that
MW
and
polymer
processing
history
(baking time and temperature, and hence crosslinking
density) have considerable effects on many of the
above parameters.
Other properties which may be of importance in cer-
tain applications include the dielectric loss tangent, which
ranges from 0.0002 for PTFE to 0.04 for PMMA. Shrink-
age upon crosslinking is a source of stresses, and it can
be considerable (5–10%).
Polymer
selection
involves further considerations:
chemical stability against acids, bases and solvents, for
example. PDMS has excellent chemical resistance to
weak acids and alkaline solutions but it is unsuitable
for most organic solvents. SU-8, parylene, PTFE and
polyimides are very resistant to most solvents, acids and
bases. PTFE is exceptional in its chemical stability and
low water absorption (<0.01%), while for PDMS it is
0.1% and for PMMA and polyimides a few percent.
Polymers are generally electrical and thermal insula-
tors, and can serve many of the same functions as silicon
dioxide and silicon nitride: as intermetal insulators, gate
dielectrics, passivation ﬁlms and free-standing mem-
branes. Semiconducting polymers like polythienylene
vinylene (PVT) and PEDOT can be used in transistor
channels and conducting polymer polyanilin (PANI)
has been used for “metallization” of transistors. The
resistivity of a conducting polymer can be as low as
10 000 μohm-cm, a thousand times higher than metals,
but only a hundred times the resistivity of polysilicon.
As will be discussed in Chapter 26, polymers can serve
every function needed in a transistor (Figure 26.22). The
main advantages of polymer electronics are ﬂexibility
(Figure 18.4) and low-temperature processing, but their
performance does not match silicon devices, and polymer
transistors are geared toward very different applications
like embedded electronics, enabling cheap intelligence
in products.
18.2 Polymer Thermal Properties
Because polymer MWs have wide distributions, poly-
mer properties change gradually, not abruptly. The glass
transition temperature (Tg) is an important parameter. Be-
low Tg polymers are brittle and glass-like, but above Tg
thermoplasts become soft (viscosity decreases) and they
will ﬂow and can be molded. Baking above Tg is also
a stress reduction method: above Tg the polymer will
relax stresses because it becomes softer and is able to
accommodate stresses. Baking photoresist above Tg will
mean that it will ﬂow and end up as a hemispherical
dot (see Figure 18.30 below). While a non-vertical re-
sist sidewall proﬁle is generally regarded as a processing
Table 18.2
Properties of common microfabrication polymers
Tg
Tdeg
CTE
Thermal conductivity
UV transparency
(◦C)
(◦C)
(ppm/◦C)
(W/K-m)
PMMA
100
200
70
0.2
Opaque
PC
150
230
65
0.2
>350 nm
PDMS
−130
400
300
0.15
>240 nm
SU-8
240
340
100
0.2
>350 nm
Polyimide
400
620
3–50
0.2
Opaque
Parylene
150
290
35
0.1
>300 nm
Teﬂon
130
330
100
0.1
opaque
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 199]
Polymer Microprocessing
207
Figure 18.4
Flexible glucose sensor. Reproduced from
Kudo et al. (2006), copyright © 2006 by permission of
Elsevier
problem, these dots can be used for microlenses. Elas-
tomers are weakly crosslinked materials with values of
Tg below room temperature, and therefore they are soft
and easily deformed by pressure, but when pressure is re-
moved, they return to their original shape. PDMS is the
most widely used elastomer in microfabrication, with Tg
of −130 ◦C.
Temperature is a key variable in polymer micropro-
cessing because polymer viscosity depends strongly on
temperature. The different temperature regimes of a poly-
mer are shown in Figure 18.5. Viscosity, which describes
the mechanical response to a shearing force, is plotted vs.
temperature. The ﬁrst major transition occurs at Tg. Poly-
mer becomes viscous, and can be embossed/imprinted,
even though embossing is usually done at higher temper-
ature, around the ﬂow transition, in order to speed up the
process. At higher temperatures the polymer melts; this
is the regime of injection molding. Not all polymers ﬂow
and melt: some will decompose when heated.
Polymer dimensional stability is poor compared to
inorganic materials. Thermal expansion is huge, typically
50–100 ppm/◦C, compared to 3 ppm/◦C for silicon and
23 ppm/◦C for aluminum. This leads to many problems:
even mild temperatures, like the 120 ◦C encountered
in lithography bake processes, can cause large thermal
stresses. And the shrinkage of polymer after it has been
molded at elevated temperatures has to be accounted
for. In CDs and DVDs these two factors are somewhat
easier than in microfabrication in general, because the
molten polymer is fed in from the middle, and shrinkage
is radially symmetric.
log viscocity
temperature
glass transition
flow transition
Tg
imprint
demould
Figure 18.5
Thermoplast polymer viscosity vs. tempera-
ture diagram. Adapted from Schift (2008)
Polymers are low-density materials and always porous
to some extent. Water vapor absorption varies a lot: for
some ﬂuoropolymers the coefﬁcient of permeability is
10−15 mol-m/m2-s-Pa, for polyimide two orders magni-
tudes more, and yet another two orders of magnitude more
for elastomers. So while polymer packaging of microsys-
tems is attractive because of ease, it is not applicable
to cases where hermetic sealing is needed. Permeability
is sometimes useful: in cell culture devices oxygen can
diffuse through the PDMS roof, and no separate ﬂuidic
channels are needed to provide oxygen. Metallization of
polymers is difﬁcult because desorption of water from
pores will poison the vacuum, and this water vapor will
oxidize metals, resulting in increased resistivity.
Polymers can also be ﬁlled with other materials,
to modify their properties. Microfabrication makes no
exception: for electrical conductivity, carbon black has
traditionally been used, and carbon nanotubes and silver
nanoparticles are now used in microtechnology. Glass
spheres and glass ﬁbers have been used in the macro
world, and the same applies in the micro world. Young’s
modulus can be tailored by an order of magnitude by
ﬁllers. Magnetic nanoparticles can be used to make
polymers react to magnetic ﬁelds and it is also possible
to retain photoactivity when the nanoparticle size is
small relative to exposure wavelengths (and their density
low enough).
18.3 Thick-Resist Lithography
Thick can mean very different thicknesses to different
people. In IC fabrication resist thickness is from a hundred
nanometers to a few micrometers. In MEMS and thin-
ﬁlm magnetic recording head (TFH) fabrication, thick can
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 200]
208
Introduction to Microfabrication
mean anything from 5 to 200 μm, and in X-ray lithography
thick extends into the millimeter regime. As with thin
resists, a number of sometimes conﬂicting requirements
are imposed on thick resists, such as resolution, sidewall
proﬁle, sensitivity (photospeed), thermal stability, adhe-
sion and shelf life.
Thick-resist processing has a few extra factors that
need attention, compared to standard resists. Rapid sol-
vent evaporation has to be prevented because rapid and
large shrinkage leads to defective and non-uniform ﬁlms
as the surface layer dries and encapsulates the material
beneath. One solution is a closed spinner bowl which cre-
ates a saturated solvent vapor atmosphere. This buys extra
time to ensure uniform resist spreading before viscosity
increases so much that ﬂow stops. Solvent evaporates dur-
ing ﬁnal spinning to some extent, but for thick resists it
is advantageous to perform an additional slow spinning
step at the end, to further dry the resist.
With thick resists the edge bead is sizable, and it will
prevent contact exposure because the mask touches the
edge bead at wafer edges. Edge bead removal is beneﬁcial
also for cleanliness: the extra resist material can ﬂake off
and cause particle problems.
Soft bake can be done in a convection oven, on a hot-
plate or by infrared heaters. Solvent removal is diffusion
limited and long baking times are required for thick re-
sists; for 100 μm thick resists, bake times are about an
hour. While oven bakes are usually done at one temper-
ature, hotplates allow easy temperature ramping. During
the bake the wafers should be perfectly horizontal because
viscosity is smaller at elevated temperatures and therefore
resist can easily ﬂow. A minor bevel can cause major re-
sist thickness non-uniformity across the wafer. Positive
novolak resists need an additional rehydration period af-
ter baking: water is an essential compound in exposure
(Figure 9.7).
In novolak–DNQ resists, exposed DNQ still absorbs
some light, and thick layers of such resist will need very
high exposure doses, that is long exposure times. The
practical thickness limit of novolak–DNQ positive resists
is 50–100 μm, which translates to exposures of tens of
minutes. In negative resists based on a photoacid gener-
ator, the reactive acid molecule is produced throughout
the volume of the resist, and absorbance is not affected
by the exposure. Therefore even layers a millimeter thick
can be exposed in reasonable times. All polymers absorb
to some extent below 350 nm, and in order to avoid ab-
sorbance by the base resin, wavelengths below 350 nm
should be ﬁltered out. Exposure is supposed to interact
with the photoactive compound, not with the base resin.
It is usually not the exposure but the mechanical
strength of the ﬁnal resist structures that limits the
thicknesses of negative resist structures. This involves
also the properties of liquids used in development and
rinsing and drying. Capillary forces can be so strong
that drying water can pull neighboring resist lines
into contact. This will be discussed in more detail
in Chapter 29, because such drying-induced stiction
problems are central in surface micromechanics.
In order to make deep trenches or high pillars, colli-
mated light is needed: if incoming light is not collimated,
sizable exposure will take place underneath the mask. This
same reason explains why thick resists are not exposed by
projection mask aligners.
Thick-resist development is normally done by immer-
sion. Development is diffusion limited and development
time increases as a function of thickness. Development
is also slower in narrow grooves compared to large open
areas. Development times are tens of minutes.
For negative photoresists post-exposure bake (PEB) is
required to ﬁnish the crosslinking reaction. For positive
novolak resists PEB is not normally required. It is
important that the temperature is high enough to com-
plete crosslinking, but not too high because crosslinking
creates
stresses (which can only be controlled by
crosslinking density). Stresses also appear because of
thermal expansion coefﬁcient differences between the
substrate and resist.
Even though resists are soft materials and thin relative
to wafer thickness, visible wafer bowing can result from
resist thermal stresses.
Polymer structures of high aspect ratio in for example
SU-8 resist (Figure 18.1a) resemble DRIE structures in
appearance (Figure 21.9). Both technologies are capable
of 10:1 aspect ratios easily, 40:1 ratios with effort and
100:1 ratios have been reported in special cases. In both
SU-8 and DRIE the sidewall proﬁle is seldom 90◦, and
an acceptable sidewall angle is a question of engineering
judgment. For example, in mirror and interferometer
applications, or with parallel-plate capacitors, perfect
verticality is desired, while in ﬂuidics or mechanical
applications deviations can be tolerated to some extent.
The smoothness of resist sidewalls can be as low as
10 nm, which is better than that of DRIE sidewalls.
Multilayer
structures
can
be
made
by
repeated
exposure–bake–spin coat–expose–bake cycles, leaving
the development step till the very end. This is shown
in Figure 18.6 both schematically and in the SEM
micrograph. The structure is used in tissue engineering.
18.3.1 Thick resists as structural materials
There are many microﬂuidic applications for thick-resist
structures. The choice of microﬂuidic channel wall
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 201]
Polymer Microprocessing
209
unexposed resist
exposed resist
Figure 18.6
Three-level SU-8 structure: three spin coatings and three exposures with different masks, and one devel-
opment at the end. Reproduced from Mata et al. (2006) by permission of IOP
valve
spring
anchor
open direction
200 µm
pneumatic actuators
sacrifical copper layer
(6 µm)
imt
Figure 18.7
SU-8 microvalve (left); SU-8 pneumatic actuator (right). Reproduced from Seidemann et al. (2002), copy-
right © 2002 by permission of Elsevier
material is mostly about surface chemistry, surface charge
for electro-osmotic ﬂow, adsorption of analytes and con-
tact angle for wetting and capillarity. Transparency and
lack of autoﬂuoresence for optical detection, integration
of electrodes for conductivity detection and bondability
are also important.
Polymers are suitable for mechanical devices, too.
Spring constants can be smaller by making long, slender
beams, and this is certainly done in MEMS, but the
alternative is to use softer materials, like polymers (see
Equation 29.2). In Figure 18.7 mechanical elements
made of SU-8 epoxy polymer are shown for a passive
microﬂuidic valve and pneumatic actuators. The SU-8
structures are free to move because a copper thin ﬁlm
underneath the polymer has been etched away.
18.4 Molding Techniques
18.4.1 Replica molding in PDMS
Molding of PDMS is easy and therefore widely used. A
simple SU-8 process can be used as a mold master. PDMS
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 202]
210
Introduction to Microfabrication
prepolymer is mixed with a crosslinking agent (e.g., in a
10:1 ratio) and degassed. It is poured over the mold master
and degassed again to ensure bubble removal. Curing can
be anything from 65 ◦C for 10 hours to 80 ◦C for 2 hours,
depending on process details. PDMS will demold easily
because of its inertness and ﬂexibility (it is an elastomer).
PDMS devices are not only easy to fabricate, but also
good for aqueous ﬂuids; they are optically transparent
down to 250 nm and mechanically ﬂexible. A simple
PDMS device is shown in Figure 18.8. The PDMS
piece is bonded to a ﬂat glass wafer, forming a ﬂuidic
actuator/valve. However, because the PDMS CTE is
about 300 ppm/◦C, PDMS is not suitable for applications
that require accurate pattern positioning.
One of the great advantages of PDMS is its self-
adhesiveness: a clean PDMS piece will adhere to a clean
surface spontaneously, and this bond is strong enough
for many applications. It is great for R&D but long-term
stability of the bond is not good. If a stronger bond is
substrate wafer
 
input piston
output piston
y-deflection
PDMS
membrane
x-deflection
Figure 18.8
PDMS vertical input piston induces lateral
deformation in output piston, closing a microchannel.
Adapted from Lee et al. (2007)
Figure 18.9
Optoﬂuidic chip: SU-8 master and its PDMS
cast replica. Microlenses focus light onto a microﬂuidic
channel. Adapted from Seo and Lee (2004)
needed, oxygen plasma activation of PDMS can be used
(more on polymer bonding later in this chapter).
An optoﬂuidic chip is shown in Figure 18.9: mi-
crolenses focus light onto the microﬂuidic channel, for
improved detection. The whole device is made of PDMS
and bonded to a planar glass wafer. The lenses come
“free of charge”: they are formed in the same molding
process as the channels.
More complex mold masters enable more complex
shapes. Figure 18.10 shows a hemispherical SU-8 mold
master. It is made by standard lithography, but after
development SU-8 is baked above its glass transition
2nd substrate
1st substrate
 
2nd substrate
 
PDMS 
3rd substrate  
Resist master
formed in the first
resist by flow above
Tg
Stamping 2nd resist
by hemispherical 1st
resist master
PDMS casting into
2nd resist mould,
and bonding to 3rd
substrate
Detachment from
mould, PDMS lens
ready
PDMS
3rd substrate
Figure 18.10
PDMS microlenses by resist ﬂow, stamping
and transfer bonding. Adapted from Chen et al. (2005)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 203]
Polymer Microprocessing
211
PDMS 
PDMS
control channel
active channel
PDMS
3rd substrate 
1st master 
2nd master 
Figure 18.11
Microﬂuidic chip with three PDMS layers:
pneumatic pressure in control channel deforms the thin
PDMS membrane, closing the active liquid channel. Flu-
idic inlets are made by piercing. Adapted from Lin and Su
(2008)
temperature, which will make is ﬂow. Figure 18.11 shows
a ﬂuidic system: two SU-8 masters are used, one with
the standard SU-8 process and the other by resist ﬂow.
Three PDMS steps are required: two casting steps and
one spinning step for thin PDMS membrane formation.
The actuator channel does not need to close completely,
but the analyte channel with its hemispherical shape will
be fully closed.
18.4.2 Micromolding in capillaries (MIMIC)
Micromolding in capillaries takes advantage of microfab-
ricated mold masters: liquid precursor ﬁlls microﬂudic
channels in the master by capillary forces. The precursor
is then cured, and the master is removed. This method is
applicable to passive structures (like Figure 18.12) and
active polymer transistor components alike. Not only
polymers but other materials that can be made soluble can
be processed, for example nanoparticles in suspension,
metal powders, etc. Micromolding is also applicable to
multiple layer thicknesses in a single molding step.
18.4.3 Injection molding
Injection molding set-up is pictured in Figure 18.13. In-
jection molding is applied for micrometer dimensions in
mass manufacturing: molten plastic is injected into a mold
insert to fabricate CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray discs (with
1, 0.6 and 0.3 μm feature sizes, respectively). However,
Figure 18.12
Polyurethane net by micromolding in capil-
laries. Reproduced from Kim et al. (1996), copyright 1996
American Chemical Society
Figure 18.13
Injection molding: high-pressure injection
of molten polymer into a mold
from a general microfabrication point of view, these are
easy applications because aspect ratios are about 0.2 only,
pattern density is quite uniform and pattern sizes are
quite similar. Because the molds are expensive (they have
to tolerate molten polymers, often around 300 ◦C), long
production series are compulsory to bring the cost down.
The main parameters of injection molding are the
temperature of the injected polymer, mold temperature,
injection speed and pressure, and holding time and pres-
sure. Micro injection molding requires some modiﬁcations
relative to large-scale systems: for instance, materials
usage needs to be rethought, otherwise only a fraction
of polymer ends up in the ﬁnished parts. In mold fab-
rication technologies, materials, dimensions and surface
roughness need to be assessed. Polymer properties must
be understood, for example viscosity changes rapidly in
micromolds because the large surface-to-volume ratio
leads to rapid cooling of the polymer melt.
Compared to all other replication methods, injection
molding is the fastest: it takes only a few seconds per
piece. Injection molding is used in microﬂuidics for
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 204]
212
Introduction to Microfabrication
disposable devices where cost minimization is essential,
but some very complex injection-molded microﬂuidics
applications exist, too.
18.5 Hot Embossing
Hot embossing involves pressing a master against a
polymer at a temperature around Tf, typically 50–100 ◦C
above the polymer glass transition temperature Tg, see
Figure 18.14. Popular hot embossing polymer PMMA has
Tg ∼100 ◦C and polycarbonate (PC) has Tg ∼150 ◦C.
The embossing force is on the order of 100–1000 kPa
and hold time is on the order of minutes. De-embossing
takes place after cooling below the glass transition
temperature, therefore the embossed shape is retained.
In theory the features are true replicas of the master,
and any size patterns can be made, from nanometer
size to macroscopic (but nanometer master fabrication
is very expensive !). Note that in order to emboss large
areas, uniform pressure needs to be applied. In addition
to precision mechanics, a soft compliance layer helps
Figure 18.14.
The hot embossing process is visualized in the time–
temperature–pressure graph in Figure 18.15. The process
starts by heating the wafer (and the master) to T2, which
is for example 80 ◦C above the polymer Tg. Pressure of
100–1000 kPa is then applied to press the master against
the softened polymer. Polymer will ﬂow and ﬁll the cavi-
ties in the master, forming an inverse replica of the master.
After a few minutes the temperature is ramped down, and
vacuum pumping 
force press
master
substrate
polymer
soft compliance layer
heater
Figure 18.14
Thermal imprinter/hot embossing tool: soft
compliance layer assures conformal large-area contact be-
tween master and substrate
temperature
pressure
time
T2
Tg
T1
p1
Figure 18.15
Pressure–temperature diagram of hot em-
bossing: heat to T2
(50–100 ◦C > Tg) apply pressure
(100–1000 kPa), cool down to T1 (e.g., 20 ◦C below Tg),
and remove pressure
below Tg (at T1, which is 80 ◦C for PMMA) force is re-
moved. The polymer has solidiﬁed into the form of the
master, and because the temperature is now below Tg, it
will retain its shape upon de-embossing.
Hot
embossing
has
three
major
issues:
ﬁlling
of structures by polymer, reproduction ﬁdelity and
de-embossing. Polymeric materials have CTEs on the
order of 50–100 ppm/◦C, whereas silicon has a CTE of
2.6 ppm/◦C and nickel, a typical electroplated master
material, 13 ppm/◦C. Thermal cycling is mandatory in
hot embossing but it should be minimized around Tg to
avoid thermal mismatch cracking.
Hot embossing results in microparts with low internal
stresses because stresses have time to relax in the slow
process. Its slowness is compensated in R&D by the sim-
plicity of the experimental set-up: changing masters and
materials is quick and easy, and the various technologies
for master fabrication enable cheap masters. Hot emboss-
ing is applicable to large areas, with 200 mm wafer size
embossing tools available. The slowness is inherent in hot
embossing because the polymer and master are heated by
conduction, and heating is an integral part of the process
and not easily decoupled from other process parameters.
The thickness of hot embossed structures can be
varied enormously, from nanometers to millimeters
(Figure
18.16).
There
is
no
resolution
limit,
and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 205]
Polymer Microprocessing
213
Figure 18.16
An embossed optical bench 400 μm high.
Courtesy Mathias Worgull, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe
embossing can replicate structures down to 10 nm size,
making the master become the limiting factor. Aspect
ratios of embossed structures can be as high as 20:1
and up to 50:1 when special release coatings have been
applied. Making needle-like structures by embossing is
difﬁcult, however, because ﬁlling such long needles by
polymer is often inadequate.
18.6 Nanoimprint Lithography
Nanoimprint lithography (NIL) is hot embossing applied
to nanofabrication. The smallest imprinted features have
been 5 nm wide. This indicates that any nanoscopic irreg-
ularities in hot embossing masters will be replicated. This
was in fact observed long ago, but NIL only emerged in
the late 1990s. In lithography application, the removal of
a residual layer at the bottom of features (Figure 1.9) be-
comes a necessity, and the thickness contrast hr/hf must
be high enough in order to reasonably make patterns.
At the macroscopic level the NIL process depends
critically on stamp contact with the substrate. Using
a soft compliance layer between the stamp and the
upper platen, small deviations from planarity can be
compensated. Thermal NIL works on 200 mm wafers.
On a microscopic level air evacuation from cavities
is important, and a vacuum can help in this. The
squeeze ﬂow of polymer is obviously very important.
Polymer viscosities are on the order of 103–107 Pa-s and
imprinting pressures around 1000 N/cm2. Temperature
and pressure can be traded for each other, and low
pressure can be compensated by longer process time.
But as discussed above, structure size affects the time
requirement, and therefore time is not a completely
free variable.
NIL is a very simple process for making nanostructures:
if master fabrication can be subcontracted, the NIL equip-
ment price is only a fraction of the optical lithography tool
capable of identical linewidths: from $100 000 for a NIL
lab system, to $1–3 million for an advanced system. There
is a twist, however: in optical lithography tools alignment
is a standard feature, while the cheaper NIL systems offer
no alignment or only rudimentary alignment. And if align-
ment accuracy is 500 nm and resolution 50 nm, most the
high-resolution capability is left unused. But if a single
layer pattern is needed, imprint lithography is very cost
effective. Hard disks have been suggested as an applica-
tion and optical devices like gratings can also be done
without alignment.
18.6.1 Imprinting theory
An idealized description of the embossing/imprinting pro-
cess is shown in Figure 18.17. A downward force F
presses the stamp against a polymer with viscosity η.
Polymer height h changes over time as h(t). Stefan’s law,
Equation 18.1, governs the ﬂow of polymer between solid
parallel plates. That is,
F = 3πR4
2h(t)3
dh
dt η
(18.1)
Interpretation of Stefan’s equation tells us that achiev-
ing a thin residual layer is exceedingly difﬁcult because
h0
F
2R
v
h(t)
Figure 18.17
Factors contributing to Stefan’s law: viscos-
ity, force, stamp protrusion size, residual thickness
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 206]
214
Introduction to Microfabrication
of the 1/h3 term. This is a critical difference between tra-
ditional hot embossing and NIL is in layer thicknesses.
In embossing the polymer sheet is for example 2 mm
thick, and 50 μm structures are embossed. Residual thick-
ness is 1950 μm. In NIL original polymer thickness is for
example 300 nm and target residual thickness 50 nm. In
Stefan’s equation h is large and dh/dt is small.
Another observation is that in fact it is easier to make
small structures than large ones, because the required
force increases as R4. Low viscosity is beneﬁcial be-
cause then lower force can be used, therefore elevated
temperature is practically always used, even though cold
embossing does exist. A further point to note is that struc-
ture ﬁlling is nonlinear in time: initially polymer ﬂow
will ﬁll the cavities in the master fast, but ﬁlling becomes
slower as time goes on.
A
fundamental
principle
of
mass
conservation
illustrates why the imprinting of uneven areal density
structures is difﬁcult. In Equation 18.2 mass conservation
is used to calculate ﬁnal heights. The volume of polymer
is unchanged (nothing disappears during imprinting)
and it is only surface heights that change. The situation
is pictured in Figure 18.18. The residual thickness hf
depends on the areal density (A0/Af) of patterns:
A0h0 = Afhf + (A0 −Af)he
(18.2)
18.6.2 Practical NIL
Several non-idealities make NIL more difﬁcult. Non-
uniform pattern height results when a rigid stamp (or low
imprint pressure) does not allow large patterns to form,
while nanostructures are rapidly ﬁlled. A submicrometer
grating is imprinted in a fraction of a second, while large
areas can take minutes. In the case of high imprinting
force the stamp may bend and the smaller features
penetrate deeper into the polymer, resulting in thicker
h0
he
hf
Area A0
Area
Af
Figure 18.18
Mass is conserved in imprinting, and resid-
ual thickness hf and ﬁnal height he can be calculated once
the embossed area is known
residual layers for the large structures. Incomplete
nanopattern ﬁlling can also result because of the volume
constancy requirement: large and small areas side by
side both affect pattern height.
There are many variants of NIL. In UV-NIL, photoac-
tive polymer is used. In one version liquid photopolymer
is used, and the process is basically a room temperature
process. The structure is cured by UV light (Figure 18.19).
Compared to thermal imprint, optical/UV-NIL has cer-
tain strong points: UV curing can be much faster than
thermal ramps, an obvious productivity feature. And if
temperature ramps can be eliminated, polymer shrink-
age problems can also be minimized. On the other hand,
thermal NIL masters can be made of silicon, nickel or
practically anything. Optical methods obviously require
transparent masters, which limits the choices. For accurate
Figure 18.19
UV-NIL: stamping of photopolymer with a transparent master stamp and curing by UV exposure. Repro-
duced from Aura et al. (2008) by permission of Elsevier
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 207]
Polymer Microprocessing
215
nanofabrication fused silica masters are used. In the mi-
crometer range PDMS is an excellent master material.
There are also equipment issues: optical paths have to be
designed, and if both heat and light are needed, the design
becomes even more difﬁcult.
Thermal NIL can be done on 200 mm wafers (but
the writing time and cost of a 200 mm stamp with
nanostructures are astronomical), therefore many imprint
methods “expose” smaller areas. This is similar to
step-and-repeat optical lithography (Figure 10.2): stamp
size is for example 25 × 25 mm, and multiple stampings
are needed to ﬁll the wafer. The method is sometimes
called step-and-stamp, and as S-FIL, for step-and-ﬂash
imprint lithography, in the case of UV-NIL.
18.7 Masters for Replication
Masters and molds can be made by a number of technolo-
gies:
• photolithography of SU-8
• photolithography and silicon etching
• photolithography and metal electroplating
• discharge machining
• laser machining
• mechanical milling
• natural objects.
Photoresists are common mold masters, especially SU-8,
which is often used as a master for PDMS casting. The
beneﬁts of SU-8 are in the simplicity of making mas-
ters in various sizes, both laterally and in the z-direction,
from micrometers to millimeters. Additionally, since SU-
8 is a polymer, its thermal expansion is similar to other
polymers, which reduces thermal stresses.
Silicon is an excellent master mold material in many
cases: its machining accuracy is good, the surface ﬁnish
is good (especially in wet etching) and with DRIE practi-
cally any shape can be made. Wet etching is more limited
in shapes, but the 54.7◦angle is good for detachment, see
Figure 18.20.
Thomas Alva Edison used sputtered gold seed layer,
wax mask and gold electroplating to fabricate phonograph
masters. The technology entered production in 1901 and
it could replicate 125 μm pitch (200 grooves/inch) struc-
tures 25 μm thick into phonograph records. Electroplating
is still a major method for mold master fabrication, with
nickel as the metal of choice. In microﬂuidic applica-
tions the dimensions are similar to Edison’s, and in fact
traditional machine tools can be used to fabricate the mas-
ters, but often the surface ﬁnish is too rough and pattern
complexity makes machining throughput low, though it is
a useful method for making a few test devices.
Figure 18.20
Mold master should have positive slope for
easy detachment; negative (retrograde) proﬁle does not al-
low detachment
An important issue in all replication methods is the
detachment (also known as de-embossing or release). In
fact, it is often equal in importance to replication itself.
There are a number of requirements that are essential and
beneﬁcial. First of all, the master must have positively
sloped walls (Figure 18.20). Release is not possible with
retrograde walls.
Another
requirement
is
surface
smoothness:
the
smoother the surface, the easier the release. Micro-
fabricated master molds are very smooth, especially
photoresist mold (and metal mold made using resist
molds) and anisotropically wet etched silicon molds.
Plasma etched molds are somewhat rougher. Milled and
machined molds are clearly much rougher.
Chemical bond formation between master and replica
should be avoided. This is especially important in molding
processes where monomers are chemically reactive, not
just physically ﬂowing. Diamond is a good choice for
a mold because of its inertness and abrasion resistance.
Another way is to deposit a sacriﬁcial layer on the mold
master, and release the structures by etching this sacriﬁcial
layer away.
Alternatively, the mold can be coated by low-surface-
energy material. Teﬂon-like ﬁlms and ﬂuorinated SAMs
are obvious candidates, because of their extremely low
friction. Alternatively, the surface of the polymer can be
treated with ﬂuoropolymer and then stamped.
Often polymers can be used as masters and molds for
other polymers. PDMS has been used to emboss poly-
carbonate, and PDMS is also an excellent transparent
material for UV embossing masters. Of course, thermal
and other limitations apply, but clearly the choices are
many. The polymer masters are soft, while the silicon
and metal masters are rigid. Depending on process details,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 208]
216
Introduction to Microfabrication
either property can be beneﬁcially utilized, for example a
soft master will conform and make intimate contact, al-
lowing large-area stamping which is not possible with a
rigid master unless the wafer and master are very ﬂat and
carefully leveled.
Molding can be continued to further generations: in-
stead of using the molded piece itself, it can be used as a
new mold. This process can be continued for many gener-
ations in certain applications before the quality of molded
pieces becomes unacceptable. However, each generation
results in a reverse polarity structure of its parent, so it is
necessary to decide beforehand which generation is going
to be used. If the master fabrication process is expensive,
as in X-ray LIGA, it is useful to have a slave master made
of the expensive original, and thus limit the costs.
Master fabrication can sometimes beneﬁt from exist-
ing structures: both butterﬂy wings and lotus leaves have
been used as masters for replication, the former for opti-
cal effects, the latter for superhydrophobicity. In order to
use the master repeatedly, it has to be transferred to some
more stable material, but there are many choices.
18.8 Processing on Polymers
Polymer etching is not often done because lithography,
imprinting and casting produce polymer microstructures
easily. Thermosets must sometimes be etched because
molding
is
not
possible.
Polymers
are
etched
by
oxygen-containing gases, with or without additional
gases, for example O2/CF4, or O2/Ar. Non-erodible
masks like aluminum and chromium are used in deep
etching. But as in silicon etching, achieving anisotropy is
difﬁcult because of the spontaneous chemical reactions.
In most cases the rates are limited to about 1 μm/min.
Wet etching is usually not an option for polymers. In
theory solvent etching could be done by suitable selection
of polymer and solvent. Sometimes NaOH etching is
done, not for patterning, but rather for surface treatment.
Polymers can be polished by CMP and this has been
used in the creation of thermal insulation: a deeply etched
cavity wafer is coated by BCB, which is planarized by
CMP. Devices are then processed on BCB. Thermal iso-
lation is often done by etching away the silicon wafer,
leaving only a thin membrane. This approach has prob-
lems with mechanical strength. BCB has a high operating
temperature, but at about 400 ◦C it is still low compared
to inorganic materials.
18.8.1 Deposition of polymers
The adhesion of polymers on thin ﬁlms and thin ﬁlms
on polymers is generally poor because polymers do not
readily form bonds. Adhesion then depends on mechanical
interlocking (surface roughness) and surface cleanliness.
Surface cleaning can be done prior to metal deposition
by many techniques, for example baking, wet treatment,
plasma treatment. These have the effect of removing con-
taminants and absorbed water vapor, and etching also
induces surface roughening, which is beneﬁcial for ad-
hesion. Use of adhesion promoter layers underneath the
main metal can be made as usual, for example titanium
or chromium. Evaporated ﬁlms have poor adhesion on
polymers, but sputtering fares somewhat better. Sputtered
atoms have kinetic energy and impinge on the polymer
surface, and some of them are implanted inside the poly-
mer, creating a mixed layer which holds the substrate and
ﬁlm together. If layer thickness is measured on a polymer
ﬁlm, the result will differ from an inorganic substrate, be-
cause some of the deposited atoms will ﬁnd their way
inside the polymer, due to both their kinetic energy and
polymer porosity.
Adhesion can be improved by nano- and microstruc-
turing the surfaces. Figure 18.21 shows one technique for
improved polymer adhesion. It utilizes an isotropic
etch proﬁle to create undercut structures which will
lock polymer structures, just as a retrograde proﬁle will
prevent molded piece detachment from the mold master
(Figure 18.20).
One technique to secure mechanical interlocking is to
cast polymer over T-shaped or mushroom-shaped metals
(Figure 18.22). Overplating (Figure 5.13) is performed
on a standard resist pattern. The T-shape of the plated
metal now securely keeps the cast PDMS in place, and the
structure tolerates further processing, in this case through-
wafer DRIE. The resulting membrane is ﬂexible due to
PDMS and can be magnetically actuated due to the metal-
lic coil structure. The standard approach does not work
well, even with the adhesion layer, because the large ther-
mal expansion of PDMS during resist baking will lead to
metal detachment.
Figure 18.21
Isotropically etched holes anchor the poly-
mer mechanically
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 209]
Polymer Microprocessing
217
PDMS casting
Seed metal, lithography
and electroplating 
Seed metal, lithography
and electroplating
Resist removal,
PDMS casting
Resist removal and
DRIE
DRIE
Figure 18.22
Flexible PDMS membrane for micropump.
Left, standard approach of metal plating on top of PDMS;
right, PDMS casting on overplated metal. Adapted from
Yin et al. (2007)
Resist spinning on polymers requires careful attention
to solvents used in resists. A reaction between polymer
and solvent can render the whole process unusable. There-
fore alternative methods like shadow masks are often used
(see Chapter 23) because neither lithography nor etching
is required. This is beneﬁcial because the typical 120 ◦C
temperature of resist baking can already result in thermal
stresses that will delaminate the metal from the polymer.
Thin-ﬁlm metals have higher resistivity than bulk ma-
terials, and thin-ﬁlm metals on polymers have even higher
resistivities than those on silicon or glass. On PMMA or
other fairly non-porous polymer metal, the resistivity can
be for example 10% or 100% higher than on reference
oxide, but on porous polymer like PDMS the resistivity
can be even 1000% higher than on oxide. Post-deposition
annealing for resistivity reduction is not an option with
most polymers.
In Figure 18.23 PDMS is used to make highly ﬂexible
antennas. The process uses aluminum as a sacriﬁcial layer,
copper as the antenna conductor and chromium as an ad-
hesion layer and barrier between the copper and oxide.
PDMS is spin coated on top and cured. Another PDMS
piece is then bonded on top of the ﬁrst PDMS, and TMAH
Cu
Cr
Al
Si wafer 
PDMS 
Final carrier wafer 
2nd
PDMS
bonding
Al sacrificial
layer etching
Bonding to
final carrier
Figure 18.23
Metallized ﬂexible PDMS antenna. Adapt-
ed from Tiercelin et al. (2006)
is used to etch aluminum. PDMS bonding to a copper car-
rier wafer ﬁnalizes the process. Unlike the process shown
in Figure 18.22, there are no process steps above room
temperature once PDMS has been cured, so the large CTE
of PDMS does not come into play.
PECVD ﬁlms can be deposited on polymers, tempera-
ture permitting. It is often possible to lower the deposition
temperature and get reasonable ﬁlm quality, even though
lower temperature invariably correlates with poorer ﬁlm
quality. ALD alumina (Al2O3) is usually deposited at
around 220 ◦C, but it can be done at 80 ◦C which en-
ables deposition on polymers. However, its properties are
different; for instance, it etches much faster in wet etching
than the standard ﬁlm.
18.9 Polymer Bonding
The basics of bonding were presented in Chapter 17.
In this chapter we will explore applications speciﬁc to
polymers. As in all bonding processes, a few universal re-
quirements apply: the surfaces to be bonded must be clean
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 210]
218
Introduction to Microfabrication
of particles, have proper bond-forming surface chemistry,
and the substrates must be ﬂat and smooth to ensure inti-
mate contact between the wafers to be bonded. Adequate
bond strength at the lowest possible temperature is de-
sired, and with polymers there is little room for annealing
for bond strength improvement.
Bond strengths of polymer–polymer bonds are typically
in the 1–10 MPa range, and differ greatly depending on
process details. The best results have been obtained for
COC solvent bonding, with over 30 MPa, which is ade-
quate for liquid chromatography chips.
18.9.1 Thermal bonding
The term thermal bonding is often used to describe a
process similar to fusion bonding or direct bonding in
silicon technology: two wafers of the same material are
bonded by application of elevated temperature. The termi-
nology is somewhat confusing: thermal bonding can also
refer to thermocompression bonding (where pressure is
an important element). Vacuum-assisted thermal bonding
is to be considered standard procedure in direct bond-
ing: most fusion bonding methods use some vacuum to
reduce gas bubbles between the wafers. At elevated tem-
peratures polymers may degrade due to reactions with
oxygen, therefore a vacuum is useful.
In polymer bonding the glass transition temperature
plays a critical role: above Tg the materials become
soft, which compensates some non-ﬂatness and non-
smoothness. In the case of two identical materials,
interface bond strength should be identical to material
bulk strength. Bonding identical polymers is easier than
dissimilar materials because thermal mismatch is elimi-
nated. One of the advantages of fusion bonding is that the
ﬁnal structure is made of a single material, and this is ben-
eﬁcial in microﬂuidics as all the walls of the system have
identical contact angle, surface charge and adsorption.
Most polymer bonding processes operate between
100 and 200 ◦C: for example, 95–165 ◦C for PMMA
(the values differ both because of experimental details
like pressure and because of polymer molecular weight
differences), 250 ◦C for BCB, 130–230 ◦C for parylene
(Tg = 90 ◦C, decomposition 290 ◦C), 160 ◦C for CYTOP
ﬂuoropolymer and around 200 ◦C for polyimides. Typical
bonding times are a few hours. This is rather slow
and alternative methods are often motivated by faster
bonding processes. Pressures of 500–1000 N are usual.
Optimizing
thermal
bonding
processes
is
dif-
ﬁcult:
differences
between
polymers
mean
that
temperature–pressure relations have to be found for
each polymer. Bonding is also dependent on chip
design: bonding shallow, wide channels is much more
critical to roof sagging than bonding narrow, deep
channels. A general purpose process has to be able to
do both simultaneously, or else designers must be given
restrictions on allowed structures.
18.9.2 Bonding by surface treatments
PDMS elastomer is soft and it is easy to achieve intimate
contact. This is one reason for its adhesiveness. But be-
cause the PDMS surface is mostly methyl groups, they
are not very reactive, and the bond is easily detached.
This reversibility is advantageous sometimes, but if more
permanent bonds are needed, oxygen plasma treatment of
PDMS will turn some of the methyl groups to hydroxyl
groups (–OH), which are much more reactive (Figure
12.6). Oxygen plasma-treated PDMS can be bonded to
another PDMS piece permanently, and also to glass or
oxide because their surfaces are also hydroxyl terminated.
The bond strengths are on the order of 0.5 MPa, which is
not much, but adequate for many applications. Contact
angle measurement after plasma treatment can be used
as a quick monitoring method: small contact angles, or
hydrophilic surfaces, are essential to strong bonds.
One technique to ensure intimate contact between bod-
ing surfaces is to make them soft by solvent treatment.
The solvent should be selected to match the polymer,
and properly selected solvent will soften only the very
top layer of polymer, for example 50 nm in the case of
DMSO and PMMA. This soft layer is sufﬁcient for poly-
mer chains to become mobile and make contact. A thicker
solvated layer is in fact detrimental: softened polymer
ﬂow will clog microchannels. UV treatment can also be
used to modify surface chemistry by breaking bonds (and
by cleaning the surface). It can even be that Tg of the sur-
face layer is lowered so much that bonding can be carried
out below bulk Tg.
18.9.3 Localized bonding
Laser welding of polymers is possible but it must be ap-
plied to bond dissimilar wafers: the top wafer has to be
transparent, but the bottom wafer has to be absorbing.
Laser bonding beneﬁts include minimized thermal distor-
tions because the heating is very local.
Ultrasonics heats up the polymer pieces, and softening
will help make a good contact between the wafers.
The best results are obtained if there are structures
designed to guide ultrasonic energy, which makes the
method sensitive to chip design. Microwave welding
relies on the heating of metal thin ﬁlms, which will then
soften the polymers, leading to bonding. The obvious
drawback is the need to deposit and pattern metallizations
on polymers.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 211]
Polymer Microprocessing
219
18.9.4 Adhesive bonding
The advantage of adhesive bonding is its universality:
any two wafers can be joined together by an adhesive,
irrespective of their surface chemistries, thermal expan-
sion coefﬁcients or other properties. Bond strengths in
epoxy-based adhesive bonding can reach 20 MPa which
is much higher than most polymer–polymer direct or
thermal bonding methods. However, the foreign material
between the wafers is sometimes undesirable, and direct
bonding must then be used. For example, the adhesive
may interact with the analytes in microﬂudic systems.
Thermal stability of adhesive bonds is limited, and their
long-term behavior is poorly known.
Adhesives work by many different mechanisms, and
not all of them are suitable for microsystems. Some ad-
hesives solidify by drying, releasing gases which will be
trapped at the bonding interface (unless one or both of the
wafers are permeable to gases). Thermoplastic adhesives
are applied hot, and are soft and make good contact. They
solidify upon cooling, forming bonds, and are very general
purpose adhesives. Epoxies are thermosets that experience
hardening either by UV light or by heating. UV adhesives
like SU-8 are good because the bonding temperature is
low, but there is the limitation that one of the wafers has
to be transparent. BCB is a thermoset polymer which can
be cured by heating (to about 200–300 ◦C).
Thermoplastic adhesives tolerate a maximum of 300 ◦C,
while some thermoset adhesives can tolerate even 450 ◦C.
They are generally also more resistant to chemicals.
In many applications it is advantageous to have all the
walls of a ﬂuidic channel made of one material only. A
simple full wafer, single photomask process for full SU-
8 channels is illustrated in Figure 18.24 (left). The ﬁrst
layer, blanket exposed, serves as the ﬂoor; the second
layer, exposed through a mask, deﬁnes the walls; and the
third layer, on a Pyrex wafer, serves as the roof. After
joining the wafers, the SU-8 on Pyrex is exposed through
the Pyrex wafer to bond it to cured SU-8.
However, because of the large thermal expansion mis-
match between SU-8 and silicon and glass, large SU-8
structures are prone to cracking. Therefore it is advisable
to break up large SU-8 areas into smaller areas. As shown
in Figure 18.24 (right), two photmasks are needed in this
version. The bottom SU-8 is exposed through mask #1
but not developed. The second SU-8 is spin coated and
exposed with the second photomask. Both layers are then
developed. The third layer is spin coated on top of the
Pyrex wafer as before.
In a similar fashion, three layers of SU-8 have been
used to fabricate an electrospray nozzle (Figure 18.25).
Additionally, the structure has been released from the sup-
porting glass wafer by HF etching.
Figure 18.24
SU-8 microﬂuidic channels by SU-8 ad-
hesive bonding: left, simple channel by one-photomask
process; right, two-photomask process with stress relief
auxiliary channels. Adapted from Tuomikoski et al. (2005)
Figure 18.25
Electrospray tip made of three-layer SU-8:
after two layers (left); and after bonding (right). Reproduced
from Tuomikoski et al. (2005) by permission of Wiley-
VCH
Another beneﬁt of adhesive bonding is the ease of creat-
ing patterns: either photoactive epoxy like SU-8 is deﬁned
by lithography, or non-photoactive glue is patterned by
screen printing. Adhesive bonding can create overhang-
ing structures which cannot be made by lithography or
imprinting processes.
The drawback of adhesive bonding is that the “glue”
must usually be ﬂowable, and there is the danger that it
will ﬂow into microchannels and cavities already made.
This can be minimized by working with thinner glues,
but then the advantage of adhesive bonding starts to
disappear: thick adhesive compensates wafer non-ﬂatness,
but with thin adhesive the usual ﬂatness requirement re-
emerges. Thin adhesive is also less forgiving of particle
contamination. Dry resists (laminates) can be used to close
structures, as will be discussed at the end of this chapter.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 212]
220
Introduction to Microfabrication
photomask
PET foil
unexposed SU-8
exposed SU-8
metal electrodes
Figure 18.26
Microﬂuidic
channel
with
electrodes,
lithography with auxiliary carrier ﬁlm: SU-8 on PET foil,
which is detached after SU-8 exposure. Adapted from
Abgrall et al. (2006)
18.10 Polymer Devices
The rest of this chapter discusses examples of polymer
microdevices. Various aspects include the interaction of
materials properties with fabrication and operation, and a
comparison of different techniques and materials.
Dry ﬁlm resists are useful because of their simplic-
ity and ability to cross trenches (recall Figure 9.8). The
drawback is poor resolution: dry resists are suitable for
structures in the tens of micrometers range and larger.
Sometimes standard resist and an auxiliary ﬁlm can serve
the same purpose, as shown in Figure 18.26: resist is spin
coated on PET foil for example, and this stack is then in-
verted on top of the structure. Exposure through the PET
ﬁlm hardens the resist, and PET ﬁlm is peeled off.
The Braille actuator shown in Figure 18.27 uses three
layers of PDMS. It is very similar to the microvalve
shown in Figure 18.11: both devices use pneumatic pres-
sure to move the PDMS membrane up and down.
An in-plane ﬂuidic valve (diode) has also been made of
PDMS (Figure 18.28). A ﬂap valve by design, the large
vertical PDMS ﬂap deﬂects to the right, but is prevented
from deﬂecting to the left, creating a ﬂuidic diode.
PDMS permeability to oxygen is a beneﬁt in cell
growth chambers, but in many applications this per-
meability is a drawback: drug stability is compromised
if oxygen permeates through the device and makes
contact with the drug, and in PCR DNA ampliﬁcation
at 95 ◦C operating temperature water will be vaporized
and liquid volume will decrease over time. Of course
other materials can be used instead of PDMS, or else
additional layers can be added to the structure: for
example, in Figure 18.29 a low-permeability Mylar ﬁlm
is bonded to PDMS to reduce vapor losses.
1. Invert
2. Bond to glass
3. Peel film
1. Pour PDMS
2. Spin Coat
3. Partial Cure
1. Invert
2. Align & Bond
3. Peel
1. Align & Bond
2. Peel film
Silanization
Glass
Glass
Glass
Curve
Invert
Plastic
Film
Partially
cured
PDMS
Micro Braille Display
PDMS
Glass
Pressure
Figure 18.27
Fabrication steps of a Braille actuator: bonding of three PDMS pieces. Reproduced from Moraes et al.
(2009) by permission of IOP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 213]
Polymer Microprocessing
221
Left Channel
Right Channel
Right Channel
Flap
Flow Direction
Left Channel
Flow Direction
Top View
Top View
Side View
Side View
Left Channel
Right Channel
Flap
Flap
Right Channel
Left Channel
Flap
Figure 18.28
PDMS ﬂuidic diode: left-to-right ﬂow is allowed, right-to-left ﬂow is blocked. Adapted from Adams et al.
(2005)
Liquid drug
SU-8
Silicon wafer
(a)
Oxygen plasma
(d)
Mylar film
(f)
(c)
PDMS
KRATON layer
Osmotic actuator (e)
(b)
SU-8 (reservoir)
Oxygen plasma
Silicon substrate
Delivery channel
SU-8
Drug reservoir
Figure 18.29
Drug delivery device: SU-8 mold for PDMS casting, Mylar vapor barrier. Reproduced from Su et al.
(2002), copyright 2002, by permission of IEEE
low Tg. high CTE, thermal Insulation
Young's modulus in GPa range, tenalis strength in 10's MPa range
Variable add/base and solvent resistance, high water absorption
Thermal
Mechanical
Chemical
Optical
Lithography
Processing
Moulding
Thermal
Bonding
Solvent
Adhesiva
thermal N/L
hot embossing
Injection moulding
Moulding in capillaries
Replica moulding
UV-N/L
Embossing/imprinting
thick negative resists
positive resists <100 µm
retractive index, transparency, autotfluorescence
Properties
Polymers
Microstructures
Passive Sieves, reservoirs, mirrors, lenses, scaffolds, nozzles
Active
Applications
membranes, valves pumps
chemical analysis
Fluidics
Optics
RF-MEMS
Tissue engineering
drug delivery
DNA processing
Chemical structure
long chains of repeating units
MWs 10 000 to 100 00
thermoplasts vs, thermosets
amorphous vs, semicrystalline
photoactive vs, non-photoactive
hydrophobic surfaces
Figure 18.30
Polymer microprocessing and devices
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 214]
222
Introduction to Microfabrication
18.11 Polymer Overview
Polymers are a vast group of materials, with widely dif-
ferent chemical structures, physical properties, process-
ing methods and device applications. The mind map of
Figure 18.30 lists some important aspects of polymers for
microfabrication.
18.12 Exercises
1. If SU-8 structures 50 μm thick need to be exposed,
what is the smallest feature size that can be fabri-
cated?
2. What degree of positional repeatability can be
achieved in stamping if the polymer stamp CTE is
60 ppm/◦C and the cleanroom temperature control is
±1 ◦C?
3. Design a fabrication process for the SU-8 microvalve
of Figure 18.7.
4. How can you make hemispherical microlenses by hot
embossing?
5. Draw a time–height plot to show how feature ﬁlling
evolves in imprinting/embossing: (a) for submicrom-
eter features; (b) for 20 μm features.
6. What ratios of original NIL resist height to residual
thickness are feasible?
7. Calculate silicon wafer bow due to stress from an
SU-8 layer 200 μm thick.
8. Explain the fabrication process of the ﬂuidic diode of
Figure 18.28.
9. Design a fabrication process for the three-layer
PDMS valve shown below.
10. Invent a process for making superhydrophobic sur-
faces by NIL using real lotus leaves as a starting
point.
11. Explain step by step the fabrication of an SU-8 chan-
nel with electrodes as in Figure 18.26.
References and Related Reading
Abgrall, P. et al. (2006) Novel fabrication method of ﬂexible
and monolithic 3D microﬂuidic structures using lamination
of SU-8 ﬁlms, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 16, 113–121.
Adams,
M.L.
et al.
(2005)
Polydimethylsiloxane
based
microﬂuidic diode, J. Micromech. Microeng., 15, 1517–
1521.
Aura, S. et al. (2008) Novel hybrid material for microﬂuidic
devices, Sens. Actuators, B132, 397–403.
Beck, M. et al. (2002) Improving stamps for 10 nm level wafer
scale nanoimprint lithography, Microelectron. Eng., 61–62,
441–448.
Becker, H. and C. G¨artner (2008) Polymer microfabrication
technologies for microﬂuidic systems, Anal. Bioanal. Chem.,
390, 89–111.
Chen, K.-S., K. Lin and F.-H. Ko (2005) Fabrication of 3D
polymer microstructures using electron beam lithography
and nanoimprinting technologies, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
15, 1894–1903.
del Campo, A. and C. Greiner (2007) SU-8: a photoresist
for high-aspect-ratio and 3D submicron lithography, J. Mi-
cromech. Microeng., 17, R81–R95.
Dixit, P. et al. (2007) Fabrication and characterization of ﬁne
pitch on-chip copper interconnects for advanced wafer level
packaging by a high aspect ratio through AZ9260 resist elec-
troplating, J. Micromech. Microeng., 17, 1078–1086.
Giboz, J., T. Copponnex and P. Mele (2007) Microinjection
molding of thermoplastic polymers: a review, J. Micromech.
Microeng., 17, R96–R109.
Guo, J.L. (2007) Nanoimprint lithography: methods and mate-
rial requirements, Adv. Mater., 19, 495–513.
Haas, K.-H. (2004): Hybrid Inorganic-organic polymers based
on organically modiﬁed Si-alkoxides, Adv.Eng.Mater. pp.
571–582
Heckele, M. and W.K. Schomburg (2004) Review on micro
molding of thermoplastic polymers, J. Micromech. Micro-
eng., 14, R1–R14.
Kang, W.-J. et al. (2006) Novel exposure methods based on
reﬂection and refraction effects in the ﬁeld of SU-8 lithog-
raphy, J. Micromech. Microeng., 16, 821–831.
Kim, E., Y. Xia and G.M. Whitesides (1996) Micromolding in
capillaries: applications in materials science, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 118, 5722–5731.
Koukharenko, E. et al. (2005) A comparative study of different
thick photoresists for MEMS applications, J. Mater. Sci.:
Mater. Electron., 16, 741–747.
Kudo, H. et al. (2006) A ﬂexible and wearable glucose sensor
based on functional polymers with Soft-MEMS techniques,
Biosens. Bioelectron., 22, 558–562.
Lee, D.-W. and Y.-S. Choi (2008) A novel pressure sensor
with a PDMS diaphragm, Microelectron. Eng., 85, 1054–
1058.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 215]
Polymer Microprocessing
223
Lee, S.J. et al. (2007) Characterization of laterally deformable
elastomer membranes for microﬂuidics, J. Micromech. Mi-
croeng., 17, 843.
Lin, B.-C. and Y.-C. Su (2008) On-demand liquid-in-liquid
droplet metering and fusion utilizing pneumatically actuated
membrane valves, J. Micromech. Microeng., 18, 115005.
Loechel, B. (2000) Thick-layer resists for surface microma-
chining, J. Micromech. Microeng., 10, 108.
Luharuka,
R.
et al.
(2006)
Improved
manufacturability
and characterization of a corrugated Parylene diaphragm
pressure transducer, J. Micromech. Microeng., 16, 1468–
1474.
Mata, A., A.J. Fleischman and S. Roy (2006) Fabrication of
multi-layer SU-8 microstructures, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
16, 276–284.
Meng, E., P.-Y. Li and Y.-C. Tai (2008) Plasma removal of
Parylene C, J. Micromech. Microeng., 18, 045004.
Moraes, C. et al. (2009) Solving the shrinkage-induced PDMS
alignment registration issue in multilayer soft lithography, J.
Microelectromech. Syst., 19, 065015.
Prakash, A.R. et al. (2006) Small volume PCR in PDMS
biochips with integrated ﬂuid control and vapour barrier,
Sens. Actuators, B113, 398–409.
Pranov, H. et al. (2006) On the injection molding of nanos-
tructured polymer surfaces, Polym. Eng. Sci., 46, 160–171.
Samel, B., M.K. Chowdhury and G. Stemme (2007) The fab-
rication of microﬂuidic structures by means of full-wafer
adhesive bonding using a poly(dimethylsiloxane) catalyst, J.
Micromech. Microeng., 17, 1710–1714.
Schift, H. (2008) Nanoimprint lithography: an old story in mod-
ern times? A review, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B26, 458–480.
Seidemann, V., S. B¨uteﬁsch and S. B¨uttgenbach (2002) Fabri-
cation and investigation of in-plane compliant SU8 structures
for MEMS and their application to micro valves and micro
grippers, Sens. Actuators, A97–98, 457–461.
Seo, J. and L.P. Lee (2004) Disposable integrated microﬂuidics
with self-aligned planar microlenses, Sens. Actuators, B99,
615–622.
Stephan, K. et al. (2007) Fast prototyping using a dry ﬁlm
photoresist: microfabrication of soft-lithography masters
for microﬂuidic structures, J. Micromech. Microeng., 17,
N69–N74.
Su, Y.-C., L. Lin and A.P. Pisano (2002) A water-powered
osmotic microactuator, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 11, 736.
Sun, Y. and Y.C. Kwok (2006) Polymeric microﬂuidic system
for DNA analysis: a review, Anal. Chim. Acta, 556, 80–96.
Tiercelin, N. et al. (2006) Polydimethylsiloxane membranes
for millimeter-wave planar ultra ﬂexible antennas, J. Mi-
cromech. Microeng., 16, 2389–2395.
Tsao, C.-W. and D.L. DeVoe (2009) Bonding of thermoplastic
polymer microﬂuidics, Microﬂuid Nanoﬂuid, 6, 1–16.
Tuomikoski, S. and S. Franssila (2005) Free-standing SU-8
microﬂuidic chips by adhesive bonding and release etching,
Sens. Actuators, A120, 408–415.
Tuomikoski, S. et al. (2005) Fabrication of enclosed SU-8 tips
for electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry, Electrophore-
sis, 26, 4691–4702.
Worgull, M. et al. (2006) Modeling and optimization of the hot
embossing process for micro- and nanocomponent fabrica-
tion, J. Microlithogr. Microfabr. Microsyst., 5, 011005.
Yin, H.-L. et al. (2007) A novel electromagnetic elastomer
membrane actuator with a semi-embedded coil, Sens. Ac-
tuators, A139, 194–202.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 216]
19
Glass Microprocessing
The term glass is used as a shorthand for many different
materials, but the common silicate glasses are amorphous
silica with alkali metal oxides. Glass used for beverage
bottles contains 72.5% SiO2, 13% Na2O, 9.3% CaO,
with the remainder consisting of K2O, MgO, Al2O3 and
Fe2O3. This basic formula has remained pretty much
unchanged since antiquity.
Borosilicate glasses are important in microsystems
because their coefﬁcients of thermal expansion can be
matched with silicon, important for stress-free bonding.
Each manufacturer has slightly different compositions,
but Pyrex 7740 borosilicate glass suitable for anodic
bonding has a composition of 80.3% SiO2, 12.2% B2O3,
4.0% Na2O, 2.8% Al2O3, 0.4% K2O and 0.3% CaO.
Other anodically bondable glass might replace Na2O
for Li2O and include some Fe2O3 and TiO2. The wide
variability of glass properties can be seen in Table 19.1
where the properties of different borosilicate glasses do
vary a lot.
There are at least 3000 varieties of glass. While silicon
properties can be tailored by doping and crystal orien-
tation, glasses can be tailored by a huge repertoire of
methods. First of all, glass composition can be varied,
and sometimes very small changes in composition lead
to drastically different properties: changing Na2O con-
tent from 15.75% to 15.5%, Al2O3 content from 3.4% to
2.2% and increasing MgO from 3.0% to 3.2% make glass
biosoluble. Pyrex’s thermal expansion can be tailored by
its composition, but it is also affected by the cooling rate
used during solidiﬁcation. Tempering can be used to in-
troduce compressive stress in the surface layers of glass,
blocking the propagation of cracks and greatly improving
mechanical strength.
The emphasis in this chapter will be on Pyrex-type
glasses that are available in wafer format and widely used
in MEMS and microﬂuidics. Flat-panel display processing
on large glass panes is discussed in Chapter 37 and only
brieﬂy touched upon here.
19.1 Structure and Properties
of Glasses
Glasses are metastable liquids without long-range order.
Glass networks are based on Si–O bonds (Figure 19.1).
These bonds form tetrahedral basic units (Figure 13.18).
When dopant atoms are incorporated into a silicon dioxide
network, they can take either substitutional or interstitial
positions. Boron can take the position of a silicon atom in
the network and form oxide (B2O3). Sodium, potassium
and lead are interstitial network modiﬁers which bond to
one silicon atom only, because they have a valence of one.
Therefore they do not contribute to networked structures.
O
O
O
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Na
Na
Na
Na
Ca
Ca
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
Si
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Figure 19.1
The structure of glass: Si–O network with
metal atoms dispersed (the fourth bond of silicon is out-of-
plane)
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 217]
226
Introduction to Microfabrication
As temperature rises, the electrical behavior of glass is
not too different from that of semiconductors. Thermally
generated charge carriers are important in many appli-
cations, but in glasses these thermally generated charge
carriers are sodium ions, not holes or electrons. In Pyrex
glass the room temperature resistivity is 1014 ohm-cm, at
250 ◦C it is 108 ohm-cm, but at 350 ◦C only 106 ohm-cm.
Anodic bonding is also based on sodium ionic conduction
(at 300–500 ◦C).
Glasses do not experience sharp melting but gradual
softening. As a simpliﬁcation the glass transition temper-
ature is often used to characterize glasses: at Tg glass
behavior changes from a brittle–elastic solid to viscous
melt. Room temperature viscosities of glasses are 1018
Pa-s, and Tg is the temperature when viscosity equals
1012.3 Pa-s. The usable temperature range of glass wafers
is limited by softening, which takes place at about 820 ◦C
for Pyrex glasses. In practice the processing tempera-
tures are limited to about 600 ◦C because even minor
dimensional and shape changes, for example increased
warp, may render bonding impossible and lithography out
of focus. Table 19.1 lists some important properties of
borosilicate glasses, and compares them to quartz glasses.
The proper term for pure amorphous SiO2 is fused silica
even though it is often called “quartz.” It is very different
from glasses: it does not exhibit temperature-dependent
resistivity because there are no metal oxides which disso-
ciate and release metal and oxygen ions.
One major microfabrication difference between soda
lime glass and fused silica is optical transmission:
the elimination of metals leads to superior optical
transmission. Fused silica is transparent from NIR to
deep UV while soda lime transmission in UV is strongly
Table 19.1
Quartz vs. borosilicate glasses
Quartz glasses
Borosilicates
Density (g/cm3)
2.0–2.2
2.25–2.45
Tensile strength (MPa)
70–120
80–150
Compressive strength
(MPa)
1600–2000
600–1000
Young’s modulus
(GPa)
62–75
65–85
CTE (10−6/◦C)
0.53
3–6
Resistivity (ohm-cm)
1018–1019
1014–1018
Dielectric constant εr
3.7–3.9
4.5–8
Thermal conductivity
(W/m-K)
4.8
2.0–3.8
Glass transitiona (◦C)
1300
600
aDeﬁned as temperature where viscosity η = 1012.3 Pa-s.
Source: H¨ulsenberg, D., A. Harnicsch and A. Bismarck (2008)
attenuated (Figure 8.9). This means that photomasks for
DUV lithography must be made on “quartz” but above
400 nm exposure wavelength the much cheaper soda lime
glass can be used. The coefﬁcient of thermal expansion
for soda lime glass is 10 ppm/◦C (cf. 2.6 ppm/◦C for Si)
and as a photomask material soda lime glass is limited to
applications above 3 μm linewidths where dimensional
control requirements are lax (recall Exercise 9.4). Fused
silica with its extremely low CTE retains its dimensions
much better under intense UV illumination.
Quartz is pure crystalline silica. Because quartz is
crystalline, it can be anisotropically wet etched by HF
while glasses are etched isotropically because of their
amorphous structure. And because of crystallinity, quartz
properties are anisotropic, for example thermal conduc-
tivity parallel and perpendicular to the z-axis differs by a
factor of two, and Young’s modulus parallel to the z-axis
is 97 GPa but 76 GPa perpendicular to it. These properties
have been used to make micromechanical devices.
CVD oxides are sometimes called glasses, for example
undoped silica glass (USG) and phosphorus-doped sil-
ica glass (PSG). These are not glasses proper because
they do not contain metal oxides. They are more akin
to silica in chemical composition. Spin-on glasses come
in two main varieties, silicate (inorganic) and siloxane
(inorganic–organic hybrid), but neither is glass in the tra-
ditional sense. All these “glasses” share some properties
with glasses, like amorphous structure, electrical and ther-
mal insulation, and optical transparency, but not ionic
conductivity, or sodium contamination danger.
19.2 Glass Substrates
Glass can be cut into many shapes, and it is available in
silicon-compatible formats: round wafers, even with wafer
ﬂat, even though glass is amorphous and ﬂat in silicon is
used to identify crystal orientation. Flats are useful when
bonding glass to silicon wafers with ﬂats.
The glass wafer fabrication process is not too different
from the silicon wafering process. The main steps are:
1. Shape cut
2. Edge grinding
3. Lapping
4. Polishing
5. Cleaning
6. Inspection
7. Packaging
An example of glass wafer speciﬁcation is shown in
Table 19.2. Because there are many glass varieties, the
specs are never as detailed or standardized as with silicon.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 218]
Glass Microprocessing
227
Table 19.2
Glass wafer speciﬁcations
Diameter
100.0 ± 0.3 mm
Thickness
500 ± 25 μm
Bow/warp
<10 μm
Top side
Polished
Back side
Polished
Roughness
<1.5 nm RMS
TTVa
<10 μm
Primary ﬂat
32.5 mm
Particles
<5 μm
Scratch and dig
60–40 according to MIL-PRF-13830
Edge exclusion
6 mm
Packaging
Under class 1000 according to Fed-
eral Standard 209
aTotal Thickness Variation.
Glass wafer thicknesses range from 50 μm to 10 mm
and in general glass wafers can be found with a very
wide range of specs. In many respects glass wafer specs
are similar to silicon wafer specs, for instance wafers
with tighter TTV can be bought, or wafers with less than
0.5 nm RMS roughness (surface roughness is an important
factor for bondability). Glass wafers are available up to
300 mm in diameter, just like silicon. Thick glass wafers
are standard in the millimeter range. Glass is commonly
available also as square or rectangular sheets, ranging in
size from microscope slides (76 × 25 mm) to ﬂat-panel
display “mother panes” (2160 × 2460 mm).
19.3 General Processing Issues
with Glasses
Some problems of glass substrates are related to their pro-
cessing in silicon-oriented labs. Even though glass wafers
are round like silicon, have ﬂats like silicon and are avail-
able in the same thicknesses as silicon, complications can
still arise, especially in automated tools. The detection
of the presence and movements of wafers in processing
equipment is based on either optical or capacitive sen-
sors, and these are fooled by transparent dielectric wafers.
Amorphous silicon or polysilicon deposition on the wafer
back side can be used as a preventive measure, but the role
of this extra ﬁlm needs to be considered for all process
steps and tools.
Glasses contain alkali metals which are serious con-
taminants to silicon transistors. There are various ways of
dealing with this: use fused silica instead of glass (which
will make bonding very difﬁcult); limit glass processing to
speciﬁc equipment and/or cleanroom areas; or take special
precautions, like depositing barriers on glass to prevent
sodium diffusion. This is a standard starting step in ﬂat-
panel display manufacturing, and it works: the thin-ﬁlm
transistors in displays are silicon devices which work well
for extended periods.
In this section we will brieﬂy discuss various processing
issues and then devote more attention to two technolo-
gies, etching and bonding. Glasses are also machined
by various non-standard techniques (non-standard from
a microfabrication point of view), powder blasting for
example. This will be discussed in Chapter 23. Various
grinding, milling and drilling methods will be discussed
in Chapter 24.
19.3.1 Surface preparation
Glass can be cleaned with RCA cleans just like silicon
wafers; in fact, the RCA clean was invented for glass
cleaning in TV tube manufacturing. The surface of
the glass is chemically identical to oxidized silicon,
with Si–OH as the typical surface termination. Surface
functionalization
techniques
developed
for
one
can
easily be transferred to the other, like silane coatings for
hydrophobicity.
19.3.2 Lithography
The exposure of resist on a glass wafer requires more en-
ergy than exposure on silicon because there is no reﬂected
light. An additional 50% of the exposure dose might be
used as a starting point. Reﬂections from etched structures
or thin ﬁlms need to be accounted for, because they can
cause unwanted exposure (see Figure 10.9).
Fabrication on glass substrates offers intriguing ways
for self-alignment by back-side exposure. A bottom gate
thin-ﬁlm transistor (TFT) is shown in Figure 19.2. After
chromium bottom gate lithography, etching and stripping,
a stack of PECVD oxide (gate oxide), a-Si:H (channel)
and nitride (passivation) are deposited. Photoresist is ap-
plied on the top side, but exposure is made from the back
side, with the Cr gate blocking light (photomasks are glass
plates with chromium patterns on them!). Resist is then
developed and nitride etched. After resist stripping and
wafer cleaning, chromium is deposited. During anneal-
ing, chromium silicide will form on the a-Si layers, but
not on the nitride (recall Figure 7.15).
19.3.3 Deposition on glass
Basically, deposition on glass is identical to deposition
on silicon, with only minor differences. Sputtering and
evaporation, and PECVD, can be done as on silicon. With
thermal CVD temperature limitations arise: for example,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 219]
228
Introduction to Microfabrication
glass substrate
glass substrate
Figure 19.2
Top: Cr gate has been patterned on the glass
substrate, and PECVD gate oxide, a-Si:H channel and ni-
tride stopper layers have been deposited. Bottom: resist on
the top side is exposed through the back side, making S/D
metallization self-aligned to the gate. Redrawn after Hirano
et al. (1996)
polysilicon deposition by LPCVD around 600 ◦C is at the
limit of mechanical strength of glass wafers. Another issue
is contamination: very few laboratories allow polysilicon
deposition on glass wafers.
Film stresses are always present. When processing thick
SU-8 resist on thin microscope glass, considerable bend-
ing can occur, even rendering the whole device useless.
Thicker glass would help, but sometimes optical thickness
considerations require thin substrates.
Because glass is used in optical devices, transparent
conducting
oxides
(TCOs)
are
often
needed,
and
indium-doped tin oxide (ITO), ﬂuorine-doped tin oxide
(FTO) and the like are used. These ﬁlms can be deposited
by vacuum techniques like sputtering, evaporation and
(PE)CVD,
but in
large-area
devices
like ﬂat-panel
displays (FPDs) and solar cells, pyrolysis and various
wet processes are also used.
Another big optical application is windowpane coating
for self-cleaning and optical and thermal properties.
Titanium dioxide in its crystalline anatase phase is
a photocatalyst that can break down organic dirt on
windows, which is then ﬂushed away by rain. Thin-ﬁlm
multilayer ﬁlters are deposited on glass, for example
by tailoring infrared reﬂectivity for minimizing thermal
losses in windows or improving windshield optics.
Metallic and dielectric layers with thicknesses from
10 nm onward are sputtered by the square meter in the
glass industry for building and automotive applications.
Over 90% of the sputtering target industry (by weight) is
geared up for these applications.
19.3.4 Glass polishing
While silicon microtechnology adopted polishing by CMP
only recently, glass polishing for microscope and tele-
scope lenses is 400-year-old technology. In fact, early
CMP equipment was directly borrowed from the glass
polishing industry. Melted glass as well as spin-coated
glass can be polished to create smooth surfaces, for either
ease of further processing, or optical properties.
19.3.5 Glass embossing, molding and blowing
Glass softens upon heating and embossing can be done
to create glass microstructures. The principles are the
same as discussed for polymer embossing in Sections
18.3–18.5. First of all, embossing must be done above
Tg. For glasses the transition temperatures are around
400–800 ◦C. Second, reaction between master and glass
must be avoided. Because of the higher temperatures
involved in glass embossing, this is more difﬁcult than
with polymers, but non-oxidizing materials like TiN and
TiAlN have been successfully used. For de-embossing,
the surface quality of the master is important, and
microfabricated silicon and nickel promise smooth-
enough surfaces.
Glass molding is an old technique for lens fabrication:
instead of polishing each lens individually, molten glass is
poured over a mold, and lenses are formed. The basic idea
and lens shapes are identical to polymer lenses (Figure
18.10), but of course the mold material has to be high-
temperature resistant. The method is best suited for cheap
mass-produced lenses.
The silicon mold can be made by RIE, enabling
delicate shapes that are not possible with glass etching.
Figure 19.3a shows the starting situation: the silicon
mold has been ﬁlled with boroﬂoat glass (at temperatures
around 800 ◦C). Three possible process options then
emerge: in Figure 19.3b glass etching and polishing
end up with thick glass structures embedded in silicon.
These might be used as thermal isolation islands. In
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 220]
Glass Microprocessing
229
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
silicon
silicon
Si
glass
glass
glass
Figure 19.3
(a) Silicon mold made by RIE, ﬁlled by
molten glass with three alternative process continuation
options: (b) glass etching/polishing to planarize; (c) sili-
con etching/polishing to planarize; and (d) complete silicon
etching
Figure 19.4
Polysilicon micromotor before glass coating
and after glass casting and polishing. Reproduced from
Yasseen et al. (1999), copyright 1999, by permission of
IEEE
Figure 19.3c silicon etching and polishing result in
embedded silicon islands inside glass. These might be
used as conductive paths or as thermal sinks. Finally,
in Figure 19.3d all the silicon has been etched away to
create glass microstructures of high aspect ratio. One
example is shown in Figure 19.4, namely a polysilicon
mold, with and without molded glass.
19.4 Glass Etching
19.4.1 Wet etching
Etching of glass follows the same basic ideas as etching
of silicon dioxide. Fused silica etching is very similar
to thermal oxide etching. Hydroﬂuoric acid etches silica
according to Equations 19.1 and 19.2. The resulting etch
proﬁle is isotropic (Figure 19.5):
SiO2 (s) + 4 HF (aq) →SiF4 (ad) + 2 H2O
(19.1)
SiF4 (ad) + 2 HF (aq) →H2SiF6 (aq)
(19.2)
The insoluble SiF4 is turned to soluble H2SiF6. Pyrex and
other glasses are much more difﬁcult to etch because in-
soluble ﬂuorides are formed, for example AlF3 and CaF2.
These etch products slow down the etch rate but are re-
moved by undercutting.
The Pyrex etch rate in hydroﬂuoric acid (49%) is about
8 μm/min at room temperature. Etching 300 μm can be
done in 40 min, and the resulting surface roughness is
about 20 nm. A microﬂuidic nozzle made by double-sided
etching of a Pyrex wafer 500 μm thick is shown in
Figure 19.5. Amorphous LPCVD silicon was used as the
etch mask. The addition of some HCl to HF improves
smoothness: the insoluble metal ﬂuorides are dissolved
by chlorine, and surface roughness below 10 nm can be
obtained in deep etching. HCl has only a minor effect on
etch rate and the most common mask materials behave
similarly with regard to HF and 10:1 HF:HCl mixture.
But remember that, because each manufacturer has a
proprietary glass composition, glass etch rates are vari-
able. High aluminum oxide content will reduce the etch
rate, and the same applies to magnesium and calcium.
When glass or fused silica wafers are etched, the etched
depth can be anything up to 500 μm, and the issue of etch
mask stability becomes paramount. This applies to both
Figure 19.5
Wet etching Pyrex wafer from both sides: a-
Si mask, 49% HF. Reproduced from Saarela et al. (2009)
by permission of IOP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 221]
230
Introduction to Microfabrication
glass
polysilicon
tensile stress
Figure 19.6
Tensile stresses in thin ﬁlms tend to open
cracks which allow etchant to penetrate through the mask
wet and dry etching, but for different reasons. Photore-
sist masks fail by adhesion loss. Concentrated HF is a
very aggressive etchant, and it etches rapidly under the
mask. If there is, for example, a water-rich interface layer
between the wafer and resist, etchant will penetrate very
fast laterally. Faster lateral than vertical etching is often
seen in isotropic etching. In wet etching, mask mechani-
cal strength is important, especially when large undercut
develops, and long overhangs are formed.
Common hard masks for glass etching include metals
(Ni, Cr, Au) and CVD ﬁlms: PECVD a-Si and SiC and
LPCVD a-Si. In theory all these are resistant to HF, but
often fail in practice. The main explanation is tensile ﬁlm
stress. Any cracks in tensile-stressed ﬁlm tend to enlarge
as shown in Figure 19.6, and the etchant will eventu-
ally penetrate through the mask. The surface of the mask
matters: if it is hydrophobic, it lasts longer because it
will reject aqueous etchant, while if it is hydrophilic the
surface will attract etchant.
Double layer ﬁlms are often used as etch masks: Cr/Au
is an obvious choice, because gold needs an adhesion
promotion layer. But it is useful to deposit multiple layers
of gold, as the later layers will seal some of the cracks in
the preceding ﬁlms, improving mask quality.
19.4.2 RIE
Oxide etching is driven by ion bombardment, therefore
anisotropy is good, but mask selectivity is low. The prob-
lem of mask erosion really arises when deep etching is
done. Non-erodible masks for ﬂuorine plasmas include
many metals (Ni, Cr, Al, Cu), oxides and nitrides (Al2O3,
AlN). If these are deposited by PVD or CVD, the prac-
tical thickness limit is a few micrometers. Electroplated
metals nickel and copper can be made to any thickness.
The same applies to thick resists. Thick-resist SU-8 has
been found to be quite a good mask for glass DRIE. The
stability of SU-8 results in the problem of resist stripping
Figure 19.7
Pyrex glass DRIE: 80 μm etched depth with
nickel mask 5 μm thick. Reproduced from Kolari et al.
(2008) by permission of IOP
afterward. A proﬁle of plasma-etched Pyrex is shown in
Figure 19.7. The sidewall angle is steep, but not vertical.
Oxide and glass RIE is critically dependent on the ex-
act composition of the material. In both plasma and wet
etching pure silica (SiO2) is easier to etch than glass with
metal oxides (Na2O, CaO, Ka2O, MgO, Al2O3, Fe2O3). In
plasma etching the lower volatility of the metal ﬂuorides
results in a lower rate and larger risk of residues.
Silicon is etched in ﬂuorine plasmas but if the silicon
is thick enough, and selectivity reasonable, deep glass
etching can be done with a silicon mask. Complete silicon
wafers with through-wafer holes have been used as etch
masks for glass DRIE. Both anodic bonding and simple
mechanical clamping have been employed.
One RIE etch application of glass/fused silica is mak-
ing masters for UV NIL (see Figure 18.19). There the
problem is not etched depth or mask erosion but feature
size control, sidewall angle control and smoothness.
It should be remembered that there are good alterna-
tives to glass etching. One technique is to make a silicon
mold and cast molten glass on it, and remove the sil-
icon (Figure 19.3), leaving glass microstructures whose
dimensional accuracy is determined by the silicon DRIE
process. In the case of larger structures drilling, powder
blasting and spark-assisted etching can be used. There are
also laser processes to pattern glass, and some of these are
described in Chapter 24.
19.5 Glass Bonding
All the usual requirements for successful bonding ap-
ply to glass bonding: ﬂat, smooth surfaces, cleaned of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 222]
Glass Microprocessing
231
particles and with proper bond forming surface chemistry,
are needed. Various surface cleaning and activation pro-
cesses have been tried, including RCA-1, sulfuric acid,
nitric acid, KOH, acetone and other solvents. Because the
surface chemistry of glasses is similar to oxidized sili-
con, RCA cleans (ammonia/peroxide, see Chapter 12) are
most common.
Thermal fusion bonding takes place above the glass
transition temperature, which translates to about 600 ◦C
for Pyrex glasses. Bonding times range from 1 to 6
hours, with extended cooldown. Specialty glasses may
have much lower or higher values of Tg, but fusion
bonding must be between two identical wafers. Fused
silica bonding can be done around 1000 ◦C, but because
fused silica does not soften like glasses, bonding is very
sensitive to ﬂatness and smoothness deviations.
Anodic bonding of glass and silicon (Section 17.3) is a
very special case of direct bonding, and it requires special
properties from the glass, namely suitable sodium concen-
tration and matching CTE. A glass wafer is connected as
a cathode and a silicon wafer as an anode. Current in-
creases rapidly at the initiation of bonding because the
contact area increases, and then decreases exponentially
as oxygen ions react at the interface to form SiO2 and
the oxide becomes thicker (Figure 19.8). When the cur-
rent has dropped to 10% of its peak value, bonding is
termed ﬁnished.
Bonding glass to glass anodically is possible if thin
ﬁlms are deposited on one of the wafers. Silicon nitride,
silicon carbide, polysilicon and a-Si can be used. When a
voltage is applied, sodium ions migrate toward the inter-
face, which acts as a diffusion barrier for sodium (silicon
dioxide does not work because it is not a barrier for
sodium). A depletion layer is formed and electrostatic
force pulls the wafers strongly together, just as in standard
anodic bonding. Oxygen ions diffuse toward the interface
and react there to form Si–O bonds. The interlayer ﬁlm
should be free of hydrogen, because otherwise oxygen
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Time (s)
Current (mA)
Figure 19.8
Anodic bonding current vs. time: initial cur-
rent peak, followed by a long tailout
200 °C
nonbonded
area
bond
strength
400 °C
1000V
500V
Figure 19.9
Non-bonded area and bond strength as a
function of temperature and voltage, for anodic bonding
of two glass wafers with polysilicon interlayer. Adapted
from Wei et al. (2003)
will react with the hydrogen and not with silicon. Other
outgassing products from PECVD ﬁlms are also prob-
lematic. Bondable area and bond strength increase with
voltage and temperature as expected (Figure 19.9), but
often it is desirable to have reasonable bond strength at
low temperature.
Glass–glass bonding can be done in a liquid environ-
ment. Two cleaned wafers with a proper surface ﬁnish are
brought together under liquid, and capillary forces draw
the wafers together (this is something that must be avoided
in release etching of micromechanical free-standing struc-
tures, as will be discussed in Chapter 29). If the surfaces
are clean and smooth, fairly strong bonds can form even at
room temperature, and annealing can be done to increase
bond strength.
Various wet cleaning strategies have been developed for
liquid bonding. Sulfuric acid (with and without peroxide)
cleaning has been shown to work, with or without RCA-1
(ammonia/peroxide) activation. The actual bonding takes
place under a DI water stream
Another bonding technique uses spin coating of a
sodium silicate layer, a few tens of nanometers thick, on
top of one of the wafers, followed by a 90 ◦C anneal
for 1 h. Bond strengths similar to silicon–silicon fusion
bonding are possible, showing that Si–O–Si bonds have
been formed at high density across the interface.
Adhesive bonding is an option in many microﬂuidic
devices. Again, the principles described in Chapter 17
apply here: adhesive bonding is a low-temperature process
which is insensitive to some particle contamination, and
it is quite general purpose.
Because glasses are transparent, UV curing adhesives
are handy. But adhesive bonding introduces additional
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 223]
232
Introduction to Microfabrication
materials, which may interfere with analytes in microﬂu-
idic systems.
19.6 Glass Devices
Capillary electrophoresis chips are the most studied mi-
croﬂuidic devices. They can be made of polymers but
glass devices are also widely used. Most often they are
made simply by etching ﬂuidic channels in one wafer
(in the case of polymers, by casting or embossing) and
bonding it to a blanket wafer which has the ﬂuidic inlets.
In case the capping wafer is the same material, thermal
or fusion bonding is performed, or a PDMS cover can
be attached (permanently or intermittently). The chips do
not usually have metal electrodes integrated; rather Ep-
pendorf tubes are attached to ﬂuidic inlets and platinum
wires stuck in. This works well for high-voltage electro-
osmotic pumping, but if electrochemical detection is used,
the detection electrodes need to be integrated in the ﬂuidic
channels (recall Figure 18.26).
In the capillary electrophoresis (CE) device shown in
Figure 19.10 the ﬂuidic channels are HF etched in the top
wafer, and ﬂuidic inlets are drilled in the top wafer, too.
Electrodes are fabricated in the bottom wafer. In order to
have a ﬂat surface for fusion bonding, the metal electrodes
are recessed (Figure 19.11). A glass wafer is etched to the
same depth as the designed metal thickness. After etching
of the glass, the resist is dried by baking, and used again,
as a lift-off mask for metal deposition. Next, an acetone
wash removes photoresist, and together with it the metal
that was deposited on top (see Chapter 23 for more on
lift-off). The resulting metal surface is fairly close to the
B
S
SW
BW
CD
CD
separation 
channel 
Figure 19.10
Capillary electrophoresis (CE) chip: ﬂuidic
channels (gray) etched in top glass wafer and electrodes and
pads (black) in bottom glass wafer. Fluidic reservoirs for
buffer (B), sample (S), sample waste (SW) and buffer waste
(BW) have high-voltage electrodes. Low-voltage electrodes
are for conductivity detection (CD)
Figure 19.11
Embedded metal electrodes: photoresist
masked etching of glass wafer, metal deposition without
removing the resist, followed by lift-off. Metal thickness is
designed to match the etched depth. Redrawn from Keynton
(2005)
original glass surface, except for minor inaccuracies in
both etched depth and metal thickness.
Glass–glass fusion bonding is also used in the microﬂu-
dic nebulizer shown in Figure 19.12. The nebulizer has
heater electrodes that vaporize incoming liquid and mix
it with nebulizer gas, shooting out a hot vapor jet from
a nozzle. This vapor jet is ionized and the ions analyzed
by a mass spectrometer. The same device can be made of
silicon but glass is preferred because it is thermally in-
sulating: in order to vaporize high-boiling-point analytes,
LPCVD silicon hard mask deposition on a glass wafer
Hard mask patterning and glass wet etching
Hard mask removal and glass-to-glass fusion bonding
Platinum heater deposition, etch patterning and wafer dicing
sample in
nebulizer gas in
nozzle
Figure 19.12
Fusion bonded glass–glass ﬂuidic nebulizer
chip. Reproduced from Saarela et al. (2007), Royal Society
of Chemistry
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 224]
Glass Microprocessing
233
Thermal bonding of two etched glass wafers
Etching from two sides simultaneously
Etch mask peeling, and second etching
Figure 19.13
Glass–glass bonded PCR reactor. Redrawn
from Easley et al. (2007)
the chip operates at 400 ◦C; in a glass chip this hot zone
is local, but in a silicon chip heat spreads all over.
When fast temperature ramping is required, it is
essential to minimize thermal mass. This can be achieved
by etching away excessive glass. In the PCR reactor
of Figure 19.13 this has been done after bonding. The
channels end up being suspended, with thin roofs and
ﬂoors. Timed etching was used, so ultimate thinness
cannot be achieved.
Glass is the material of choice for not only high-
temperature devices like the nebulizer and the PCR
reactor, but also for cryogenic devices, and because of the
thermal insulation. The cryogenic cooler of Figure 19.14
is fabricated from three glass wafers, requiring seven
photomasks. The top wafer is 175 μm thick, and ﬂow
channels 50 μm deep are fabricated by HF etching.
The middle wafer is 145 μm thick, and again the ﬂow
channels are HF etched, but the through-wafer vias are
made by powder blasting. In the bottom wafer all the
structures are powder blasted because they are large,
deep and non-critical, for example the bottom wafer is
175 µm
D
C
B
B
D
E
A
E
F
pL flow channel
pL gas outlet
pH gas inlet
pH flow channel
restriction
evaporator
CFHX
F
F
E
145 µm
400 µm
Figure 19.14
Cryogenic cooler with three wafers fusion
bonded. Reproduced from Lerou et al. (2006) by permis-
sion of IOP
thinned to improve thermal isolation. Fusion bonding of
the three wafers is done in a single step.
Glass blowing is an old technique that has been given a
microfabrication twist. A thin glass sheet is bonded in air
to a cylindrical cavity formed by DRIE (Figure 19.15).
When the device is heated to 850 ◦C, the trapped air
expands, blowing the thin, softened glass sheet into a
spherical bubble. Again in the spirit of traditional glass
blowing, the structure is annealed at 560 ◦C for 30 min
to remove stresses and slowly cooled below the strain
point, 510 ◦C for Pyrex. In further processing the device
is ﬁlled with rubidium chloride and barium, for atomic
clock action.
The DNA processing chip of Figure 19.16 consists of
three glass wafers and a PDMS layer. The top glass wafer
holds the ﬂuidic channels, the second glass wafer the ther-
mal elements, namely heaters and temperature sensors.
The PDMS layer acts as a movable membrane valve and
is actuated by vacuum/air pressure in the bottom mani-
fold wafer. Microﬂuidic chips like this offer beneﬁts in
DNA processing in many ways: small sample volumes
(nanoliters) are important for reagent cost minimization,
small size is also important for rapid temperature ramp-
ing, and the integration of many analysis steps on one
device eliminates manual labor, saves time and improves
reproducibility. The PCR chip of Figure 25.7 is similarly
of glass–polymer hybrid design.
19.7 Specialty Glasses
The variety of glasses is vast, so we offer here only a
short glimpse of some specialty glasses. Vycor is porous
glass. Various annealing steps cause phase separation, and
etching in HCl and NaOH removes practically everything
else except silica (with a few percent sodium borate). By
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 225]
234
Introduction to Microfabrication
Step 1: Pattern and
etch Si wafer
Step 2: Bond Pyrex
wafer to Si wafer
Step 3: Heat in
furnace at 850 °C
Step 4: Place chip in
holder (upside-down)
Step 7: Seal backside
with anodic bonding
Step 6: Fill cell with
alkali and buffer gas
Step 8: Remove chip from holder
Step 5: Pattern and
etch backside
Figure 19.15
Blown glass sphere atomic clock. Repro-
duced from Eklund et al. (2008), copyright © 2008 by
permission of Elsevier
Channel
RTD/valve
PDMS
Manifold
100 mm
Figure 19.16
Bioprocessor for nanoliter DNA samples,
fabricated on a glass/glass/PDMS/glass wafer stack of
100 mm diameter. Reproduced from Blazej et al. (2006),
copyright 2006 National Academy of Sciences USA
tailoring the annealing steps and etching conditions, var-
ious pore sizes in the range of 10–100 nm are available.
Such porous glass has a huge surface area which is useful
in many biochips.
Photostructurable glasses (e.g. Foturan) can be exposed
by UV light, and after annealing the exposed areas can be
anisotropically etched in HF. These glasses contain about
70% silica, 10% Li2O, and the usual alkali metal oxides
plus small amounts (<1%) of cerium, silver and anti-
mony and tin oxides. When hit by UV radiation cerium
ions absorb the light and turn Ce3+ into Ce4+ and re-
lease an electron, which reacts with Ag+ to form metallic
silver. During the thermal treatment atomic silver forms
nuclei and lithium metasilicate crystallizes. This crystal-
lized phase can be etched in 10% HF with 20:1 selectivity
to amorphous glass. The etch rate can be up to 20 μm/min.
Etched depth is controlled by UV exposure dose. For
example, 8 J/m2 is used to expose through the wafer, while
3 J/m2 exposes half the wafer thickness.
The problem is that crystal size is quite large, in the
range of 10 micrometers, which means that small struc-
tures cannot be made and sidewalls will be rough. Tg
values of photostructurable glasses are around 500 ◦C with
CTEs ranging from 7 to 10 ppm/◦C, which means that
bonding with silicon is out of the question. Figure 19.17
shows a MEMS combustor. The middle wafer is made of
photostructrable glass, including the movable piston. De-
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 226]
Glass Microprocessing
235
Gas inlet
Exhaust hole
Spark plug
Check valve
Piston
Combustion Chamber
Pyrex glass
Figure 19.17
MEMS combustor and reciprocating de-
vice. Reproduced from Lee et al. (2002) by permission of
IOP
spite gas leakage between the movable piston and frame,
6 mm movement has been achieved within 0.1 s.
19.8 Exercises
1. Design a process for molding glass microlenses.
2. List the processes and phenomena that become impor-
tant for borosilicate glass as temperature goes up.
3. Estimate the device dimensions for the PCR reactor of
Figure 19.13. How thin a glass is there after etching?
4. How could the glass melting process of Figure 19.3 be
used to fabricate a thermally insulated PCR reactor?
5. In the cryogenic cooler of Figure 19.14 some structures
are wet etched, others powder blasted. Which ones and
why?
6. Design an alternative version of the nebulizer of
Figure 19.12 but with the heater inside the channel!
References and Further Reading
Bien, D. C. S. et al. Characterization of masking materials for
deep glass etching, J. Micromech. Microeng., 13, S34.
Blazej, R., Kumaresan, P. and Mathies, R. A. (2006) Micro-
fabricated bioprocessor for integrated nanoliter-scale Sanger
DNA sequencing, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci., 103, 7240–7245.
Danel, J. S. and G. Delapierre (1991) Quartz: a material for
microdevices, J. Micromech. Microeng., 1, 187–198.
Easley, C. J., J. A. C. Humphrey and J. P. Landers (2007)
Thermal isolation of microchip reaction chambers for rapid
non-contact DNA ampliﬁcation, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
17, 1758–1766.
Eklund, E. J. et al. (2008) Glass-blown spherical microcells for
chip-scale atomic devices, Sens. Actuators, A143, 175–180.
Hirano, N. et al. (1996) A 33cm diagonal high-resolution TFT-
LCD with fully self-aligned a-Si TFT, IEICE Trans. Elec-
tron., E79, 1103.
H¨ulsenberg, D., A. Harnicsch and A. Bismarck (2008) Mi-
crostructuring of Glasses, Springer.
Iliescu, C., B. Chen and J. Miao (2008) On the wet etching of
Pyrex glass, Sens. Actuators, A143, 154–161.
Keynton, R. S. (2004) Design and development of microfabri-
cated capillary electrophoresis devices with electrochemical
detection, Anal. Chim. Acta., 507, 95–105.
Kim, M.-S. et al. (2005) Fabrication of microchip electrophore-
sis devices and effects of channel surface properties on sep-
aration efﬁciency, Sens. Actuators, B107, 818–824.
Kolari, K., V. Saarela and S. Franssila (2008) Deep plasma
etching of glass for ﬂuidic devices with different mask ma-
terials, J. Micromech. Microeng., 18, 064010.
Lee, D. H. et al. (2002) Fabrication and test of a MEMS com-
bustor and reciprocating device, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
12, 26–34.
Lee, J.-H. et al. (2008) A simple and effective fabrication
method
for
various
3D
microstructures:
backside
3D
diffuser lithography, J. Micromech. Microeng., 18, 125015.
Lerou, P. P. P. M. et al. (2006) Fabrication of a micro cryo-
genic cold stage using MEMS-technology, J. Micromech.
Microeng., 16, 1919–1925.
Saarela, V. et al. (2007) Glass microfabricated nebulizer chip
for mass spectrometry, Lab Chip, 7, 644–646.
Saarela, V. et al. (2009) Microﬂuidic heated gas jet shape anal-
ysis by temperature scanning, J. Micromech. Microeng., 19,
055001.
Wang, H. Y. et al. (1997) Low temperature bonding for micro-
fabrication of chemical analysis devices, Sens. Actuators,
B45, 199–207.
Wei, J. et al. (2003) Low temperature glass-to-glass wafer
bonding, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag., 26, 289–294.
Yasseen, A. A., J. D. Cawley and M. Mehregany (1999) Thick
glass ﬁlm technology for polysilicon surface micromachin-
ing, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 8, 172–179.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 227]
20
Anisotropic Wet Etching
Microsystems
technology
relies
on
anisotropic
wet
etching of silicon for many major applications. Bulk mi-
cromechanics, the machining of silicon by anisotropic wet
etching, depends on silicon crystal plane-dependent etch-
ing, and many surface micromechanical and SOI devices
make use of silicon wet etching for auxiliary structures,
even though the main device features are deﬁned by
plasma etching. Because <100> silicon is the workhorse
of microsystems, our discussion concentrates on it. Both
<110> and <111> etching will be brieﬂy discussed.
Etched grooves, trenches and wells exemplify the basic
features of crystal plane-dependent etching. They can be
used as sample wells and ﬂow channels in microﬂuidics,
or as optical ﬁber alignment ﬁxtures. Other basic struc-
tures are membranes (diaphragms), beams and cantilevers.
Mechanical devices like pressure sensors, resonators and
AFM cantilevers rely on these basic elements. Through-
wafer structures include nozzles and oriﬁces, for example
for ink jets or micropipettes.
20.1 Basic Structures on <100>
Silicon
Anisotropic etching relies on aligning the structures with
wafer crystal planes. The primary ﬂat, which is along
the [110] direction, is used as a reference. Rectangular
structures with concave corners are easily made, with
four (111) sidewalls and the (100) plane as the bottom
(Figure 20.1).
Self-limiting depth is the depth were the slow etching
(111) planes meet. The angle between the (100) and (111)
planes is 54.7◦and the self-limiting depth (d) for mask
opening Wmask is calculated from
d = Wmask
√
2
(20.1)
54.7°
(100)
(111)
(111)
Figure 20.1
Anisotropic wet-etched proﬁles in <100>
wafer. The sloped sidewalls are the slow etching (111)
planes; the horizontal planes are (100). Etching will ter-
minate if the slow etching (111) planes meet
A pattern 742 μm wide on the mask will then result
in a through-wafer “zero-sized” hole, for a wafer
525 μm thick.
Typical mask ﬁlms for anisotropic wet etching, thermal
oxide and LPCVD nitride are deposited on both sides
of the wafer. This is useful in protecting one side while
processing the other, but it can also be utilized to speed
up processing: this was used in microthruster (Figure
11.7) etching from both sides simultaneously. In the
AFM cantilever–tip structure (Figure 20.2) the tip is
etched ﬁrst, followed by oxide etch and p++ diffusion.
Another oxidation is done for backside mask and front
side protection.
20.2 Etchants
A number of alkaline etchants have been tried for crys-
tal plane-dependent etching but KOH has emerged as the
main etchant. Typical etch rates are about 1 μm/min which
translates to 6 hours for through-wafer etching of 380 μm
wafers. KOH poses a contamination hazard for CMOS
work, therefore CMOS-compatible etchants are desirable.
Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide, (CH3)4NOH, usually
known as TMAH, is such a compound. In fact, both
NaOH and TMAH are used as photoresist developers,
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 228]
238
Introduction to Microfabrication
(b)
(a)
(c)
Figure 20.2
AFM cantilever and tip: (a) oxide-masked
etching of tip; (b) p++ boron doping on front side;
(c) Thermal oxidation and KOH etching from back side,
stopping on p++ layer
in diluted concentrations and at room temperature, so
the contamination danger can be handled with proper
working procedures. Organic amines have also been used
for anisotropic etching, most notably ethylene diamine
(NH2)(CH2)2NH2 mixture with pyrocathecol and water,
known as EDP or EPW. Hydrazine (N4H2) has also been
tried. Both amines pose occupational safety and health
hazards, and thus are not widely used. Ammonia has been
shown to etch silicon reasonably well, but the stability of
ammonia etch baths during extended etching needs spe-
cial attention. Etch rates of 1.5 μm/min at 70 ◦C have been
demonstrated, with high selectivity against oxide and alu-
minum masks, and very smooth surfaces of 2.4 nm RMS
roughness, whereas typical KOH-etched surfaces exhibit
5–10 nm RMS roughness.
Even though all the alkaline etchants share the same
basic features of etching (100) crystal planes quickly and
(111) planes slowly, the actual selectivity between the
crystal planes needs careful attention. KOH exhibits 200:1
selectivity between (100) and (111), whereas selectivity
is only 30:1 in TMAH. Exact selectivities are dependent
on etchant concentration and temperature. But when other
crystal planes are considered, even more differences pop
up: when planes like (110) and high-index planes like
(311) are studied, the differences multiply. Figure 20.3
shows the etch rates for KOH. It is important for etch
geometry which are the (local) maximum etch rate planes.
Table 20.1 lists etch rate relative to (110).
Isopropanol (IPA) addition to KOH will change the rel-
ative etch rates of crystal planes and, depending on exact
conditions, either the (100) or (110) planes will be the
maximum etch rate planes. Other surfactants have also
been used to modify crystal plane selectivities.
Because etch times are rather long, etchant stability
over hours and days needs special attention. When
silicon is etched in TMAH, the etched silicon dissolves
80
μm/h
60
40
20
(010)
0°
15° 30°
45°
60°
75°
90°
80
μm/h
60
40
20
(010)
0°
(a)
(b)
15° 30°
45°
60°
75°
90°
(111)
(111)
(111) + (131)
Figure 20.3
Etch rates in different crystal directions in 50% KOH at 78 ◦C: (a) <100> Si: fast, but not maximum
etching in (010) direction; (b) <110> Si: (010) near maximum etch rate. Reproduced from Seidel et al. (1990a) by
permission of Electrochemical Society Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 229]
Anisotropic Wet Etching
239
Table 20.1
Etch rates normalized to (110) crystal
plane in 30% KOH
(110)
1.00
(100)
0.548
(210)
1.072
(211)
0.906
(221)
0.491
(310)
1.00
(311)
0.987
(320)
1.06
(331)
0.797
(530)
1.069
(540)
1.039
(111)
0.004
Source: Sato, K. et al. (1998).
into the etchant solution and changes its properties,
especially selectivities. In order to stabilize the etchant,
some silicon is dissolved into TMAH before etching, in
a concentration higher than that caused by etched silicon.
Pyrocathecol is employed in EDP for similar reasons:
the decomposition of ethylene diamine releases small
amounts of pyrocathecol, which changes the etchant com-
position, but if pyrocathecol is added in large amounts
to begin with, the decomposition has negligible effect.
20.3 Etch Masks and Protective
Coatings
Silicon dioxide and silicon nitride are the common mask-
ing materials for anisotropic wet etching. Oxide etch rate
in KOH is a few nanometers per minute, while TMAH and
EDP etch oxide hardly at all. Nitride is more resistant than
oxide in both etchants. Silicon etch rate and mask etch rate
depend on temperature and concentration but some gen-
eral guidelines can be given. An oxide thickness of 2 μm
is needed for through-wafer etching in KOH whereas
200 nm is sufﬁcient in TMAH or EDP. Plasma oxides etch
fastest and thermal oxides slowest. LPCVD nitride ﬁlms
of 200 nm are thick enough for almost any applications,
but PECVD nitrides have widely varying properties.
As a practical issue it should be noted that thermal
oxide and LPCVD nitride are furnace processes and ﬁlm
is grown/deposited on both sides of the wafer so that the
wafer back side is protected. This is important when deep
etching is done. PECVD deposition is usually on the front
side of the wafer only.
All silicon etchants etch aluminum, which means that
either aluminum deposition has to be done after silicon
etching, or aluminum has to be protected during silicon
etching. In some cases aluminum has been replaced by
another metal, like gold. Some relief can be achieved by
saturating TMAH solution with silicon, but typically only
very short alkaline etchings are done after metallization.
20.3.1 Peeling masks/nested masks
Photoresist coating over severe topography can be
eliminated by double masking (also known as peeling
masks or nested masks): two different mask materials
are patterned on a planar wafer, before the ﬁrst silicon
etching step (Figure 20.4). Mask 1 is discarded after the
ﬁrst silicon etching step, and silicon etching continues
Figure 20.4
Peeling mask/nested mask: nitride (medium
gray) deposition and patterning; CVD oxide (dark gray) de-
position and patterning; ﬁrst silicon etching; oxide etching
in HF; second silicon etching with nitride mask
Figure 20.5
Symmetrical bulk silicon micromachined
accelerometer: wafer 380 μm thick has been etched through
from both sides simultaneously. SEM courtesy VTI Tech-
nologies
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 230]
240
Introduction to Microfabrication
with the second mask. Combinations of resist, oxide
and nitride are common. An accelerometer fabricated by
peeling masks and double-sided symmetric wet etching
is shown in Figure 20.5.
20.4 Etch Rate and Etch Stop
Silicon etch rate follows the Arrhenius exponential law:
for 30% KOH at 60 ◦C it is 24 μm/h, at 80 ◦C it is 79 μm/h
and at 100 ◦C it reaches 225 μm/h. KOH, TMAH and EDP
practical etch rates are of the order of 0.5–1 μm/min for
(100) crystal planes. Table 20.2 lists the major properties
of alkaline etchants for silicon.
In addition to silicon etch rate, other factors must be
considered: mask etch rate and surface roughness often
increase when silicon etch rate increases. The surface
roughness of deep (almost through-wafer) KOH etched
silicon is about 10–50 nm (RMS). This depends on a num-
ber of factors: KOH concentration and temperature (high
and low temperatures give rougher surfaces), agitation (ul-
trasonics reduces roughness) and additives (arsenic and
antimony oxides improve smoothness, and surfactants do
so too). However, other properties also change: surfactants
affect crystal plane selectivities, and the process needs to
be characterized anew.
Table 20.2
Alkaline anisotropic etchants: some main
features of etchants
Etchant
KOH
TMAH
EDP/EPW
Rate (at 80 ◦C)
(μm/min)
1
0.5
1 (at 115 ◦C)
Typical
concentration
40%
25%
80%
Selectivity
(100):(111)
200:1
30:1
35:1
Selectivity
Si:SiO2
200:1
2000:1
10 000:1
Selectivity
Si:Si3N4
2000:1
2000:1
10 000:1
Etch stop factor
(1020cm−3)
10
100
50
Etch stop is an idealization; inﬁnite selectivities are not
encountered in the real world. High selectivity is termed
etch stop when selectivity is so high that etch timing
becomes non-critical. Etch stop can happen through var-
ious mechanisms. The etch rate of boron-doped silicon
decreases rapidly when doping levels exceed 1019 cm−3,
as shown in Figure 20.6. The exact mechanism is un-
known but high stresses in heavily doped ﬁlm may play
1017
10−2
1018
1019
Boron concentration
Silicon etch rate
KOH
concentration
〈100〉 silicon
60 °C
〈100〉 silicon
24% KOH
1020
10%
24%
42%
57%
10−1
100
101
102
1017
10−2
1018
1019
Boron concentration
(a)
(b)
3.7 × 1019 cm−3
3.8 × 1019 cm−3
4.0 × 1019 cm−3
4.2 × 1019 cm−3
C0 =
Etch rate
1020
10−1
100
101
102
78 °C
61 °C
44 °C
34 °C
(μm/h)
(μm/h)
cm−3
cm−3
Figure 20.6
The p++ etch stop: (a) with KOH concentration as a parameter; (b) with etch temperature for 24% KOH
as a parameter. Reproduced from Seidel et al. (1990b) by permission of Electrochemical Society Inc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 231]
Anisotropic Wet Etching
241
a part. This property is frequently used in bulk MEMS,
as a way to fabricate simple mechanical structures. It is,
however, not possible to fabricate electrical devices on
such highly doped material. For instance, piezoresistors
cannot be made because the p++ etch stop doping level
is higher than the piezoresistor doping level. The stresses
in p++ doped structures make then mechanically inferior
to lightly doped material. Furthermore, slips are intro-
duced in silicon because of high stresses, and this makes
bonding of highly doped wafers difﬁcult.
On the positive side, more shapes can be made.
Simple through-wafer etching can produce only square
Figure 20.7
p++ etch stop: dots and rectangles were
masked during doping and are etched in KOH, while p++
doped areas form a silicon membrane
and
rectangular
nozzles,
but
with
the
boron
etch
stop technique all shapes become possible. As shown
in Figure 20.7, circular nozzles can be deﬁned by
lithography and boron ion implantation. Features can also
be placed close to each other. KOH etching stops at p++
regions, but continues in the areas that were protected
by photoresist during implantation. In this application
back side to front side alignment is non-critical: the
nozzle shape is deﬁned by the front-side implantation
mask only.
20.4.1 Electrochemical etch stop
When a silicon wafer is an anode in an alkaline etching
solution, biased positively, above the passivation potential
the surface will be oxidized, which stops silicon dissolu-
tion. The n-type layer of a pn structure can similarly be
protected (Figure 20.8). Positive potential, above the pas-
sivation potential, is applied to the n-type layer. Etching
of p-type silicon continues until the diode is destroyed,
and n-type silicon is then passivated. Electrochemical etch
stop can be achieved with lightly doped material, and it
is therefore possible to fabricate a number of devices on
such material.
20.5 Front-Side Processed
Structures
Initially the etched shapes are determined by the fast etch-
ing planes, usually the (100) planes. But in the end it is
Applied potential (Volts)
Current (mA/cm2)
−0.4
−0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Passivation potential
Cathodic
Anodic
Etching
No etching
Oxide
free
Surface oxide
Anodic
oxide
Etching solution
Etch mask
n-Si
p-Si
Potentiostat
Pt
Reference
electrode
Working
electrode
(Si wafer)
Counter
electrode
(a)
(b)
Figure 20.8
(a) Electrochemical cell for silicon electrochemical etching in KOH: p-type silicon etched; n-silicon passi-
vated by anodic oxide. Reproduced from Wong et al. (1992) by permission of Electrochemical Society Inc. (b) Passivation
potential and anodic oxidation regime. Reproduced from Collins (1997) by permission of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 232]
242
Introduction to Microfabrication
[110]
[011]
Figure 20.9
The largest rectangle bounded by [110] ori-
entations along and perpendicular to ﬂat will be etched:
original mask openings in white, ﬁnal etched shapes shown
by dotted lines. Oxide shown gray. Free-standing oxide
bridge will be formed in the middle geometry. Defects of
arbitrary shape will end up as rectangles
the slow etching planes, usually the (111) planes, that de-
termine the shape. Mask patterns are usually aligned to
major [110] crystal axes (Figure 20.9), but due to either
wafer miscut or alignment error, patterns can be off-axis.
Anisotropic wet etching carves out the shape that is de-
termined by the largest rectangle bounded by the pattern.
This can be used to fabricate free-standing structures by
undercutting, as in the middle structure of Figure 20.9.
The nitride clips of Figure 20.10 are formed similarly.
Note that inverse polarity structures (opposite mask
oxide vs. silicon openings) behave rather differently in
anisotropic wet etching (Figure 20.11).
Cantilevers and bridges can be made by front-side mi-
cromachining by undercutting. The structures are aligned
not to the main axes of silicon, but for example 45◦off,
so that fast etching planes appear.
Sensor resistors, catalyst metals, AFM tips or other
microstructures must be integrated with cantilevers. What-
ever structures are made, they have to be processed before
the silicon release etch because topology and topography
do not allow lithography after release.
If the structures are aligned along the [100] direction
(45◦relative to wafer ﬂat), instead of the usual ﬂat direc-
tion [110], new possibilities arise. The basic situation is
shown in Figure 20.12.
Figure 20.10
Silicon nitride microclips for optical ﬁber
positioning. Reproduced from Bostock et al. (1998) by per-
mission of IOP
Figure 20.11
Etched shape difference with mask polarity:
upper row shows the mask patterns (oxide mask shown
gray); lower row shows structures after a short anisotropic
wet etch
<100>
<010>
<011>
<001>
{111}
{111}
{110}
{110}
{100}
{100}
Figure 20.12
Orientation of structures on (100) wafer.
Alignment to wafer ﬂat leads to 54.7◦angles and {111}
sidewalls. Alignment of 45◦relative to ﬂat leads to {110}
walls and {100} vertical walls result when rates of {110}
relative to {100} fulﬁll conditions 20.2 and 20.3. Repro-
duced from Powell and Harrison (2001) by permission of
IOP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 233]
Anisotropic Wet Etching
243
−10 μm
−10 μm
90°
(100)
(110)
(111)
(101)
(100)
(a)
(b)
(111)
(101)
50 μm
Figure 20.13
(a) An etched well with 45◦slanted sidewalls in <100> wafer by 45◦degree off-orientation. Reproduced
from Strandman et al. (1995) by permission of IEEE. (b) Mesas with 90◦angles in <100> wafer, before and after etch
mask removal. Reproduced from Vazsonyi et al. (2003) by permission of IOP
For instance, 45◦walls suitable for ﬁber coupling mir-
rors and 90◦sidewall mesas can be made. These structures
depend on the relative etch rates of (100) and (110) planes
according to
rate{100}/rate{110} < 1/
√
2
90◦walls
(20.2)
rate{100}/rate{110} >
√
2
45◦walls
(20.3)
Condition (20.2) leads to vertical walls which are (100)
planes, and condition (20.3) leads to 45◦walls which
are (110) walls. This is shown in Figure 20.13. Also
shown are vertical (100) walls. However, severe undercut
is unavoidable in order to make vertical walls in <100>
silicon.
KOH etchant of 25–50% fulﬁlls condition (20.2), and
KOH–IPA solution is an example of condition (20.3).
When the rate condition is close to the limit values, as
with <25% TMAH, inadequate stirring or some other dis-
turbance can lead to unexpected changes in ﬁnal shapes.
20.6 Convex Corner Etching
The etch rate of (100) planes is high relative to (111)
planes. When simple concave shapes are etched, the fast
etching planes will disappear and the slow etching (111)
planes will dominate in the ﬁnal structure. The fastest
etching planes, usually (110) and some high-index planes
like (311), are not present in the simple rectangular wells,
channels and nozzles, which have only concave 90◦
inside corners. Convex corners reveal these high-etch-rate
planes, and etching under the mask takes place. The
time evolution of a convex corner shape is shown in
Figure 20.14. The etched shape is initially determined by
the fast etching planes, but the slow etching (111) planes
will ﬁnally be limiting the structures.
Depending on initial mask size and etch time, either
ﬂat mesas or sharp silicon needles will be produced
(Figure 20.15).
Nitride bridges, membranes and cantilevers, as well as
p++ doped silicon structures, are made by corner under-
cutting (Figure 20.16).
20.6.1 Corner compensation
We noted above that convex corners are dominated by
(311) planes (Figure 20.15). In many designs it would be
very useful to have sharp corners. This is possible with
a little extra effort in mask design by adding compensa-
tion structures, shown in Figure 20.17. The fast etching
planes start to erode at convex corners. But the ﬁnal con-
vex corner is protected by this sacriﬁcial structure so that
after the compensation structure has been etched away, a
rectangular corner remains.
Timing is the difﬁcult part: if etching is stopped too
early, a peak remains on the corner. Overetching leads to
a structure with an undercut corner, similar to the non-
compensated case, but with less undercut. Even though
this method looks perfect in two dimensions, it leaves
some small <311> surfaces in three dimensions. Another
shortcoming of this method is that it can take a lot of space
to form these compensation structures.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 234]
244
Introduction to Microfabrication
(b)
(111)
(110)
(111)
(100)
A-A cross-section
(110)
(111)
(100)
(110)
(111)
(110) slope formation
B-B cross-section
(c)
(111)
(100)
(111)
(100)
A-A cross-section
(100)
(100)
(100) slope formation
under the etching mask
C
C
(111)
(110)
(111)
(100)
C-C cross-section
(d)
(111)
(100)
(311)
(111)
(311)
(100)
A-A cross-section
(100)
(100)
(311) slope formation at
the intersection between
(100) and (111) planes
(111)
(111)
(311)
(100) (110)
C-C cross-section
(111)
(111)
(100)
A-A cross-section
Etching mask
(111)
(100)
(110)
(110)
(111)
A
A
B
B
(111) slope formation
B-B cross-section
(a)
C-C cross-section
(e)
(111)
(311)
(111)
(311)
(100)
A-A cross-section
(311)
(100)
(311) slope growth
(111)
(311)
Figure 20.14
Time evolution of convex corner undercutting. Reproduced from Shikada et al. (2001) by permission of
Springer
{111}
{111}
{111}
WD15
X 2652W18J
NMR557
X250
20.0KV
120μm
wafer surface
(a)
(b)
Figure 20.15
Left: etching a silicon mesa. Reproduced from Schr¨oder et al. (2001), copyright 2001, by permission of
IEEE. Right: silicon pyramid. Reproduced from Wilke et al. (2005) by permission of IOP
Figure 20.16
Cantilever and bridge structures by front-side etching. Underetching from convex corners is used, with
structures aligned to [110] main axes on a wafer. Simple rectangular holes along [110] axes result in V-grooves only.
Reproduced from Ma et al. (2009) by permission of IOP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 235]
Anisotropic Wet Etching
245
(a)
(b)
Figure 20.17
(a) Different designs for corner compensa-
tion. (b) Optical microscope image of a compensated corner
after etching. Courtesy Ville Voipio and Seppo Marttila,
Aalto University
20.7 Membrane Fabrication
There are two basic membrane (diaphragm) structures:
either the membrane is made of a deposited ﬁlm, or it
is made of single crystal silicon. In the ﬁrst case etch-
ing is quite simple: all silicon is removed, and the thin
ﬁlm remains. There are two main considerations for the
membrane material: it has to be (slightly) tensile stressed
because a compressively stressed ﬁlm would buckle, and
too high a tensile-stressed ﬁlm would crack. The ﬁlm has
also to be resistant to alkaline etchants. Silicon nitride
fulﬁlls both requirements, and it is widely used. It is also
electrically (and thermally) insulating so that resistors can
be readily deposited on it, and it is optically transparent.
(We use the word membrane for a continuous ﬁlm: some
workers in the ﬂuidics ﬁeld assume the membrane to be
permeable, as in ﬁlters. We call such structures perforated
membranes.)
Silicon membrane fabrication pictured in Figure 20.18a
relies on timed etching but this is a very unsatisfactory
approach, especially if thin membranes are needed. Some-
thing like 40 μm is the thinnest that can reasonably be
made by timed etching in a manufacturing environment.
Etch stop techniques (pn junction, p++) offer better
thickness control, and SOI wafers are also amenable to
very good membrane thickness control. Etch stops based
on p++ and electrochemical techniques differ with respect
to the ﬁnal membrane properties: the p++ membrane is
highly doped and highly stressed (because boron is a small
atom and the lattice has contracted due to the high concen-
tration of boron), so it cannot be used for electrical devices
and it is no good for mechanical devices either. It can be
used for passive structures, however. Standard p++ etch
stop has two variants: either the p++ layer is made by dif-
fusion (or implantation) or it is an epitaxial layer. Because
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 20.18
Silicon membranes: (a) timed; (b) etch stop;
(c) SOI membranes
the doping levels required for etch stop are very high in-
deed, diffusion p++ is limited to very thin membranes.
Alternatively, Si:Ge:B etch stop can be used: germa-
nium, a big atom, is introduced to compensate for the
small boron atoms. Electronically nothing changes be-
cause germanium is isoelectronic with silicon. Si:Ge:B
etch stop layers are always grown by epitaxy. Usually a
structural layer with freely chosen doping is epitaxially
grown on top of the Si:Ge:B etch stop layer. This gives
a lot of freedom, but epitaxy is an expensive process.
The pn junction etch stop has the same variants as
p++ as far as doping methods are concerned, that is dif-
fusion and epitaxy, therefore the same thickness limits.
Additionally, the n-layer has to be electrically contacted,
and this contact has to be protected from alkaline silicon
etchant. Holders of various designs have been invented,
with the drawback that part of the wafer front side is used
for sealing the holder, leading to silicon real-estate loss,
sometimes up to 20% fewer chips than in free etching.
SOI wafers offer an elegant but somewhat expensive
way of making membrane structures. The buried oxide
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 236]
246
Introduction to Microfabrication
Backplate chip with acoustic holes 
Membrane chip with
Au/Sn solder bumbs
acoustic
holes
air gap 
Figure 20.19
Metallized nitride membrane to be bonded
to a backplate chip to make a microphone. Adapted from
Kwon and Lee (2007)
of SOI acts as an etch stop layer, leaving the SOI
device layer untouched by the etch process. Bonded SOI
device layer thicknesses are usually speciﬁed at about
10%, so that a 10 μm membrane with ±1 μm thickness
variation results.
Microphones are pressure sensors too, and many struc-
tural features of the two are identical. The microphone of
Figure 20.19 consists of a metallized silicon nitride mem-
brane and an acoustic backplate. The air gap is deﬁned
by wet etching (9 μm) plus Au/Sn solder thickness (3 μm).
Acoustic holes are deﬁned by DRIE (150 μm deep, 60 μm
in diameter). Thin and large membranes and small gaps
equal sensitive microphones, but small gaps are prone
to stiction during fabrication and problematic because of
condensing water.
The thermal pressure sensor shown in Figure 20.20
has a number of important points on membrane struc-
tures. The top wafer has two thin silicon supports and
a large silicon mass (boss) etched in it. The device re-
sponds to pressure because of the thin support beams,
and it will move downward retaining parallelism with the
lower wafer because the large boss does not bend. Com-
parison of thin membrane and thick bossed membrane
was shown in Figure 17.14. Second, the thick boss will
act as a heat sink (due to the excellent thermal conductiv-
ity of silicon). The central wafer has a nitride membrane.
The heater resistor and thermopile detector are patterned
on it. The fact that nitride is an electrical and thermal
insulator is crucial. The heat produced by the resistor is
lost to the gas, and when pressure reduces the gap, heat
heat sink
thermopile
p0
p0
p1
nitride
heater resistor
Figure 20.20
Thermal pressure sensor: ﬂexible silicon
heat sink will bend when pressure is applied, and the nar-
rower gap enhances heat conduction from the heater resistor
to thermopile detector
Figure 20.21
Nitride
membrane
with
silicon
heat
spreader island, with the two photomasks used in its
fabrication. Adapted from Briand et al. (2000)
transfer to the boss is enhanced. Temperature is sensed
by the thermopile detector. Similar bossed design is also
used in capacitive pressure sensors.
A silicon boss can be made for thermal uniformity rea-
sons in a micro hotplate sensor (Figure 20.21). The ﬁrst
mask deﬁnes the silicon island size (which depends on
both mask dimensions and initial wet etch depth) and the
second mask deﬁnes the size of the membrane (together
with wafer thickness).
Membrane devices can be made in three basic ways:
1. Membrane ﬁrst, thin ﬁlms afterward.
2. Thin ﬁlms ﬁrst, membrane etching at the end.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 237]
Anisotropic Wet Etching
247
3. Partial wafer etching ﬁrst, then thin ﬁlms, then ﬁnal
silicon removal at the end.
The ﬁrst method is easy in the sense that the harsh KOH
(or TMAH) etching step is already done, and the chemical
stability of thin ﬁlms need not be considered. The draw-
back is that the wafer becomes rather fragile when the
membrane is made, and the larger the membrane, the big-
ger the concern. This applies to processing in general (spin
coating, high temperature steps, etc.) and thin-ﬁlm stresses
in particular: high stresses may damage the membrane.
The “membrane-ﬁrst” approach was used to make the
membrane chip of the microphone in Figure 20.19. Elec-
trode metallization (Cr/Ni/Au) and solder bonding metals
(Au/Sn) were deposited afterward.
The membrane-last approach necessitates some sort of
protection of the structures processed on top of the wafer.
This protection may be polymer coating, but photoresist
is not chemically tolerant. Instead, parylene, ﬂuoropoly-
mers, or black wax can be used. Other protective layers
include the same materials that are used as etch masks,
namely oxide and nitride. Instead of protective ﬁlms, a
single wafer holder can protect the top side during back-
side KOH/TMAH etching. This approach leads inevitably
to some loss of effective area on the wafer front. But the
holder can provide other functions, like electrical contacts
in electrochemical etching or the etch stop technique,
which can compensate the costs. The membrane-last
approach was used in the micro hotplate device of
Figure 20.22. However, the chemically sensitive ﬁlm
was deposited after membrane formation because it does
not tolerate KOH, unlike platinum, oxide and nitride.
The mixed approach tries to combine the best of
both worlds: mechanical stability offered by a silicon
nitride
membrane
Pt heater
sensor material
oxide
Pt measurement
electrodes
Figure 20.22
Membrane-last micro hotplate sensor
“backbone” during processing, and shorter ﬁnal etch
time, which means lesser protection requirements for the
front-side devices. Then, for instance, simple PECVD
oxide can serve as a protective coating.
20.8 Through-Wafer Structures
A nozzle is a basic through-wafer structure. It can be done
by single-sided lithography and etching: the nozzle size is
determined by the mask size, wafer thickness and silicon
crystal geometry. The condition for zero nozzle oriﬁce on
a <100> wafer is given by Equation 20.1. This simple
process is very sensitive to wafer thickness variations and
it is not practical for making small nozzles.
In the microthruster of Figure 11.7 the size of the noz-
zle depends critically on etch timing: in order to achieve
inlet shapes as drawn, etching must be stopped immedi-
ately when the top and bottom etching fronts meet in the
middle of the wafer, otherwise the structures start widen-
ing as shown in Figure 20.23. So, even though <100>
silicon usually results in 54.7◦angles, vertical walls can
be obtained in <100> etching. The SEM micrograph
Figure 20.23
Time evolution of etching through <100>
silicon from two sides simultaneously
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 238]
248
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 20.24
Accelerometer by wet etching of <100>
silicon. Courtesy VTI Technologies
_MC2_
10KV
100 μm
X85 36mm
Support frame
Silicon tube
(a)
Si
Nitride
Oxide
(b)
(c)
Figure 20.25
Hollow silicon tube for densitometer, dou-
ble masking with thermal oxide and LPCVD nitride. Re-
produced from Najmzadeh et al. (2007) by permission of
IOP
laser detection
glass or PDMS
cantilever
pipette
Figure 20.26
Cantilever biosensor. Adapted from Yue
et al. (2004)
of Figure 20.24 shows what a wet-etched accelerometer
looks like when etching is stopped at the right moment.
Through-wafer etching is often done in steps: etching
some structures, doing further processing and continuing
etching later on. In the densitometer of Figure 20.25 fu-
sion bonding has been done on partially etched wafers.
Wet etching was then continued, to create hollow tubes
for liquid density measurements.
In the cantilever biosensor of Figure 20.26, etching
from two sides simultaneously is used to increase the
apparent etch rate. The etched shapes are not critical
to device operation, and the functionality is in the
gold-coated LPCVD nitride cantilever: antibodies are
attached to the gold-coated cantilever via gold–sulphur
(thiol) bonds. When antigens bind to antibodies, surface
stress increases and the cantilever bends. This bending
is detected optically. Silicon is very suitable for this
application for many reasons: it can withstand LPCVD
nitride deposition conditions, it can be etched selectively,
it can be bonded to glass (and to PDMS) and its surface
is suitable for ﬂuidics.
20.8.1 Membranes with perforations
Perforated nitride membranes can be made by double-
sided lithography and anisotropic wet etching. Top-side
lithography determines the size for perforations. Plasma
etching of nitride exposes silicon to wet etchant. Inverted
pyramids will form in silicon, and etching will grind to
a halt. But because (111) planes have a small but ﬁnite
etch rate, the inverted pyramids will eventually merge,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 239]
Anisotropic Wet Etching
249
Figure 20.27
Perforated nitride membranes: simple and
doubly supported designs. Adapted from Kuiper et al.
(2000)
and etching then continues. This could be helped by de-
signing ﬁlter openings not along the main crystal axes,
but slanted. However, this strategy might still not work:
hydrogen evolution may prevent etchant from entering
small cavities. Back-side etching is therefore needed, too.
Nitride is a very advantageous material for this appli-
cation because of its very high etch tolerance in KOH
and TMAH. Nitride is also mechanically a good material,
but large membranes and high pressures pose problems.
The formation of dual support bars (Figure 20.27) enables
large-area membranes with high aperture ratios (high per-
centage of open area).
20.9 <110> Etching
Silicon of <110> orientation offers an interesting possi-
bility anisotropically to wet-etch perfectly vertical walls
when the mask is aligned so that slow etching (111)
planes form the sidewalls. However, just as in the case
of <100> silicon etching, the relative rates of different
crystal planes can be changed by etchant concentration
and temperature. It is possible to ﬁnd conditions where
a square bottom proﬁle can be achieved, for instance
KOH (23% wt)–H2O–isopropanol (10–15% wt) at 85 ◦C
or 30% KOH at 70 ◦C give the etch proﬁle shown in
Figure 20.28.
Under other etch conditions a self-limiting shape, a U-
groove, is encountered, for instance with 40% KOH at
70 ◦C (Figure 20.29). U-grooves are self-limiting just like
V-grooves on (100) wafers, when planes that etch slower
than (110) appear.
Etching will proceed until the six slow etching (111)
planes meet. The self-limiting depth D for U-grooves
Figure 20.28
Rectangular groove bottoms in KOH–IPA
etching of <110> silicon. Reproduced from Dwivedi et al.
(2000) by permission of Elsevier
[110]
[111]
[311]
Figure 20.29
Etching of <110> silicon: slow etching
(111) planes form vertical sidewalls. Depending on etchant
concentration, composition and temperature, slow etching
planes start to limit the groove
for initial mask opening sizes a and b (Figure 20.30) is
given by
D =

a +
√
2 × b

2 ×
√
6
(20.4)
A major limitation of vertical walled structures on (110)
silicon is that only diamond-shaped structures will have
all four walls vertical. Diamonds have 70.5◦and 109.5◦
angles. Rectangular shapes will turn into hexagons, but
diamonds oriented with crystal axes will retain their
shape in the etching process.
There is no fundamental limitation as to size of
wet-etched structures. In practice minimum size may be
limited by lithography or by crystal plane etch selectivity.
With 100 nm initial size and 100:1 etch selectivity, a
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 240]
250
Introduction to Microfabrication
70.5°
109.5°
a
b
Figure 20.30
<110> etched shapes: solid lines indicate
mask openings, dotted lines ﬁnal etched shapes. Diamonds
oriented along major crystal axes retain their shape
100 nm undercut appears after etching 10 μm deep, but
ﬁnite crystal plane selectivity can be designed in, and in
fact structures with aspect ratios greater than 100:1 have
been made.
Chemical microreactors form a broad class of micro-
fabricated devices, usually with various chamber/ﬂow
channel geometries. The hydrogen separation device
shown in Figure 20.31 is one example of the beneﬁts
that microfabrication has to offer. Hydrogen can diffuse
through palladium–silver thin ﬁlm, but other gases cannot.
The reactor is fabricated on <110> silicon, with etching
stopping on the oxide. The oxide is etched away to reveal
He + H2
He + H2
N2
N2 + H2
Glass
Glass
<110>
Figure 20.31
A microreactor for hydrogen separation.
KOH etching of <110> silicon stops on oxide, HF etching
removes oxide, and palladium membrane remains. Pd al-
lows hydrogen diffusion but blocks all other gases. Adapted
from Tong (2003)
the Pd–Ag membrane. The ﬂow channels are formed by
anodic bonding. Defect-free thin metal membranes can
be made reproducibly because fabrication takes place in
a cleanroom, and because the silicon surface is extremely
ﬂat and smooth. Higher separation selectivity between
hydrogen and other gases is possible because thin, yet
defect-free, membranes do not leak. Moreover, the mem-
branes tolerate high pressures because silicon etching
can be used to leave silicon support struts as desired.
This enables higher pressures and higher gas ﬂuxes.
20.10 <111> Silicon Etching
<111> silicon wafers cannot be etched in KOH because
(111) planes are the slow etching planes. If, however,
initial trenches are opened by plasma etching, other crys-
tal planes will be exposed. The depth of the structure is
determined by the initial plasma etch step because the
bottoms are (111) planes just like the wafer surface and
they do not etch further in KOH.
The sixfold symmetry which was seen in the vertex
view of silicon crystal (Figure 4.6) is evident in <111>
wafers (Figure 20.32). Triangular and hexagonal patterns
will retain their shapes if oriented along the proper crystal
planes. The sidewalls will be either 70.5◦or 90◦. Struc-
tures with concave corners will result in hexagonal ﬁnal
shapes as (111) planes meet.
Free-standing thin-ﬁlm structures can be made by
etching an initial release hole, and then continuing with
anisotropic wet etching. Complete undercutting leads to
free-standing structures not unlike those made on (100)
silicon. However, lateral undercutting in some directions
is fairly large, as shown in Figure 20.33.
If free-standing silicon bridges and beams need to be
made (Figure 20.34), multiple etch and deposition steps
are needed.
Process ﬂow for <111> silicon
microbridge
1. Oxide mask
2. First silicon RIE
3. CVD oxide
4. Oxide RIE
5. Second silicon RIE
6. Silicon wet etching
7. Oxide removal
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 241]
Anisotropic Wet Etching
251
A
A
A
Top view
(a)
60°
60°
19.47°
120°
(111)
A′
A′
A′
[111]
Cross section A A′
Side view
[111]
[111] [111]
[111]
Flat
[110]
[111]
[111]
(b)
60°
90°
90°
60°
120°
Top view
Cross section A A′
Side view
[110]
[101]
[110]
[101]
[011]
[011]
(111)
B′
B′
B′
B
B
B
Flat
[110]
[111]
Figure 20.32
<111> silicon crystal planes. Note the hexagonal symmetry. Not all walls are bound by slow etching
(111) planes. Reproduced from Park et al. (1999) by permission of Institute of Pure and Applied Physics
Flat
[110]
Pattern openings
[111]
[111]
[111]
[111]
[111]
[111]
C
C′
Figure 20.33
Etching of <111> silicon bridge: two rect-
angular pattern openings are undercut, and etching will
proceed until slow etching (111) planes are met. Under-
cutting to the left and right of the bridge is large compared
to bridge width. Reproduced from Park et al. (1999) by
permission of Institute of Pure and Applied Physics
This microbridge can be of any doping type, while
(100) silicon bridges are made either by p++ or pn etch
stop or by timed etching. The bridge thickness of a (111)
bridge is determined by the ﬁrst silicon RIE step, and re-
lease gap thickness by the second silicon RIE step. The
depths of RIE steps are not very accurate but because
the bridge roof and ceiling are slow etching (111) planes,
surface quality is excellent.
20.11 Comparison of <100>,
<110> and <111> Etching
If an initial trench has been etched in the wafer by
anisotropic
plasma
etching
(i.e.,
vertical
sidewalls,
Figure 20.35), anisotropic wet etching will proceed until
slow etching (111) planes are encountered. On a (100)
wafer this will result in a rhombohedral structure with
54.7◦angles. On a (110) wafer the ﬂat bottom will be
further etched and, depending on relative etch rates in
the etchant in question, either a ﬂat bottom remains or
a U-groove sets in. On (111) wafers either vertical or
slanted walls will result, depending on pattern orientation.
Anisotropic wet etching of silicon has served the
MEMS community well for decades and is still going
strong. There are of course applications where (D)RIE
excels, and wet etching is no substitute, but the opposite
is also true in certain applications. Batch processing
with excellent throughput, uniformity and surface quality
is a strong point of wet etching. Exact slope angles
determined by silicon crystal planes cannot be matched
by DRIE: obtaining perfectly vertical walls by DRIE is
only approximate and often a wet etch step is done to
reveal the vertical crystal planes, as will be shown in
Figure 21.24. Wet etching is also used to smooth surfaces
after DRIE.
Integrating wet etching into a process ﬂow requires a
number of issues to be tackled: mask oxide thickness is
on the limit of practical thermal oxides for through-wafer
etching with KOH, but then TMAH can be used. How-
ever, the two are not direct substitutes for each other.
Use of a silicon nitride etch mask usually solves masking
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 242]
252
Introduction to Microfabrication
Silicon
Oxide
Nitride
[111]
(a)
[111]
[111]
[111]
(b)
Figure 20.34
Silicon bridges in (111) silicon. The ﬁrst RIE deﬁnes silicon bridge thickness. A spacer is formed before
the second RIE step which deﬁnes the release gap. The spacer protects the bridge during undercutting etch in KOH.
Reproduced from Park et al. (1999) by permission of Institute of Pure and Applied Physics
<100>
<110>
<111>
Figure 20.35
RIE vertical walled starting shape (dotted), followed by KOH wet etching: top, <100>; middle, <110>;
bottom, <111> wafers
problems. DRIE will be discussed in the following chapter
and Chapter 30 discusses MEMS applications at length.
20.12 Exercises
1. What is the activation energy of <110> silicon etch-
ing in 30% KOH?
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 ◦C
4.7
9.8
19.4
37
68
121
209
350 μm/h
2. KOH etch rates (μm/h) for <100> silicon are given
below. Calculate the activation energies for the dif-
ferent KOH concentrations!
40 ◦C
60 ◦C
80 ◦C
100 ◦C
20%
7.09
26.7
86.3
246
30%
6.48
24.4
79
225
40%
5.28
19.9
64.4
183
50%
3.77
14.2
45.9
131
Data from Lang (1996).
3. Silicon <100> wet etch rate in 25% KOH at 90 ◦C
has been measured to be 2.5 μm/min, and activation
energy was determined to be 0.61 eV (59 kJ/mol). If
membranes 40 μm thick are made in wafers 380 μm
thick, and etch bath temperature is controlled to
±1 ◦C, how does this affect membrane thickness
control?
4. In Exercise 1.5 pressure sensor membrane deﬂection
was calculated. Compare this to the surface roughness
of a KOH etched wafer.
5. Micromechanical
pressure
sensor
chips
have
diaphragms 40 μm thick which are 1 × 1 mm in area.
How many such chips can be made on
(a) 380 μm thick 3 inch wafers?
(b) 525 μm thick 100 mm wafers?
(c) 675 μm thick 150 mm wafers?
6. Nozzles are fabricated by etching anisotropically
through a <100> silicon wafer 380 μm thick. A
mask pattern 540 μm wide is used. Calculate the
size of holes produced by an ideal process. Then
calculate the effect of the following real-world
uncertainties:
(a) wafer thickness variation 380 ± 5 μm
(b) total thickness variation (TTV) of 1 μm
(c) <100>:<111> crystal plane selectivity 33:1 vs.
30:1.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 243]
Anisotropic Wet Etching
253
7. If a piezoresistive pressure sensor membrane is
made in an epitaxial layer, and diaphragm etching
is stopped by a pn junction etch stop, how do the
following affect membrane thickness:
(a) wafer thickness
(b) wafer TTV
(c) epitaxial layer thickness?
8. Detail all the fabrication steps of the AFM cantilever–
tip of Figure 20.2.
9. Detail the process sequence for making the device
shown in Figure 20.7.
10. What is the angle between the (111) and (311) planes
shown in Figure 20.29?
11. Design “corner compensation” structures that will re-
sult in a circular hole in a wet etched <100> wafer.
12. Design a process and mask set for the fabrication of
silicon bridges on (110) wafers.
13. Calculate the aperture ratios (percentage of open area)
in the two ﬁlter designs of Figure 20.27.
14. The deﬂection of a circular membrane under pres-
sure is given by h = 0.666(r4p/Et)1/3, where r is
diaphragm radius, t thickness and E Young’s modu-
lus. What deﬂection corresponds to 25 mtorr pressure
difference? What is the corresponding capacitance
change?
15. How small an opening can you make by wet etching
in (a) bulk wafers and (b) SOI wafers for the structure
shown below? Assume top-side etched depth to be
10 μm.
16. How is nozzle shape control different below if etching
is done (a) from both sides simultaneously, (b) from
the top side ﬁrst, then thermally oxidized and etched
from the back side?
17. How would you fabricate the optical ﬁber positioning
device shown below? Draw photomasks and cross-
sections after each silicon etch step.
Reproduced from Hoffman and Voges (2002) by permission of
IOP
18. Design a process and calculate the mask dimensions
for
a
500 × 500 μm
nitride
membrane
with
a
300 × 300 μm silicon island, 20 μm thick, for the
heat spreader structure of Figure 20.21.
19. Estimate
the
dimensions
of
structures
in
the
accelerometer of Figure 20.5!
References and Related Reading
Bostock, R.M. et al. (1998) Silicon nitride microclips for
the kinematic location of optic ﬁbres in silicon V-shaped
grooves, J. Micromech. Microeng., 8, 343–360.
Briand, D. et al. (2000) Design and fabrication of high-
temperature micro-hotplates for drop-coated gas sensors,
Sens. Actuators, B68, 223–233.
Brida, S. et al. (2000) Microstructures etched in doped TMAH
solutions, Microelectron. Eng., 53, 547–551.
Collins, S.C. (1997) Etch stop techniques for micromachining,
J. Electrochem. Soc., 144, 2242.
Dwivedi, V.K. et al. (2000) Fabrication of very smooth walls
and bottoms of silicon microchannels for heat dissipation of
semiconductor devices, Microelectron. J ., 31, 405.
Elwenspoek, M. and H. Jansen (1998) Silicon micromachin-
ing, Cambridge University Press.
Fang, W. (1998) Design of bulk micromachined suspensions,
J. Micromech. Microeng., 8, 263–271.
Hannemann, B. and J. Fruhauf (1998) New and extended pos-
sibilities of orientation dependent etching in microtechnics,
Proceedings of IEEE MEMS’98, p. 234.
Hoffmann, M. and E. Voges (2002) Bulk silicon microma-
chining for MEMS in optical communication systems,
J. Micromech. Microeng., 12, 349.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 244]
254
Introduction to Microfabrication
Kovacs, G.T.A. et al. (1998) Bulk micromachining of silicon,
Proc. IEEE, 86, 1543.
Kuiper, S. et al. (2000) Wet and dry etching techniques for the
release of sub-micrometre perforated membranes, J. Micro-
electromech. Syst., 10, 171–174.
Kwon, H.-S. and K.-C. Lee (2007) Double-chip condenser mi-
crophone for rigid backplate using DRIE and wafer bonding
technology, Sens. Actuators, A138, 81–86.
Lang, W. (1996) Silicon microstructuring technology, Mater.
Sci. Eng., R17, 1–55.
Lindroos, V. et al. (2010) Handbook of Silicon Based MEMS
Materials and Technologies, Elsevier.
Ma, T., Y. Liu and T. Li (2009) A <100> direction front-
etched membrane structure for a micro-bolometer, J. Mi-
cromech. Microeng., 19, 035022.
Najmzadeh, M., S. Haasl and P. Enoksson (2007) A silicon
straight tube ﬂuid density sensor, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
17, 1657–1663.
Oosterbrook, R.E. et al. (2000) Etching methodologies in
<111> -oriented silicon wafers, J. Microelectromech. Syst.,
9, 390.
Pal, P., K. Sato and S. Chandra (2007) Fabrication techniques
of convex corners in a (100)-silicon wafer using bulk
micromachining: a review, J. Micromech. Microeng., 17,
R111–R133.
Park, S. et al. (1999) Mesa-supported, single-crystal mi-
crostructures fabricated by the surface/bulk micromachining
process, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 38, 4244.
Powell, O. and H. Harrison (2001) Anisotropic etching of {100}
and {110} planes in (100) silicon, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
11, 217.
Sasaki, M. et al. (2000) Anisotropically etched Si mold for
solid polymer dye microcavity laser, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 39,
7145.
Sato, K. et al. (1998) Characterization of orientation-dependent
etching properties of single-crystal silicon: effects of KOH
concentration, Sens. Actuators, A64, 87–93.
Schr¨oder, H. et al. (2001) Convex corner undercutting of {100}
silicon in anisotropic KOH etching: the new step-ﬂow model
of 3-D structuring and ﬁrst simulation results, J. Microelec-
tromech. Syst., 10, 88–97.
Seidel, H. et al. (1990a) Anisotropic etching of crystalline sili-
con in alkaline solutions I, J. Electrochem. Soc., 137, 3612.
Seidel, H. et al. (1990b) Anisotropic etching of crystalline sili-
con in alkaline solutions II, J. Electrochem. Soc., 137, 3626.
Shikida, M. et al. (2000) Differences in anisotropic etching
properties of KOH and TMAH solutions, Sens. Actuators,
80, 179.
Shikida, M. et al. (2001) A new explanation of mask undercut
in anisotropic silicon etching: saddle point in etching rate
diagram, Proceedings of Transducers’01, p. 648.
Strandman, C. et al. (1995) Fabrication of 45◦degree mirrors
together with well-deﬁned V-grooves using wet anisotropic
etching of silicon, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 4, 214.
Tong, H.D. (2003) Microfabrication of palladium–silver alloy
membranes for hydrogen separation, J. Microelectromech.
Syst., 12, 622–629.
Vazsonyi, E. et al. (2003) Anisotropic etching of silicon in a
two-component alkaline solution, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
13, 165.
Wilke, N. et al. (2005) Process optimization and characteriza-
tion of silicon microneedles fabricated by wet etch technol-
ogy, Microelectron. J., 36, 650–656.
Wong, S.S. et al. (1992) An etch stop utilizing selective etching
of n-type silicon by pulsed potential anodization, J. Micro-
electromech. Syst., 1, 187.
Yue, M. et al. (2004) A 2-D Microcantilever array for mul-
tiplexed biomolecular analysis, J. Microelectromech. Syst.,
13, 290–299.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 245]
21
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
Reactive ion etching (RIE) (which we will use as a
synonym for plasma etching) opens up many possibilities
which cannot be done by wet etching. Practically any size
and shape can be made by RIE. All sorts of mechanical
devices, like springs, beams and plates, are fabricated by
plasma etching, as are vertical capacitors and mirrors,
in-plane and out-of-plane microneedles and nozzles, and
ﬂuidic ﬁlters and separation devices.
DRIE is an extension of RIE for deep etching, but
depth is very different from application to application. For
example, in SOI MEMS there is a need to etch the SOI de-
vice layer, which can be 5–50 μm, but in many cases also
the handle wafer needs to be etched, that is 300–500 μm.
While typical RIE rates are on the order of 0.1–1 μm/min,
DRIE rates are 2–20 μm/min. Even higher rates have been
reported, but then other criteria have been sacriﬁced: side-
wall proﬁle control is poor and high rates are only avail-
able for designs which have small etchable area.
This chapter concentrates on silicon DRIE processes,
with some basic structures discussed. Comparison is of-
ten made to anisotropic wet etching because sometimes
DRIE and KOH can both be used, and selection has to be
reasoned. More advanced device examples will be found
in Chapter 30 on MEMS integration.
21.1 RIE Process Capabilities
Small linewidths can be made by RIE. If lithographers
have been able to print something on the wafer, etch
engineers have always been able to etch those patterns.
RIE was adopted in IC fabrication at about 3 μm
linewidths, and it has been scaled down to current
generation 45 nm processes. RIE is therefore suitable for
nanostructure fabrication.
Structures
of
high
aspect
ratio
can
be
made
(Figure 21.1). Pillars and holes can be very deep and
narrow, with 100:1 record structures used in DRAM
trench capacitors (10 μm deep, 100 nm wide). In MEMS
through-wafer structures 10 μm wide and 400 μm deep
have been made. Making structures of high aspect ratio
is by no means easy, and etch rate slows down in such
deep cavities, as will be discussed later in this chapter.
Combining the narrow gap and high aspect ratio ca-
pabilities, RIE enables comb-drive devices. Comb drives
are widely used as sensors and actuators in microsystems.
Basically a comb drive is a vertical capacitor with mov-
ing and ﬁxed capacitor plates. The principle is shown
in Figure 21.2 and a SEM micrograph of it is shown in
Figure 21.3. All the capacitor ﬁngers are undercut, but
every other one is connected to a ﬁxed anchor and every
other to a movable plate (more on this in Chapter 29 on
surface micromachining).
A comb drive can be used as a capacitive sensor, with
its capacitance given by Equation 21.1 and force by
Equation 21.2. DRIE is important in many ways, because
it can be used to fabricate narrow gaps, spacing d is
small and the number of ﬁnger pairs, n, can be made
large and, because deep structures can be etched, height
h and area A will be large:
C = nεA
d
(21.1)
F = 1
2CV2 = nεA
2d V 2
(21.2)
In sensor applications the gap between the capacitor plates
changes due to some external force, for example acceler-
ation (in accelerometers and gyroscopes) or gravity (in-
clinometers). High sensitivity is possible because of large
capacitor area. When a comb drive is used as an electro-
static actuator, the narrow gap means low actuation volt-
ages, and large area equals large forces. Long actuation
distances of tens of micrometers can be made, and this is
used for example in the laterally moving optical attenuator
of Figure 21.4. DRIE is essential also in fabricating
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 246]
256
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 21.1
Nanopillars (left) and micropillars by DRIE (right). Courtesy Nikolai Chekurov Aalto University,
and Kai Kolari, VTT
anchors
flexures
fixed comb
movable comb 
suspended
mass
actuation
direction
Figure 21.2
Comb-drive actuator
the vertical mirror which is inserted in the optical path. A
variable optical attenuator (VOA) has been made by two
45◦mirrors, one ﬁxed, one movable (Figure 21.4). DRIE
is essential for both the vertical wall and 45◦angle.
The third major difference to wet etching is shape free-
dom: RIE will truthfully replicate any shape that has been
patterned, irrespective of wafer crystal orientation. This
opens up endless opportunities for device design. In mak-
ing watch springs and other mechanical structures, the
capability to fabricate variable cross-sections opens up
new possibilities to ﬁne-tune mechanical features, unlike
traditional machining (Figure 21.5).
RIE produces vertical walls. This is true of anisotropic
wet etching of <110> silicon as well, but there are lim-
itations in wet etching: it is only possible along certain
crystal planes, and cannot for example make two mir-
rors that are 90◦to each other. With RIE, any shapes can
Figure 21.3
SEM micrograph of a comb-drive actuator (left) and vertical mirror at the end of the actuator (right).
Reproduced from Acar and Shkel (2005) by permission of IOP and from Yun et al. (2006), copyright 2006, by permission
of Elsevier
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 247]
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
257
Figure 21.4
Variable optical attenuator (VOA) with ﬁxed and movable 45◦vertical mirrors (left); optical ﬁbers inserted
into VOA (right). Reproduced from Kim and Kim (2005) by permission of IOP
Figure 21.5
Mechanical parts for watches. Courtesy CSEM
be made, as the gyroscope of Figure 21.6 reveals. RIE
walls are seldom exactly 90◦, but for example 90 ± 2◦,
which may, or may not, be critical. In the case of vertical
capacitors (and the gyroscope is one) and mirrors, 90◦
sidewalls are a must. Negative angles (>90◦), also called
retrograde, are problematic in many cases, for example in
micromolding and casting, see Figure 18.20.
Micro-optics offers a wealth of examples where the
special qualities of DRIE are utilized. The shape free-
dom is used to fabricate curving and spiraling waveguides
(Figure 21.7). Sometimes the radius of curvature is as
small as 5 μm, so the small feature size capability of
DRIE is important. There are many applications where
subwavelength sizes are needed, for example in antire-
ﬂection “coatings” by artiﬁcial refractive index structures
(Figure 21.7).
Another important issue in micro-optics is the sidewall
quality. Most applications would prefer perfectly vertical
sidewalls, but sometimes slanted walls or continuous
surface proﬁles are needed. Any roughness on the
sidewalls is usually detrimental to optical performance,
and DRIE is sometimes followed by additional smoothing
steps (Section 21.6 below).
In order to increase device packing density, the front
surface area should be reserved for active devices only.
This is especially important for optical devices like solar
cells and CMOS camera chips. One solution is through-
silicon vias (TSVs), making contacts on the back of the
wafer, and having vias through the wafer to devices on the
front side. DRIE and high aspect ratios are involved, but
the etched depth is typically only 30–100 μm, depending
on whether etching is done from the front or back side.
In all cases it is important that via proﬁle is positively
sloping, or at least not retrograde, because the vias need
to be ﬁlled by a conductor later on. TSV will be discussed
in Chapter 39.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 248]
258
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 21.6
Gyroscope. Courtesy VTI Technologies
21.2 RIE Process Physics
and Chemistry
Fluorine, chlorine and bromine etch silicon. Fluorine is
chosen for MEMS DRIE because of its etch rate: etch
rates an order of magnitude higher are possible with SF6
than with Cl2 or HBr. More ﬂuorine can be generated
at the same power level, and ﬂuorine is very reactive.
Fluorine, however, does not easily result in a perfectly
anisotropic proﬁle, but in many MEMS applications near-
vertical proﬁles can be tolerated. In DRAM trench capac-
itor etching proﬁle control is of paramount importance,
and Cl2 and HBr are used, and the etched depth is small
enough so that a slower rate can be tolerated. Two ma-
jor variants of MEMS DRIE processes exist: Bosch and
cryogenic. Both take advantage of sidewall passivation
mechanisms (Figure 11.5), but differ in many details.
In the Bosch process (named after the company which
developed it) SF6 and C4F8 gases are pulsed: an SF6
pulse etches a few micrometers of silicon, but etching
is not completely anisotropic. A C4F8 pulse is then ap-
plied, and a ﬂuoropolymer protective ﬁlm is deposited all
over the wafer. The next SF6 etching pulse removes the
polymer ﬁlm from the trench bottom by ion-assisted etch-
ing, but the sidewalls do not experience ion bombardment
and remain protected (though are slightly etched by ﬂuo-
rine radicals). After removing the protective ﬁlm from the
trench bottom, SF6 etching of silicon can continue. The
next C4F8 pulse deposits a new protective ﬁlm and then
another SF6 pulse is fed into the reactor. The pulsed opera-
tion leads to an undulating sidewall (shown schematically
in Figure 21.8 and in the SEM micrograph of Figure 21.9
(right)). It is important to remove the ﬂuoropolymer ﬁlm
completely at the end of the etching process because it
can interfere with the following steps, for example by
preventing wet cleaning via its hydrophobicity.
In cryogenic deep etching continuous SF6/O2 ﬂow is
used at −120 ◦C. Etching proceeds vertically because a
ﬁlm of SiOxFz from the reaction products is deposited on
the cooled feature walls, and it is removed from horizontal
surfaces by ion bombardment, leaving the sidewalls pro-
tected. Lateral etching by spontaneous chemical reaction
is also suppressed by low temperature as predicted by the
Arrhenius law (Equation 1.1). The smooth sidewall of the
cryogenic process is contrasted to the undulating Bosch
proﬁle in the SEM micrographs of Figure 21.9.
Both the Bosch and cryogenic processes are low-
pressure, high-density plasma processes. Various process
parameters can be used to ﬁne-tune DRIE processes,
as shown in Figure 21.10. Process inputs like pressure,
RF power, ﬂow rate and temperature inﬂuence ion
density, energy and angular distribution; radical density,
surface reaction probability and desorption probability
are also determined by machine parameters. In the end
we are not interested in ion angular distributions, but
Figure 21.7
RIE in micro-optics: left, spiraling waveguides, reproduced from Xu et al. (2009) by permission of Op-
tical Society of America; right, end-of-ridge waveguide antireﬂective facets, reproduced from Schmid et al. (2007) by
permission of Optical Society of America
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 249]
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
259
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 21.8
Bosch process, etch and passivation pulses
repeated: (a) SF6 isotropic etch step; (b) C4F8 passivation
layer deposition; (c) next etch step
in wafer-level measurable quantities, like etch rate,
selectivities, sidewall angle and the like.
Some general guidelines can be given regarding
process optimization, but process recipes are very much
reactor dependent, and not easily transferred from one
etcher to another. Higher RF power results in higher etch
rate, as expected, but the etch rates of oxide and resist
also increase, lowering selectivities, so some balance
must be obtained. Lower pressure is good for anisotropy
because at low pressure there are fewer ion collisions
and more directional ion bombardment. But if high ﬂow
rates are needed (and they are needed to provide enough
etchant), high pumping capacity is mandatory. Temper-
ature increase has to be prevented because the resist is
degraded when temperatures approach and exceed 100 ◦C.
Passivation ﬁlm thickness (either from C4F8 source gas
or from SiOxFy reaction products) is good for anisotropy,
but the passivation ﬁlm slows down etching, and there
is a danger of overpassivation, which leads to residues,
and in the extreme to silicon nanograss, often known as
black silicon (because it is an efﬁcient absorber of light).
21.3 Deep Etching
Because DRIE etch rates are high, through-wafer etching
is a standard step. This can be used to make holes,
nozzles, membranes, cantilevers and others. Figure 21.11
shows a through-wafer etched triangular aligner for
optical ﬁber. Its size is designed to match the ﬁber
size, obviously, but the ﬂexible ﬁns allow for minor
dimensional variations and
ensure
intimate contact.
Holders of silicon nitride for ﬁber alignment made by
wet etching were shown in Figure 20.10, but these were
for in-plane ﬁber alignment, and wet etching could not
be used to make a through-wafer version.
In Figure 17.2a a variable capacitor was shown. DRIE
through-wafer etching releases the aluminum membrane
and allows it to move. Aluminum is used as an etch mask,
and in ﬂuorine plasmas very high etch selectivity is ob-
tained against aluminum because AlF3 is involatile. If the
variable capacitor were made by wet etching, the pro-
cess ﬂow would need to be completely different because
aluminum does not tolerate KOH or TMAH. Making the
aluminum membrane would then need to be done after
silicon etching.
Figure 21.9
Silicon microstructures by cryogenic (left) and Bosch processes (right). Courtesy Ali Shah, Aalto University
and Mikael Sterner and Joachim Oberhammer, KTH Royal Institute of Technology
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 250]
260
Introduction to Microfabrication
SF6 flow
Oz flow
ICP power
CCP power
Pressure
Stage
temperature
He
backing
pressure
Water
temperature
Ion
directionality
Concentration of
free O radicals
Ion
energies
Etch rate
Selectivity
Anisotropy
Thickness of
passivation layer
Concentration of
free F radicals
Figure 21.10
The interdependence of reactor parameters to plasma parameters and etch responses on a wafer. Courtesy
Lauri Sainiemi, Aalto University
Figure 21.11
A holder for optical ﬁber. Reproduced from
Holm et al. (2000), copyright 2000, by permission of
Elsevier
Both the thin SOI device wafer and the thick handle
wafer can be etched by DRIE. In the torsion mirror of
Figure 21.12, all thin-ﬁlm deposition and patterning steps
on the SOI device layer are ﬁnished, and device layer
silicon is then etched. Back-side lithography and handle
wafer etching then commence. In this case all the critical
structures are in the device layer, and back-side etching is
non-critical, so both wet etching and DRIE can be used.
BOX etching ﬁnally releases the torsion bars and combs
and allows them to move.
21.4 Combining Anisotropic
and Isotropic DRIE
As discussed in Chapter 11, anisotropic etching is the
special case and isotropic proﬁle is the default proﬁle.
The high rate offered by DRIE is beneﬁcial also in
isotropic etching. The combination of anisotropic and
isotropic etching steps can be used to make free-standing
single
crystal silicon structures
with vertical
walls
(Figure 21.13). The method relies on anisotropy/isotropy
control in many steps.
Process ﬂow for suspended
silicon bridges
• Oxide mask
• DRIE for the trench
• Oxide CVD
• Oxide RIE: bottom cleared, sidewalls remain
• Isotropic silicon etching
This method has many limitations, the most important
being that the width of the released structure and its
thickness are related, and the method is best suited
for narrow and thick structures. The underside of the
structure is not well deﬁned, which may be a limitation
in some applications.
Silicon bridges with excellent dimensional control can
be achieved when SOI wafers are used (Figure 21.14).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 251]
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
261
Figure 21.12
Schematic comb-drive torsional analog mir-
ror: left, before SOI BOX etching; right, SEM micrograph
after HF etching. Reproduced from Tsou et al. (2005) by
permission of IOP
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 21.13
Suspended
silicon
bridge
fabrication:
(a) oxide-masked DRIE; (b) CVD oxide deposition and
anisotropic oxide etching; (c) isotropic etching of silicon
Thermal oxide masks the DRIE of SOI device layer etch-
ing. CVD oxide is then deposited. Next, anisotropic RIE
of oxide leaves sidewalls protected, but CVD oxide on the
bottom is etched. So far the bulk silicon and SOI processes
are identical, but then oxide etching continues and BOX
is etched, too. The oxide mask on device silicon is also
consumed, so the three oxide thicknesses have to be care-
fully designed. After etching through BOX, the isotropic
silicon etch process step releases the bridge. The bridge
is protected by thermal mask oxide from the top, by CVD
oxide on sidewalls and by BOX from the bottom, and the
bridge dimensions are preserved during the isotropic sili-
con etch step. The stress test structure of Figure 2.2 was
made with this process. Bridge doping is a free parameter,
while in many wet-etched versions p++ or pn etch stop
techniques necessitate certain doping levels.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
Si
Figure 21.14
Microbridge in SOI device layer: (a) mask
oxide, SOI device silicon and BOX anisotropic etching with
resist mask; (b) PECVD oxide; (c) oxide anisotropic etch-
ing; (d) SOI handle silicon isotropic etching. Redrawn from
Sainiemi et al. (2009)
The same method has been used to create buried
microchannels (Figure 21.15). Anisotropic silicon etching
is used to etch a narrow trench, which is protected by
CVD oxide. Isotropic silicon etching creates a circular
channel.
Conformal
deposition
closes
the
channel.
Because thin-ﬁlm deposition thicknesses are practically
limited to a few micrometers, the initial trench opening
has to be in the micrometer range.
21.5 Microneedles and Nozzles
In-plane microneedles can be made very long because
silicon is strong. A length of a few millimeters is not un-
usual. Out-of-plane microneedles are limited to the wafer
thickness, in practice a few hundred micrometers. There
are needles and nozzles for biomedical applications (blood
extraction and drug injection), for chemical applications
(for sample droplet dispensing, spraying and vaporiza-
tion), printers (ink jets, DNA array spotting), and for
cooling, aerosol generation and cell probing.
The in-plane ﬂuidic microneedle shown in Figure 21.16
makes use of DRIE’s special capabilities, as it could
not be fabricated by wet etching. The process ﬂow is as
follows. The buried channel is formed as described above
using both anisotropic and isotropic DRIE, and conformal
CVD. The ﬂuidic reservoir part (along cut line AA′) is
very wide. It will be coated by CVD but not closed.
Needle shape is determined by the next DRIE step. Chip
size is deﬁned on the same mask. Needle thickness is
determined by the back-side DRIE release etch.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 252]
262
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 21.15
Buried microchannels: (a) anisotropic DRIE, sidewall spacer formation and isotropic DRIE; (b) removal
of spacer and conformal CVD. SEM micrograph from de Boer et al. (2000) by permission of IEEE
(a)
B
B′
A′
(b)
(c)
(d)
A
Figure 21.16
In-plane microneedle: buried microchannel,
Reproduced from Paik et al. (2004), copyright 2004, by
permission of Elsevier
Deep structures can be etched easily, but lithography
over deep steps is difﬁcult. Double masking (or peeling
or nested masks) can be used just as in wet etching (Figure
20.4). For example, oxide is grown and patterned, and a
second pattern of resist is done on top (Figure 21.17). The
resist serves as a mask during the ﬁrst shallow DRIE step
(a)
(b)
Figure 21.17
Nested mask: (a) oxide lithography and
etching, followed by new resist spinning and lithography
and silicon etching with the resist mask; (b) resist mask
removal and second silicon etching with oxide mask
and is then stripped away. The oxide revealed underneath
will act as a mask for the second, deeper DRIE step.
There are various ways of making nozzles with
the through-wafer ﬂuidic channel. In this section we
will compare many different versions, with regard to
lithography–etching interplay: the number of process
steps differs, and masking and alignment requirements
vary. In every case, we are talking about arrays of
nozzles, because here DRIE excels over wet etching. In
wet etching nozzle density is limited to about 4/mm2
while DRIE nozzle arrays can have densities of 100/mm2
easily, and 1000/mm2 with some process tuning. The
most common limiting factor is the through-wafer
etching at high aspect ratio: 10 μm holes equal 40:1
aspect ratios, and most applications will settle for
larger channels (even though the nozzles can be made
very small).
The ﬁrst approach uses three front-side lithography
and DRIE steps (Figure 21.18). If the ﬁrst DRIE etch
(determining nozzle height) is shallow, resist spinning
over topography can reasonably be done. The second
lithography deﬁnes the nozzle itself. The third patterning
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 253]
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
263
Figure 21.18
Nozzle array with common ﬂuid reservoir:
three lithography and three DRIE steps. Redrawn from Yu
et al. (2009)
on the wafer back side is non-critical for both lithography
and DRIE: the structures are large, and alignment
requirements are lax. All the nozzles will be squirting
the same ﬂuid because of the common reservoir but the
density of nozzles is very high.
The DRIE requirements for the nozzles of Figure 21.19
are much more demanding than in the previous example.
For 100 μm nozzles aspect ratios of 4:1 are needed
in through-wafer DRIE. On the other hand, only two
lithography steps are needed, and both of them are done
on a planar surface. Alignment is critical to make the top
and bottom channel openings coincide.
In both the above cases simple silicon nozzles sufﬁced,
but if for instance a dielectric nozzle is needed, the pro-
cess becomes a little more complex (Figure 21.20). This
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 21.19
Silicon nozzle array: (a) back-side DRIE;
(b) front-side DRIE; (c) SEM micrographs of nozzles. Re-
produced from Deng et al. (2006), copyright 2006, by per-
mission of Elsevier
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 21.20
Oxide nozzle for patch clamp cell probing.
After two-step DRIE with peeling masks: (a) thermal oxida-
tion; (b) anisotropic oxide RIE; (c) anisotropic and isotropic
silicon RIE; (d) back-side silicon DRIE and thermal oxida-
tion. Adapted from Lehnert et al. (2002)
device is used in patch clamp cell membrane electrical
studies, and the device has to have gigaohm resistance.
A peeling mask process similar to Figure 21.17 is used
to create the initial top pattern. The wafer is then ther-
mally oxidized, and oxide RIE is performed. Oxide on
the front surface is thicker than elsewhere, because there
was mask oxide to begin with. The oxide on the side-
walls is preserved because oxide RIE is anisotropic, but
the bottoms of etched features are cleared of oxide. Sil-
icon DRIE is then continued, to form an oxide nozzle
(Figure 21.21). Another oxidation step ensures dielectric
isolation everywhere.
The side-opened microneedle (Figure 1.13) provides
a sharp tip for effective piercing of the epithelium, but
because the ﬂuidic channel is not at the tip, it will not
10μm
Figure 21.21
Oxide nozzles of previous ﬁgure as seen by
a SEM. Reproduced from Lehnert et al. (2002), copyright
2002, American Institute of Physics
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 254]
264
Introduction to Microfabrication
be easily clogged. The fabrication process is depicted
in Figure 21.22. Front-to-back alignment is needed, but
because device dimensions are fairly large, 100 μm, align-
ment is not difﬁcult. The process ﬂow is as follows:
Process ﬂow for the side-opened
microneedle:
Step
Comment
Thermal oxidation
Both sides of wafer,
protects front
Back-side lithography
Non-critical lithography
Oxide RIE on back
Etch mask pattern
DRIE from backside
Fluid access channel
Oxide etching in HF
Oxide removed from both
sides
Wet oxidation
Front etch mask and etch
stop in channel
Top-side lithography
Needle lateral shape
deﬁned
Oxide RIE on top
Etch mask pattern, no
back-side protection
DRIE sequence on top
side
First isotropic shallow etch,
30 μm
Second anisotropic medium
etch, 100 μm
Third isotropic narrowing
etch, until oxide
Oxide etch
HF etching opens channels
and clears tip
21.6 Sidewall Quality
As a ﬁrst approximation DRIE sidewalls are vertical
(Figure 21.9) and this is important in many applications.
Vertical capacitors and mirrors necessitate perfectly verti-
cal walls. In an optical etalon (Exercise 30.13) the
vertical mirrors should be perfectly parallel, otherwise
the light reﬂected in between will rapidly leak out.
There are many possible non-idealities. The ﬁrst is a
non-vertical but smooth sidewall, with a deviation of a
few degrees from the vertical (Figure 11.4). A similar
negative (retrograde) slope is also common (Figure 21.1
(left)) and they can be tuned to some extent by changing
the process parameters. Other sidewall non-idealities
include Bosch process undulation (Figure 21.9b) and
roughness and bowing, which are shown schematically
in Figure 21.23. The periodic undulation (also known as
(a)
(b)
(c)
Isotropic
Plasma
Etch
Anisotropic
DRIE
Isotropic
DRIE
Si
SiO2
SiO2
Si
SiO2
Si
SiO2
Figure 21.22
Microneedle with a sharp tip for piercing
and side-opened liquid channel. See also SEM micrograph
of the ﬁnished needle in Figure 1.13. Reproduced from
Griss and Stemme (2003), copyright 2003, by permission
of IEEE
scalloping) in the Bosch process makes it unsuitable for
many optical applications. There are ways to minimize
undulation for example by using shorter pulses, which
unfortunately results is a slower etch rate. The sidewall
angle may also change, so undulation minimization will
affect many other process responses.
High ion energy is useful because it can sputter away
material, but it is non-selective etching. It may be beneﬁ-
cial in the early stages of etching to have a non-selective
etch step which will remove everything, for example na-
tive oxide. But too high an ion energy starts to affect the
shape. Sharp corners will be rounded by ion bombardment
and deﬂected high-energy ions will lead to trenching at
the feature bottoms, Figure 21.23d. Deﬂected ions in gen-
eral will result in deviations about verticality, for instance
barreling (bowing) of the proﬁle (Figure 21.23b).
The sidewalls of DRIE etched walls are quite rough,
with 50–100 nm RMS roughness typical. Optical scatter-
ing losses increase rapidly when roughness exceeds about
5% of wavelength (which corresponds to 20–30 nm for
visible wavelengths). A combined plasma–wet process
can provide beneﬁts: wet smoothing after dry etching. A
short KOH/TMAH/EDP etch step etches of course in crys-
tal plane-dependent fashion and if suitable crystal planes
are found, the surface quality will be equal to wet etch-
ing. These walls are very smooth and precisely oriented,
as witnessed by their use as a master for polymer optical
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 255]
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
265
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
Figure 21.23
DRIE sidewall non-idealities: (a) retrograde
proﬁle; (b) barreling (bowing); (c) roughness; (d) faceting
(top) and trenching (bottom)
Oxidization
Patterning
Dry etching
Etching
by EPW
Si (111)
Baking of
solution
Stripping of
laser cavity
(110)
(101)
(011)
<110>
(110)
(011)
(101)
Figure 21.24
Bosch process ripple removed by wet etch-
ing in EPW, simultaneously ensuring vertical, crystal plane-
deﬁned walls. Reproduced from Sasaki et al. (2000) by
permission of Institute of Pure and Applied Physics
device casting (Figure 21.24). This typically translates to
10–30 nm RMS roughness.
Smoothing is also important for mechanical strength: a
surface with cracks and hillocks is mechanically weak be-
cause the irregularities act as starting points for fracture. A
two-step dry–dry etching will help: after the DRIE step
an isotropic low-power plasma etch is done to remove
the damaged surface layer. A factor of two increase in
mechanical strength can be achieved. The role of lapping
in removing grinding damage is analogous. Hydrogen an-
nealing, which is used in Smart-cut SOI wafer fabrication
(Section 22.5), smoothes out small irregularities, and it is
a useful post-DRIE treatment too; for example, smoothing
requires a 1000–1100 ◦C anneal for 10 minutes.
Post-etch smoothing can take many forms. Anisotropic
wet etching obviously works better for rectangular shapes
(on <100> silicon) and hexagonal shapes (on <111>
silicon) than for circular shapes. Thermal oxidation plus
HF wet etching is also possible (Figure 21.25). If the pro-
cess is continued by LPCVD polysilicon deposition and
poly oxidation, smoothness improves and simultaneously
the etched hole can be made smaller. All these steps in-
crease process complexity, so there has to be a strong
motivation for such multistep smoothing/narrowing.
21.7 Pattern Size and Pattern Density
Effects
Etch rates are very much dependent on particular process
details, including etch reactor geometry, RF power cou-
pling scheme, wafer temperature and gas ﬂow rate. They
also depend on device layout. First of all, the etch rate de-
pends on etchable area: more area, slower rate, and vice
versa. Second, the etch rate of small features is slower
than that of large features. Third, etch rate slows down.
This happens in high aspect ratio structures. All these
phenomena necessitate a more detailed analysis of how
the interactions of chemical and physical processes really
work in etching.
The loading effect, or area-dependent reaction rate, is
a common phenomenon in chemical reactions. For a pro-
cess optimized for certain etchable area, the ﬂow may
not be high enough to supply reactants to keep an iden-
tical etch rate when area is increased. This is a major
problem for ASIC manufacturers who face hundreds of
different designs.
The loading effect is very general and operates in
all etching processes. It manifests itself when reactions
are under a mass transport/diffusion-limited regime.
If the ﬂow of reactants is insufﬁcient, the rate cannot
be maintained. On the other hand, if the reaction is
controlled by surface reactions (i.e., there is ample supply
of reactants, and the etching process is limited by surface
reactions), the process does not exhibit loading effects.
Loading effects operate at various scales:
• In batch reactors the etchable area changes because the
number of wafers changes.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 256]
266
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 21.25
Reducing ripple in the Bosch process by
postprocessing. Reproduced from Matthews and Judy
(2006), copyright 2006, by permission of IEEE
• In single wafer reactors different chip designs have dif-
ferent etchable areas.
• The local pattern density on a chip is different in every
design (microloading).
Microloading manifests itself as an etch depth difference
between isolated and array features: there is more
material to be etched in arrays, therefore the rate is
slower. Identical trench widths will result in different
etched depths depending on pattern density in the
neighborhood (Figure 21.26). Other pattern dependences
discussed below are deceptively similar, yet different.
21.7.1 RIE lag and aspect ratio-dependent etching
Plasma etching of structures of 1:1 aspect ratio is fairly
straightforward, but somewhere around 2:1 aspect ratio a
phenomenon known as RIE lag manifests itself: smaller
features etch slower than larger features (Figure 21.26).
Gas conductance in deep narrow holes is low and the
reactants simply cannot reach the bottom effectively (or
the reaction products removed). Ion bombardment is also
affected: ions experience sidewall collisions in deep struc-
tures, and the bombardment at the bottom is reduced.
These effects lead to a reduced etch rate in deep structures
of high aspect ratio. RIE lag can be seen from a single
experiment with a test structure that contains many dif-
ferent linewidths. RIE lag is not related to RIE reactors;
it is present in all plasma etching systems irrespective of
actual reactor design.
Aspect ratio-dependent etching (ARDE) is a dynamic
effect: the etch rate slows down as etching proceeds, for
every linewidth! The basic mechanism for RIE lag and
ARDE is the same. But in order to see ARDE, many
wafers have to be etched, with different etch times. To
appreciate the difference, see Figure 21.27 (left) where
etch rate is plotted vs. etch time. As etching proceeds,
the etch rate slows down. This is true for 2 μm, 5 μm and
all other linewidths alike. ARDE is therefore seen as a
downward-sloping line in Figure 21.27 (right). RIE lag,
on the other hand, is the vertical displacement of the two
lines: wider lines are higher up on the chart.
DRIE is fairly straightforward for structures with aspect
ratios of 10:1 while 20:1 is much more demanding. And
even though 40:1 has been demonstrated in the lab, it
is not to be considered a standard fabrication step. For
microloading
RIE lag 
Figure 21.26
Microloading vs. RIE lag. Microloading re-
sults in different etched depths for identical lines, with lines
in low pattern density areas resulting in deeper structures.
RIE lag: smaller etch rate for narrower lines
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 257]
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
267
etch time 
etched
depth
2 µm 
5 µm 
etch time 
etch rate 
5 µm 
2 µm 
Figure 21.27
Raw data of etched depth vs. etch time for
2 μm and 5 μm features (left); plotted as rate vs. time (right),
RIE lag is the vertical distance between the lines and ARDE
is the slope
380 μm wafers these numbers translate to feature sizes
about 40, 20 and 10 μm. In bonded SOI wafers, device
layer thicknesses range from 5 μm upward. Feature size is
then limited by lithography and undercutting of the pulsed
(Bosch) process, rather than by aspect ratio effects.
Another charging-related non-ideality in DRIE is the
notching effect (or footing effect): when the silicon etch-
ing end point is reached, the underlying oxide (either
oxide on the back side of a bulk wafer, or BOX) becomes
charged. This charging leads to repellency of incoming
ions, and they are deﬂected sideways, enhancing lateral
etching near the silicon/oxide interface (Figure 21.28).
Note that RIE lag has an effect on notching: the larger fea-
tures have experienced longer overetching, therefore the
notching effect has had more time to operate. Charge can
Figure 21.28
Notching
effect.
Reproduced
from
Chekurov et al. (2007) by permission of IOP
accumulate on isolated conductors, and the oxide beneath
these conductors can be damaged by this charge accu-
mulation. Not only plasma etching, but all plasma pro-
cesses, PECVD and sputtering are potential sources of
oxide damage.
21.8 Etch Residues and Damage
Etch anisotropy relies on passivation ﬁlms, and this means
that we intentionally deposit material on the wafer; not
all of it is beneﬁcial. Too much passivation results in
a reduced etch rate, and really heavy passivation equals
etch stop. This can happen locally, so that some areas
are not attacked by the etchant, leading to roughness and
in extreme cases pillar-like structures. Similar pillar-like
residues result from particles on the surface. In the case
of a completely anisotropic process, even nanoscopic par-
ticles act as etch masks (Figure 21.29).
Similar to overpassivation, redeposition can lead to
roughness and pillar-like structures. If the etch product
is only marginally volatile, it can be redeposited on
the wafer surface and act as a mask. It is also possible
that the mask material is redeposited: high ion energy
can detach atoms from an inert mask (remember that
ion beams can etch anything) and if redeposited on the
wafer, they will certainly act as masks; after all, mask
material is chosen to be non-etchable.
Often etch products are incorporated into a sidewall
passivation ﬁlm. They can also react with photoresists.
Photoresist removal after aggressive plasma etching is
therefore difﬁcult. Aggressive etching will also etch the
resist mask, and line narrowing can take place. The op-
posite effect can also happen (but not often!): so much
Figure 21.29
Nanoparticle-masked etching. Reproduced
from Sainiemi et al. (2007) by permission of IOP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 258]
268
Introduction to Microfabrication
material (etch products, redeposited non-etchable mate-
rial, passivation ﬁlm, resist debris) is deposited on the
resist sidewall that in fact linewidth increases!
RIE lag is not the only lag that is encountered in etch-
ing. Etch initiation lag is also typical. If etched depth is
plotted vs. etch time, the line should go through the ori-
gin, but often there is a time lag before etching starts.
Native oxides is one explanation, and other residues can
also be present on the wafer surface. The “ﬁrst-wafer
effect” is often seen in RIE: the etch rate only stabi-
lizes after a few wafers have been etched. There are both
thermal and chemical reasons for this. RIE is an ener-
getic process and the system heats up during RIE. And
even if the etch reactor is clean to begin with, passi-
vation ﬁlms will soon cover its inside surfaces. If the
reactor is used for very different materials, using differ-
ent gases, like SF6-based silicon etching and Cl-based
GaAs etching, the etch residues in the chamber will foul
the process.
21.9 DRIE vs. Wet Etching
Both DRIE and anisotropic wet etching have their advan-
tages, as in Tables 21.1 and 21.2, and in many applications
both etching techniques are needed. The decision in favor
of either technique depends not only on technological
factors like etched shape, sidewall angle or surface qual-
ity, but on practical issues like etch rate, back-side pro-
tection or equipment availability.
The ink jet example of Figure 21.30 shows how
many different etch techniques are utilized in one
device: the manifold etching through the wafer is done
by TMAH anisotropic wet etching, the critical inlet
channel is deﬁned by DRIE, and the chamber is made
hemispherical by isotropic plasma etching. The nozzle
Table 21.1
DRIE main features
• Any shape can be made
• Tightly spaced structures can be made
• Vertical structures of high aspect ratio are possible
• Difﬁculty in making silicon membranes unless SOI
wafers used
• Photoresist masking is possible
• Single-sided processing, no back-side protection
needed
• 1–3 hours for through-wafer etching in single wafer
operation
• 1–3 days to etch a batch of 25 wafers through-the-
wafer
Table 21.2
Anisotropic wet etching main features
• Very accurate dimensional control by crystal plane-
dependent etching
• Structural shapes limited by crystal plane-dependent
etching
• Accurate 45◦, 54.7◦, 70.5◦or 90◦sidewall
• Smooth and well-deﬁned surfaces
• About 4–8 hours for through-wafer etching for a
single wafer
• About 4–8 hours for through-wafer etching for a
batch of 25 wafers
• Etches both sides, protection needed on back side
• Etches both sides, symmetric structures can be made
in a single etch step
• Aggressive to metals and many other materials, pro-
tective layers needed
• Limited selection of mask materials, thick oxide and
LPCVD nitride standard
• Many etch stop mechanisms available: boron p++,
pn junction, SOI BOX
Nozzle
Nozzle guide
Inlet channel
Manifold
Chamber
Heater
Figure 21.30
Ink jet etching features: chamber is etched
by isotropic plasma etching, anisotropic plasma etching
for inlet channel, anisotropic spacer etching for nozzle
guides and anisotropic TMAH wet etching for the manifold.
Reproduced
from
Shin
et al.
(2003)
by
permission
of IEEE
guides are spacers formed by plasma etching. In a ﬂame
ionization detector (Figure 1.10), the nozzle chamber is
KOH etched in silicon, and micronozzles and sample
gas channels are etched in silicon by DRIE. Pyrex glass
wafers are isotropically wet etched in HF.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 259]
Deep Reactive Ion Etching
269
21.10 Exercises
1. What must SF6 gas ﬂow at least be in a DRIE reac-
tor if the silicon etch rate is 10 μm/min, wafer size
150 mm and etchable area 20%?
2. Determine the DRIE single crystal silicon etch rate
from the following trench etching data:
Etch time
Etched depth (μm)
(min)
80 μm wide
40 μm wide
12 μm wide
20
109
104
85
40
205
193
156
60
292
278
215
3. How much etch non-uniformity can native oxide
cause in silicon (D)RIE?
4. Design a fabrication process for the cell ﬁlter
shown below.
Reproduced from Prince et al. (2007), by permission
of Proc. IMechE
5. Compare silicon tip fabrication by anisotropic wet
etching, plasma etching and thermal oxidation.
6. Draw top view mask layouts to show how the mi-
croneedle of Figure 1.13 and 21.22 is made.
7. Explain the dimensions and ﬁlm thicknesses and
quantify the narrowing of the 3 μm hole shown in
Figure 21.25.
8. How could you make a DRIE version of the ﬁlter
shown in Figure 20.27? Could you improve the aper-
ture ratio (percentage of open area)?
9. What areal densities of nozzles could be made by the
processes of Figures 21.18, 21.19 and 21.20?
10. Design a fabrication process for the variable optical
attenuator of Figure 21.4.
11. Explain step by step the fabrication of the comb-
driven torsional mirror of Figure 21.12!
12. Explain in detail the process steps of buried channel
formation (Figure 21.15).
References and Related Reading
Acar, C. and A.M. Shkel (2005) Structurally decoupled micro-
machined gyroscopes with post-release capacitance enhance-
ment, J. Micromech. Microeng., 15, 1092–1101.
Agarwal, R., S. Samson and S. Bhansali (2007) Fabrication of
vertical mirrors using plasma etch and KOH:IPA polishing,
J. Micromech. Microeng., 17, 26–35.
Chekurov, N. et al. (2007) Atomic layer deposition enhanced
rapid dry fabrication of micromechanical devices with cryo-
genic deep reactive ion etching, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
17, 1731–1736.
Chen, K.-S. et al. (2002) Effect of process parameters on the
surface morphology and mechanical performance of silicon
structures after deep reactive ion etching (DRIE), J. Micro-
electromech. Syst., 11, 264.
de Boer, M.J. et al. (2000) Micromachining of buried micro
channels in silicon, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 9, 94.
Deng, W. et al. (2006) Increase of electrospray throughput
using multiplexed microfabricated sources for the scalable
generation of monodisperse droplets, J. Aerosol Sci., 37,
696–714.
Gottscho, R.A. et al. (1992) Microscopic uniformity in plasma
etching, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B10, 2133–2147.
Griss, P. and Stemme, G. (2003) Side-opened out-of-plane mi-
croneedles for microﬂuidic transdermal liquid transfer, J.
Microelectromech. Syst., 12, 296.
Holm, J. et al. (2000) Through-etched silicon carriers for pas-
sive alignment of optical ﬁbers to surface-active optoelec-
tronic components, Sens. Actuators, 82, 245–248.
Jansen, H.V. et al. (2009) Black silicon method X: a review
on high speed and selective plasma etching of silicon with
proﬁle control: an in-depth comparison between Bosch and
cryostat DRIE processes as a roadmap to next generation
equipment, J. Micromech. Microeng., 19, 033001.
Kiiham¨aki, J. and S. Franssila (1999) Pattern shape effects and
artefacts in deep silicon etching, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A17,
2280.
Kim, C.-H. and Y.-K. Kim (2005) MEMS variable optical
attenuator using a translation motion of 45◦tilted vertical
mirror, J. Micromech. Microeng., 15, 1466–1475.
Lee, M.-C.M and M.C. Wu (2006) Thermal annealing in hy-
drogen for 3-D proﬁle transformation on silicon-on-insulator
and sidewall roughness reduction, J. Microelectromech.
Syst., 15, 338–343.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 260]
270
Introduction to Microfabrication
Lehnert, T. et al. (2002) Realization of hollow SiO2 micronoz-
zle for electrical measurements on living cells, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 81, 5063–5065.
MacDonald, N.C. (1996) SCREAM MicroElectroMechanical
Systems, Microelectron. Eng., 32, 49.
Matthews, B. and J.W. Judy (2006) Design and fabrication
of a micromachined planar patch-clamp substrate with inte-
grated microﬂuidics for single-cell measurements, J. Micro-
electromech. Syst., 15, 214–222.
Paik,
S.-J.
et al.
(2004)
In-plane
single-crystal-silicon
microneedles for minimally invasive microﬂuid systems,
Sens. Actuators, A114, 276–284.
Prince, M. et al. (2007) The development of a novel Bio-
MEMS ﬁltration chip for the separation of speciﬁc cells in
ﬂuid suspension, Proc. IMechE, Part H: J. Eng. Med., 221,
113–128.
Ranganathan, N. et al. (2008) The development of a tapered
silicon micro-micromachining process for 3D microsystems
packaging, J. Micromech. Microeng., 18, 115028.
Sainiemi, L. et al. (2007) Rapid fabrication of high aspect ratio
silicon nanopillars for chemical analysis, Nanotechnology,
18, 505303.
Sainiemi, L. et al. (2009) Fabrication of thermal microbridge
actuators and characterization of their electrical and mechan-
ical responses, Sens. Actuators, A149, 305–314.
Sasaki, M. et al. (2000) Anisotropically etched Si mold for
solid polymer dye microcavity laser, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 39,
7145.
Schmid,
J.H.
et al.
(2007)
Gradient-index
antireﬂective
subwavelength structures for planar waveguide facets, Opt.
Lett., 32, 1794–1796.
Shin, S.J. et al. (2003) Firing frequency improvement of back
shooting inkjet printhead by thermal management, Proceed-
ings of Transducers’03, p. 380.
Sterner, M., N. Roxhed, G. Stemme and J. Oberhammer
(2007) Mechanically tri-stable SPDT metal-contact MEMS
switch embedded in 3D transmission line, Proceedings of
the 37th European Microwave Conference, 2007, pp. 1225–
1228.
Tsou, C. et al. (2005) A novel self-aligned vertical electrostatic
combdrives actuator for scanning micromirrors, J. Micro-
electromech. Syst., 15, 855–860.
Xu, D.-X. et al. (2009) Spiral cavity Si wire resonators as label-
free biosensors, OSA Integrated Photonics and Nanophoton-
ics Research and Applications (IPNRA), paper IMB2.
Yu, L.M. et al. (2009) A microfabricated electrode with hollow
microneedles for ECG measurement, Sens. Actuators, A151,
17–22.
Yun, S.-S., S.-K. You and J.-H. Lee (2006) Fabrication of ver-
tical optical plane using DRIE and KOH crystalline etching
of (110) silicon wafer, Sens. Actuators, A128, 387–394.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 261]
22
Wafer Engineering
Silicon crystal growth inﬂuences wafer processing in var-
ious ways: for example, the quality of thin thermal ox-
ide depends on microscopic voids formed during crystal
pulling, and oxygen content and distribution inside wafers
are essential for trapping metallic impurities. In spite of
continuous developments, wafers never become “perfect”
because each new generation of devices sets different de-
mands on wafers, for example larger and thicker wafers
are needed, which changes crystal pulling conditions and
thermal balances, leading to different dominating defect
mechanisms. These wafers will be processed at lower tem-
peratures, using novel processes, which will change the
relative importance of impurities and defects.
When silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers are made, dif-
ferent techniques result in different possible thicknesses
for buried oxide layer and the top device silicon. De-
fects in different SOI technologies are different, and have
varying degrees of impact on devices. In epitaxy mul-
tiple layers enhance possibilities for optimizing various
device design targets, but bulk wafers are always being
considered as an option because of the higher price of epi
(and SOI).
In addition to silicon-to-silicon bonding, there are other
possible materials that can be combined with silicon in
order to achieve the best of both worlds. Silicon-on-glass
leads to transparency, while indium phosphide-on-silicon
leads to high-speed electronics, and silicon-on-diamond is
the ultimate thermal conduction solution for high-power
devices. Wafer bonding is the key technology to make
these heterogeneous substrates.
22.1 Silicon Crystals
Vacancies and interstitials will always be present even
in the best possible material because they are created by
thermal equilibrium processes (there are also vacancies
and interstitials resulting from the crystal pulling process).
Vacancies and interstitials diffuse like dopant atoms. They
also aggregate at temperatures of 900–1050 ◦C. Vacancy
clusters are voids, and aggregates of atoms are precip-
itates, for example dopant atoms or oxygen above the
solubility limit will form precipitates (see Figure 14.2 for
solubility vs. temperature). Silicon interstitials can also
cluster, forming dislocation loops (also known as L-pits).
Processes which cause volume changes, like thermal ox-
idation, are prone to produce defects. Oxidation-induced
stacking faults (OISFs) are one class of such defects. On
the other hand, the volume changes associated with oxida-
tion inject vacancies into silicon, and these affect diffusing
species. The temperature differences between wafer cen-
ter and edge can generate dislocations, so the material that
was perfect to begin with is modiﬁed critically if improper
processing is carried out.
When a wafer is heated non-uniformly in a high-tem-
perature step, for example during epitaxy or oxidation,
temperature differences between wafer center and edge
can easily lead to thermal stresses above silicon yield
strength. These stresses will relax by forming defects, for
example slip lines. The order of magnitude of thermally
generated stress σ can be gauged by
σ = εE = αL × T × E
(22.1)
where strain ε depends on the silicon coefﬁcient of ther-
mal expansion, α, temperature difference T and wafer
size, L. Silicon yield strength (or critical shear stress)
is strongly temperature dependent: at 850 ◦C it is about
50 MPa, at 1000 ◦C only on the order of 10 MPa, and
about 1 MPa at 1200 ◦C.
Oxygen is always present in CZ silicon because of the
silica crucible (Figure 22.1). All dissolved oxygen does
not remain in the melt or get incorporated into the ingot:
most of it is evaporated as SiO. Oxygen at 5–20 ppma
(according to ASTM standard F121-83) will end up in
the crystal.
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 262]
272
Introduction to Microfabrication
CO, CO2
from graphite
oxygen
dissolution
from SiO2
SiO
evaporation
Figure 22.1
Oxygen from fused silica (SiO2) crucible and
carbon from graphite holder
The silica crucible is not mechanically strong enough
at about 1400–1500 ◦C temperatures, and a graphite sus-
ceptor provides mechanical strength. The silica crucible
reacts with the graphite holder according to the equation
SiO2 + 3 C ⇒SiC + 2 CO. This carbon monoxide gas
is the source of carbon which is always present in CZ
crystals, at concentrations about 1016 cm−3, below 1 ppm.
Oxygen is initially dissolved in interstitial sites but
can precipitate during thermal treatments. These precipi-
tates, often known simply as O2P, are important in many
respects, for example O2P are beneﬁcial for wafer me-
chanical strength because they will prevent slip lines from
spreading in the wafer. Carbon impurities act as nucle-
ation sites and centers for oxygen precipitation. Oxygen
precipitates are prime examples of bulk micro defects
(BMDs). Oxygen concentration can have a drastic ef-
fect on KOH wet etching of silicon: oxygen precipitates
cause local stresses which change the relative etch rates
of crystal planes. This will de discussed in Chapter 30
(see Figure 30.4). Very small and uniform oxygen precip-
itates can be achieved with low oxygen concentrations,
for example 7 ppma. This may, however, be too low for
ICs, and wafer selection for CMOS-MEMS integration
is difﬁcult.
0
50
1.E + 02
1.E + 03
Defect Density [Cm^−3]
1.E + 04
1.E + 05
1.E + 06
100
150
Void size [nm]
200
250
300
Fast pull                      Slow Pull
Figure 22.2
Vacancy cluster (COP) size vs. density at dif-
ferent pull rates. Reproduced from Aminzadeh et al. (2002),
copyright 2002, by permission of IEEE
Microvoids are clusters of vacancies formed inside the
ingot during crystal pulling. They are known, for historical
reasons, as COPs (Crystal-Originated Particles).
Typical COP sizes are 50–200 nm, and they are found
in concentrations of 104–106 cm−3 (Figure 22.2). When
wafers are cut and polished, COPs end up at wafer surface
after alkaline cleaning step during wafer processing. A
COP is detected by laser scattering because it reﬂects light
almost like a particle (advanced multiangle scatterometry
tools can distinguish COPs from particles). Vacancy clus-
ters were therefore classiﬁed as particles, and were given
the name COP. It was the fact that the number of COPs
did not decrease in cleaning (and it could in fact increase!)
that lead to a reassessment of their nature.
COP formation during crystal pulling depends on V/G
ratio: pull rate to temperature gradient at crystallization
interface. When V/G is high, usually at high pull rates,
COPs (microvoids) are formed throughout the crystal.
At medium pull rates oxidation induced stacking faults
(OISF) appear at periphery. Yet lower pull rates lead to
L-pits appear outside the OISF ring and at very low pull
rates OISF disappears and L-pits are everywhere. Because
pull rates tend to be smaller for larger diameter crys-
tals, larger wafers have quite different defect proﬁle from
smaller crystals.
22.2 Gettering
Defects
are
not
passive
objects:
they
change
and
morph during wafer processing, especially during high-
temperature steps.
For
example,
metallic impurities
diffuse, agglomerate and trap charge carriers. Metallic
impurities
come
from
EGS
polysilicon,
the
silica
crucible, the graphite crucible and heaters and other
hot parts of the crystal growth system. The segregation
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 263]
Wafer Engineering
273
coefﬁcients of most metals (Table 4.2) are very small,
and the crystal is puriﬁed relative to melt. Metals are,
however, fast diffusers in silicon, and they react with
other defects, forming clusters. Metals affect electronic
devices by creating trapping centers in silicon midgap,
reducing minority carrier lifetimes and lowering mobility.
Metals can also precipitate at the Si/SiO2 interface and
reduce oxide quality. The allowed iron level in advanced
silicon wafers is limited to 1010 cm−3.
In order to contain the impurities, and keep the active
transistor area defect-free, a multizone approach to wafers
has been devised. The wafer is designed to have different
zones with different roles. The top surface is the prime
quality area, with minimized particles, minimal roughness
and ultimate ﬂatness. Under the surface is the defect-free
region, known as the denuded zone (DZ). The rest of the
wafer can be used as a getter, a sink for collecting and
holding impurities. The back side of the wafer can also
be made to act as a getter. These zones are depicted in
Figure 22.3.
This multizone approach is clearly not suitable for de-
vices that extend through the wafer, like power transis-
tors, solar cells or bulk MEMS, because of the vertical
non-uniformity it introduces. If both ICs and MEMS de-
vices are made on the same wafer, it is beneﬁcial to
have small, uniform oxygen precipitates, as a compro-
mise which satisﬁes to some extent the demands of both
internal gettering and vertical uniformity.
Oxygen is depleted in the top silicon layer by anneal-
ing in hydrogen. Oxygen outdiffuses from the surface,
and an oxygen-depleted region develops. This denuded
zone thus has low oxygen concentration and minimized
oxygen-induced defects. It is formed in three steps:
1. The outdiffusion step (1100–1200 ◦C; 1–4 h): oxygen
diffuses out of the surface region, leaving <5 ppma
oxygen.
2. The nucleation step at 600 ◦C: SiOx formed homoge-
neously throughout the wafer volume.
devices
(≈ 5 μm)
denuded zones
(≈ 20 μm)
back-side
getter
(≈ 1 μm)
wafer bulk
(oxygen
precipitates)
Figure 22.3
Wafer cross-section with denuded zone (not
to scale)
3. SiOx precipitate growth and gettering (950–1200 ◦C,
4–16 h).
Denuded zone depth depends strongly on device require-
ments and can range from 10 to 40 μm.
Similar treatments can be done to create a bulk wafer
which resembles an epitaxial wafer: a p-type wafer is
annealed in hydrogen at 1200 ◦C, leading to boron and
oxygen outdiffusion. A reduction of boron concentration
by an order of magnitude can be achieved, essentially
forming p−on a p+ type structure (similar to Figure 4.15).
The denuded zone is formed simultaneously. Also, va-
cancy clusters (COPs) are annealed out and the wafer
surface is smoothed during the hydrogen anneal.
Gettering of impurities can be done either inside silicon
(intrinsic gettering, IG) or at the wafer back side (external
gettering, EG). In both cases four essential steps must take
place: (1) release of metals from active circuit region; (2)
transport of these metals to the gettering zone; (3) capture;
and (4) retention for the rest of the process.
Extrinsic gettering on the wafer back side can be
achieved by a number of techniques: a damaged layer
from sand blasting or laser damage, polysilicon thin
ﬁlm, phosphorus doping and ion implantation damage
are possible. The number of gettering sites increases
in these steps, or metal diffusion is modiﬁed, as in the
case of phosphorus. Ion implantation damage is annealed
away during high-temperature steps, and its gettering
ability reduced, but new back-side implants can be made.
Extrinsic gettering can be added to a process ﬂow before
critical high-temperature steps. Solar cell fabrication,
which is very cost sensitive, uses gettering to ensure
cleanliness in a few critical steps only.
External gettering becomes difﬁcult with growing wafer
size and even completely unusable. Large-diameter wafers
need to be thicker for mechanical strength, and diffusion
distances for impurities increase. Simultaneously, process
temperatures are getting lower (see Chapter 26 for more
details), which further decreases the efﬁcacy of back-side
gettering. And ﬁnally, double-sided polishing and the need
to keep the wafer back side ﬂat and clean eliminate many
external gettering options.
Intrinsic gettering is closely related to bulk microde-
fects (BMDs) and the thermal cycles that the wafer will
experience during processing. Oxygen precipitates act as
precipitation sites for other impurities, creating an im-
purity gradient which drives impurities toward designed
precipitation sites. Wafer oxygen concentration is thus
critical for intrinsic gettering. By and large, intrinsic
gettering is determined when wafer processing begins.
On the other hand, oxygen precipitates mechanically
strengthen the wafer, which is even more important for
large-diameter wafers.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 264]
274
Introduction to Microfabrication
22.3 Wafer Mechanical Speciﬁcations
Wafer
thickness
refers
to
centerpoint
thickness
(Table 22.1). It is difﬁcult to produce tight thickness
speciﬁcations because some wafering steps are batch
processes for many wafers at a time and some are single
wafer steps, therefore variations are inevitable. Wafer
thicknesses are compromises between material usage and
mechanical strength. Mechanical strength is especially
important in high-temperature steps as many mechanical
properties (for instance, yield strength) are strongly
temperature dependent. MEMS devices which extend
through the whole wafer require exacting thickness
control. Anisotropic wet etching results in slanted 54.7◦
sidewalls which waste area, and more so for thicker
wafers. In DRIE thick wafers lead to longer etch times.
Specialty wafers with practically any thicknesses are
available but thin-wafer handling is very difﬁcult. Me-
chanical stability increases with thickness, and thickness
has to increase with wafer size. Through-wafer MEMS
have not been done on 300 mm so far, and 200 mm is
on the fringe, too. Thicker wafers are readily available in
thicknesses of 1–1.5 mm.
Wafers bend and warp at high temperatures, either be-
cause their front and back sides are heated non-uniformly
(e.g., lamp heating from the top side only), or because
ﬁlms deposited on one side of the wafer introduce stress.
This is sometimes compensated by the fact that both sides
of the wafer are coated, as in thermal oxidation, but when
the ﬁlm on either side is etched, asymmetry is created and
bowing develops. Even though epitaxial ﬁlms are assumed
to be zero-stress ﬁlms, doping leads to bowing. Because
boron atoms are smaller than silicon atoms, the resulting
ﬁlm will be tensile stressed (and large arsenic atoms result
in compressive stresses): the higher the doping level, the
more the stress. Boron doping of 1018 cm−3 corresponds
to 10−4 lattice mismatch, which leads to bowing by tens
of micrometers. This makes wafer bonding, for instance,
much more difﬁcult.
Bow and warp relate to shape deformations of free,
unclamped wafers (Figure 22.4). Wafers can be concave
Table 22.1
Standard wafer sizes and thicknesses
(centerpoint thickness)
3 inch
380 μm
100 mm
525 μm
(380 μm for MEMS; thinner wafers
exist)
150 mm
625 μm
(380 μm for MEMS; 250 μm mini-
mum)
200 mm
725 μm
(500 μm MEMS)
300 mm
770 μm
Figure 22.4
Bow (left): deviation of median surface from
reference plane; warp (right): range of median surface dis-
tances from reference plane
or convex, or undulating. Bow may be eliminated by
clamping, that is forcing the wafer ﬂat on a chuck. Warp
is the difference between the maximum and minimum dis-
tances of the median surface. Warp is a bulk property, in
contrast to ﬂatness, which is a surface property. Warp and
bow can develop during high-temperature process steps,
or result from ingot sawing and lapping operations. The
presence of excessive bow and warp will affect litho-
graphic performance via depth-of-focus problems.
Wafer surface topography can be divided into a few
distinct scales: roughness is atomic/nanoscale, ﬂatness is
chip-scale and bow and warp are wafer-scale phenomena.
Smoothness and ﬂatness are essential parameters for fu-
sion bonding: wafers with 0.1 nm roughness are preferred
for fusion bonding. Anodic bonding is more forgiving to
surface roughness, and wafers with 0.5 nm roughness are
ﬁne for anodic bonding.
Flatness is characterized by total indicator reading
(TIR). It is a front-side reference measurement. TIR is
deﬁned as the sum of the maximum positive and negative
deviations from a reference plane. If this reference plane
is chosen to coincide with the focal plane of the mask
aligner, focal plane deviation (FPD) is deﬁned as the
largest deviation, positive or negative, from this plane
(Figure 22.5). TIR and FPD are measured for clamped
wafers, while bow and warp are measured for unclamped
(free) wafers.
Flatness is measured over an area that is relevant to
the lithography process and chip size. It directly impacts
linewidth variation through lithographic depth of focus.
Lithographic processes utilizing 1× full wafer imaging
systems are sensitive to global ﬂatness, whereas step-and-
Figure 22.5
Left, total indicator reading (TIR); right, fo-
cal plane deviation (FPD)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 265]
Wafer Engineering
275
repeat imaging systems are sensitive to local site ﬂatness,
over an exposure area which is less than 10 cm square.
22.4 Epitaxial Wafers
Epitaxial wafers offer extreme purity: carbon and oxygen,
which are always present in CZ wafers, are practically
absent in epitaxial layers. If there are COPs in bulk mate-
rial, they will be buried by the epitaxial layer, reducing a
100 nm void to a few nanometers. Epitaxial layers are not
defect-free, however; stacking faults created in epitaxial
growth are the largest yield limiters in epitaxy.
Whereas CZ wafers have cylindrical distribution of
doping and defects because of the rotation during crystal
pulling, epitaxial deposition is highly uniform. Epi
doping uniformity is typically below 4% and thickness
uniformity
about
1%.
Epitaxial
deposition
is
very
reproducible, for both resistivity and thickness. And
while resistivity in an ingot has lengthwise gradient, and
bulk wafers therefore have slightly different resistivities,
epitaxial wafers have identical resistivity.
Minimum thickness by CVD homoepitaxy is about
0.5 μm, and the maximum thickness is determined by
economics of epitaxial growth, not by physics and
chemistry. Practical maximum epitaxial thicknesses are
about 100 μm for certain power semiconductor devices.
Epitaxial wafers have applications in almost all areas of
microfabrication (Table 22.2), but the wafer cost limits
their use to more expensive applications only. In CMOS,
one-third of wafer usage is epi, two thirds bulk.
Because p++ etch stop material is too heavily doped
for electrical devices and mechanically poor due to tensile
stresses from high boron concentration, alternatives have
been explored. An advanced etch stop structure relies on
a double epitaxial layer structure: an etch stop layer and a
device layer. The ﬁrst epilayer is heavily boron doped, but
in order to minimize mechanical stresses from boron dop-
ing, the ﬁlm is compensated by germanium (1021 cm−3
germanium, 1020 cm−3 boron) (Figure 22.6). The boron
atom is smaller than the silicon one, and germanium one
is larger, which prevents stresses from volume mismatch
building up. Germanium is a column IV element (beneath
20 22
1E + 15
1E + 16
1E + 17
B
Ge
1E + 18
1E + 19
1E + 20
1E + 21
1E + 22
22 23 24 25 26 27 28
DEPTH (μm)
CONCENTRATION (atoms/cc)
29 30 31 32 33 34 35
Figure 22.6
SIMS doping proﬁle of Si:Ge:B epitaxial
etch stop layer. Courtesy Okmetic
silicon in the periodic table), therefore isoelectronic with
silicon, so no electrical effects are introduced. The second
layer, lightly doped, is deposited on top of the Si:Ge:B
etch stop layer. This second layer is the actual device
layer, and we can choose device doping level freely.
22.5 SOI Wafers
Three SOI techniques will be discussed in this chapter:
• Bonded SOI (also known as BESOI, for bond and etch-
back SOI)
Table 22.2
Epitaxial wafer applications
Technology
Subst.
Epi
ρ (ohm-cm)
Thick (μm)
Motivation
CMOS
p+
p
5–10
5–20
Latch-up
Power MOS
n+
n
5–10
10–20
Conductivity
Analog bipolar
p+
p
1–20
10–100
Speed
MEMS
p
n
1–10
7–150
Etch stop
MEMS
p
p++
0.005
3–5
Etch stop
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 266]
276
Introduction to Microfabrication
• Smart-cut (ion cut layer transfer)
• SIMOX (implanted oxygen).
Each has its characteristic SOI device layer thickness as
well as typical buried oxide (BOX) thickness. They also
differ in defect density and in the applicability of cavity
structure formation. Bonded SOI is best suited for thick
device layer applications in MEMS. BOX thickness is
quite freely chosen. SIMOX and Smart-cut are used for
thin SOI device layers in CMOS. In SIMOX both BOX
and device silicon thicknesses are limited, while in Smart-
cut silicon thickness is limited but BOX thickness is a free
variable. SOI speciﬁcations and applications are listed in
Table 22.3.
Intermediate SOI device layer thicknesses are difﬁcult
to make and usually involve an epitaxial step, as will be
discussed below.
22.5.1 Bonded SOI
22.5.1.1 The bonding process
Bonding is a straightforward way to make SOI structures.
The bonded SOI technique uses the bonding of two wafers
(one or both oxidized) followed by thinning (Figure 17.3).
Bonding without thinning has its applications too, see
Figures 1.17 and 30.16.
Wafer bonding allows independent optimization of the
top device layer and the supporting handle wafer. The
handle wafer is chosen for mechanical support, thermal
compatibility, micromachining, doping level or some
other property. The device layer can have material, crystal
orientation, doping level or thickness tailored to the partic-
ular device design, irrespective of handle wafer properties.
Thinning of the device wafer involves grinding, polish-
ing and etching, much like in silicon wafering (Table 4.3).
Thinning down to 10 μm thickness is reasonably easy, and
5 μm can be done. For layers thinner than that, special
techniques are required: either real-time thickness moni-
toring during ﬁnal polishing, or etch stop layers.
Figure 22.7 shows a process for thin device layer
bonded SOI. Epitaxial layers with different etching
properties have to be grown on the device wafer before
bonding. Grinding (or etching) removes the bulk of the
p++ etch stop epi
device layer epi
bond and etch
Figure 22.7
Thin bonded SOI: top carrier wafer with two
epitaxial layers and thermal oxide is bonded to an oxidized
handle wafer. KOH etching of carrier wafer until p++ etch
stop layer, and HF:HNO3 etch to remove p++ silicon
silicon, and selective etching (KOH/TMAH) removes the
remaining material until the p++ etch stop layer is met.
High boron doping is used but a second epitaxial layer is
grown on it. The highly doped etch stop layer can then
be removed by, for example, 1–3–8 etchant (HF, HNO3
and CH3COOH in the volume ratio of 1:3:8) which does
not etch lightly doped material. Etch stop layers enable
fabrication of device silicon layers 100 nm thick with
±5–10 nm variation.
Bonding two oxidized wafers instead of one bare and
one oxidized wafer is useful when thick BOX is required.
The thickest BOXs made of thermal oxides are 4 μm
(2 μm of oxide on both wafers) thick. Bonding of wafers
with thick deposited (CVD) oxides has been actively stud-
ied, but the ﬁlms are generally not smooth enough for
good bonding. If CMP is used to polish the surface (Figure
16.10), process cost rapidly increases.
Edge processing is needed in BESOI, as shown in
Figure 22.8. Wafer edges are rounded because sharp
edges are crack-prone. Some 3 mm of device layer
silicon is removed from the edges, which means that it
is easy to identify the SOI device side.
Table 22.3
SOI wafer applications
Application
Device layer
Buried oxide
SOI technology
CMOS
10–200 nm
200–400 nm
Smart-cut, SIMOX
Bipolar
1–10 μm
0.1–1.0 μm
Various
MEMS
5–50 μm
0.5–4 μm
Bonded SOI
Power IC
1–100 μm
1–4 μm
Bonded SOI
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 267]
Wafer Engineering
277
Figure 22.8
Bonded SOI edge treatment: top, after thin-
ning; bottom, after edge treatment
In hydrophilic bonding there are two possibilities for
the pair to be bonded: a silicon wafer and an oxidized
wafer, or two oxidized wafers. The latter results in re-
duced bond strength, just 70–80% of the former, but the
resulting structure is symmetric with respect to interfaces.
In SOI wafer speciﬁcations it is stated which wafer has
thermal oxide on it.
22.5.1.2 Bonding chemistry and physics
The water released during the formation of Si–O–Si bonds
will oxidize silicon further (Si + 2 H2O ⇒SiO2 + 2 H2;
wet oxidation!). The effect of this oxide is the more im-
portant, the thinner the oxide on the wafers; if wafers
with thick oxides are bonded, water diffusion will be
slow and additional oxidation minuscule. A combination
of thin (or native) oxide wafer and thick oxide wafer is
a compromise: oxidation will proceed according to the
aforementioned equation, strengthening the bond, and hy-
drogen can dissolve in the oxide, preventing the build-up
of gas bubbles at the interface.
While hydrophilic bonding is mainstream technology,
hydrophobic bonding is of interest in some applications.
For example, forming pn diodes by bonding requires
bonding without interfacial oxide. HF-last cleaned wafers
have a hydrogen-terminated surface (Figure 12.1) and
bonding proceeds as described by
≡S−H + H−Si ≡⇒≡Si−Si ≡+H2
(22.2)
In the case of hydrophobic surfaces (–Si–H terminated)
roughness is on the order of 0.5 nm and their bonding
properties are worse than those of hydrophilic surfaces.
Hydrogen bonds between HF units are weak. Hydrogen
bubble prevention is very important in hydrophobic bond-
ing. Hydrogen will diffuse along the bonding interface,
and will not dissolve into bulk silicon below 500 ◦C. The
bond energies of hydrophobic bonding are much lower
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
100 200 300 400
Annealing temperature (°C)
Surface energy (mJ/m2)
500
HB Si/Si
HL Si/Si
HB:hydrophobic
HL:hydrophilic
600 700 800 900
0
Figure 22.9
Surface energies for hydrophilic (HL) and
hydrophobic (HB) bonding. Reproduced from Tong and
G¨osele (1999) by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
than those of hydrophilic bonding at low temperatures
(as shown in Figure 22.9), but they can be improved by
annealing.
22.5.2 Smart-cutTM ion cut layer transfer
In the Smart-cut method hydrogen is implanted into an
oxidized wafer (called the donor wafer) which is subse-
quently bonded to a handle wafer. The donor wafer is then
split along the mechanically weak region that was created
by hydrogen implantation (Figure 22.10). The hydrogen
implantation method has been patented, under the name
Smart-cut, and wafers manufactured with the method are
marketed as Unibond.
Hydrogen bubble-induced layer splitting is based on
hydrogen implantation. Gas bubbles form at the depth
of maximum hydrogen concentration. These bubbles lead
to mechanical weakening of the silicon material and mi-
crocracks lead to cleavage of the implanted layer when
a suitable thermal treatment or mechanical pressure is
applied. The donor wafer provides mechanical strength
during thermal or mechanical treatment, and the whole
wafer can be split. In the case of a thin silicon layer,
hydrogen bubbles can burst the thin top layer.
Process ﬂow: Smart-cut
• Thermal oxidation of donor wafer
• H+ implantation into donor wafer (60 kV, 6 ×
1016 cm−2)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 268]
278
Introduction to Microfabrication
• Hydrophilic bonding at room temperature
• Anneal at 400–600 ◦C to split the wafers
• High-temperature anneal at 1100 ◦C for 2 h strength-
ens the chemical bonds
• Final polishing or hydrogen anneal
The hydrogen dose required for bubble formation is
3–10 × 1016 cm−2. The thickness of the splitting layer is
related to the H+ energy, which can accurately and easily
be controlled. CMP or hydrogen annealing is necessary
to eliminate the microroughness of the SOI device layer,
even though the layer thickness just after splitting is uni-
form to a few nanometers.
An alternative way to detachment is mechanical force.
Water jets or pressurized gas can be used. The bonding
energy at the bonding interface is much higher than that
in the H-implanted region which is embrittled. Thus, even
at room temperature, the H-implanted layer can be peeled
off from the donor wafer.
Smart-cut is a quite generic technique: implantation and
mechanical splitting have been applied to transfer thin
layers of many precious materials onto cheaper handle
wafers. In the case of a silicon handle, the bonding process
is always the same, that is the familiar silicon-to-oxide
bonding. The device layer material may impose some lim-
itations, but for example germanium-on-insulator (GeOI)
and strained silicon-on-insulator (SSOI) have been made
in straightforward fashion.
22.5.3 Separation by implantation of oxygen
(SIMOX)
In SIMOX technology, SOI structure is realized in two
main steps. The ﬁrst step is oxygen ion implantation into
a silicon wafer and the second step is a high-temperature
anneal
during
which
the
implanted
oxygen
atoms
form a buried oxide layer inside the silicon. Process
conditions are:
• oxygen dose 2 × 1018 cm−2
• oxygen energy 150–200 keV
• wafer temperature 550–650 ◦C
Good uniformity of both the silicon device layer and BOX
thickness can be achieved. SIMOX is best suited for thin-
silicon/thin-BOX applications. Typically both layers are
on the order of 100 nm thick. Increasing oxygen ion en-
ergy would lead to deeper penetration, but at the cost of
more expensive equipment.
SIMOX material exhibits inherent defect problems: the
device silicon layer is damaged by the implantation pro-
cess and it cannot be fully recovered during annealing.
SIMOX dislocation densities can be 106/cm2, orders of
magnitude more than in bulk silicon. Implantation time
poses another limitation: the required doses are two or-
ders of magnitude higher than those in common usage in
CMOS manufacturing.
An improvement of SIMOX quality can be achieved by
internal oxidation (ITOX), shown in Figure 22.11. During
handle wafer
re-usable donor
handle wafer
oxide
hydrogen implanted region
handle wafer
donor wafer
donor wafer 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 22.10
Smart-cut: (a) H+ implantation into an oxidized donor wafer; (b) donor wafer is bonded to a handle wafer;
(c) cleavage along the weak region created by implantation results in a SOI wafer
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 269]
Wafer Engineering
279
Si
Si
buried oxide
oxide
buried oxide
oxide
Figure 22.11
SIMOX SOI wafer fabrication: oxygen im-
plantation through oxide to create buried oxide inside sil-
icon, followed by thermal oxidation (called ITOX, for
internal oxidation) which anneals silicon and thickens and
densiﬁes buried oxide
ITOX the device silicon layer is annealed and simultane-
ously BOX is densiﬁed. Oxidation will consume silicon
and make the device silicon layer thinner. SIMOX BOX
electrical breakdown voltages are 3–5 MV/cm, but can be
increased to 8 MV/cm by ITOX. Thermal oxides exhibit
≥10 MV/cm breakdown voltages.
Hydrogen implantation in Smart-cut also produces
damage, but hydrogen is a light ion, and the damage
can be more readily repaired. From a productivity point
of view, hydrogen implantation dose (and thus time) in
Smart-cut is 10–100 times less than in SIMOX.
One interesting option with SIMOX is patterned (or
partial) isolation: oxide masked implantation will result
in BOX only at desired locations (Figure 22.12). This can
mean local patterns, or larger scale patterns: for example,
Figure 22.12
Masked implant for SIMOX: BOX is
formed only locally. Reproduced from Cheng et al. (2005),
copyright 2005, Elsevier
the DRAM cell array is done on bulk, while the peripheral
circuits are made on SOI.
22.6 Bonding Mechanics
Because of local roughness and global waviness, the two
wafers will not touch fully. It is possible to estimate the
dimensions of cavities which can be closed in the bonding
process. The same equations govern both random cavi-
ties from wafer irregularities as well as micromachined
cavities.
Gap closing is a function of wafer thickness (t), wafer
mechanical strength determined by Young’s modulus
(E) and Poisson’s ratio ν, and surface energy γ (about
100 mJ/m2 for room temperature silicon–silicon bonding)
(Figure 22.13).
Cavities of radius R (R > 2t, R ≫h) will be closed if
the distance between the wafers, h, is smaller than that
given by Equation 22.3, and for cavities of radius R (R <
2t, R ≫h) it is given by Equation 22.4:
h ⩽
R2

2Et3
3γ (1−ν2)
(22.3)
h ⩽3.5

Rγ (1 −ν2)
E
(22.4)
For dissimilar materials (different E) more complex for-
mulas have to be used.
Particles between wafers cause non-bonding areas
(voids) because wafers cannot conform abruptly to
particles (Figure 22.14). The radius of non-bonding area
is given by
R =
4

2Et3
3γ (1 −ν2)
√
h
(22.5)
2h
2R
2R
2h
t
Figure 22.13
Geometry for analyzing closing of cavities
for the case height h ≪radius R. Wafer thickness is t
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 270]
280
Introduction to Microfabrication
R
2h
t
(a)
(b)
Figure 22.14
Particle-caused void in bonding: left, a large
particle leads to a non-bonded area much larger than the
particle itself; right, wafers conform to particles below
critical size
Below a critical particle size hcrit the wafers are able to
conform to particles, and void size is practically identical
to particle size. This critical size is given by
hcrit = 5

tγ
E
(22.6)
22.7 Advanced Wafers
Bonding wafers with more layers on them leads to more
complex wafers. This approach can be continued with
more wafers (and more grinding, etching and CMP steps),
but of course each additional wafer incurs extra costs.
One such application is shown in Figure 39.10; there,
two buried conductor layers of WSi2 are employed.
Bonding of dissimilar materials is made easier if surface
quality is good, and low-temperature annealing is sufﬁ-
cient to achieve adequate bond strength. Then it is possi-
ble to bond for example silicon to III–V semiconductors
like InP or GaAs. The process shown in Figure 22.15 uses
epitaxial InGaAs etch stop layer to protect the InP device
layer during thinning. Plasma activation of InP enables
low-temperature bonding. Of course, all the usual require-
ments of smoothness and ﬂatness must be fulﬁlled, too.
22.7.1 Silicon-on-diamond
One of the drawbacks (in many but not all applications) of
SOI wafers is thermal insulation due to BOX. The alter-
native dielectrics silicon nitride or aluminum oxide have
a thermal conductivity an order of magnitude higher. The
ultimate thermal conduction material is diamond, with a
thermal conductivity a thousand times higher than sili-
con dioxide, yet it is an electrical insulator. The wafers
are dubbed SOD, for silicon-on-diamond (Figure 22.16).
SOD wafer fabrication starts by CVD diamond deposition
(Equation 5.11) on a hydrogen-implanted, Smart-cut-like
wafer. As discussed in Chapter 5, it is not really diamond,
<Si>
oxide
<InP>
<InGaAs>
<InP>
<Si>
oxide
<InP>
<InGaAS>
<InP>
selective
etch in
two steps
Figure 22.15
Heterogeneous bonding: InP
to
silicon
bonding using InGaAs etch stop layer. Redrawn from
Arokiaraj et al. (2006)
but diamond-like carbon (DLC) and its thermal conductiv-
ity is less than that of diamond gems, yet better than that
of copper, for ﬁlms a few micrometers thick. In order to
improve the mechanical strength, a thick polysilicon can
be deposited on it. Or, if the device processing only tol-
erates low-temperature processing, copper electroplating
instead of polysilicon can be used, to utilize the high ther-
mal conductivity of copper. The cleavage of the carrier
wafer at 450 ◦C completes the process. Strong Si–C bonds
are formed at the interface, according to the reaction
Si−OH + H−C →Si−C + H2O
(22.7)
During the annealing steps this water will oxidize the
silicon wafer. Hydrogen released in wet oxidation will
be incorporated in the DLC ﬁlm, which has hydrogen in
it to begin with.
22.8 Variety of Wafers
A wafer manufacturer has thousands of speciﬁcations. In-
gots are different, and the wafering process, especially the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 271]
Wafer Engineering
281
hydrogen 
implanted
region
split and
flip
oxide
Si
diamond
poly
Figure 22.16
Silicon-on-diamond (SOD): diamond and
copper deposition on hydrogen-implanted handle wafer,
with splitting in Smart-cut fashion
thermal treatments, adds to the variety. DSP wafers, epi-
taxial wafers and SOI wafers increase this variety further,
as shown in Figure 22.17.
In CMOS bulk wafers command about 60% of the
market, epitaxial wafers about 30% and SOI less than
10%. These values are in terms of dollars; in terms of
area the shares of epi and SOI are smaller. In MEMS
DSP wafers, SOI and epi are more prominent, but overall
the MEMS wafer market is just a few percent of the
total wafer market. In addition to those prime wafer
markets, there are other markets, for solar silicon, test
wafers, reclaimed wafers and non-polished wafers. The
latter three are important for non-device applications as
monitors for individual process steps, or for equipment
testing and
development.
In
2010,
450 mm
wafers
Epitaxial
deposition
Gettering or
backside sealing
Bonding
for SOI
Customers
Single side
polished wafers
Slices
Ingot
Double side polished wafers
Figure 22.17
From ingot to customer
are available only as test wafers, with basically the
mechanical features in place, namely diameter and
thickness. These wafers are used by equipment makers
in developing reactors, robotics, and associated tools
and techniques.
22.9 Exercises
1. If the CZ ingot neck is 2 mm in diameter, what is
the maximum ingot weight that can be pulled before
silicon yields catastrophically?
2. If COP density in ingot is 105 cm−3, what is COP
density on the wafer surface?
3. What is the maximum device silicon thickness in (a)
SIMOX and (b) Smart-cut if a 200 keV implanter
is used?
4. If ultrathin SOI needs to be made, Smart-cut device
silicon has to be thinned down, in the extreme case of
6 nm MOS transistors to, for example, 2 nm. Analyze
the strengths and weaknesses of doing this 50 nm →
2 nm thinning by the following techniques:
(a) wet etching in TMAH
(b) plasma etching is Cl2 or SF6
(c) CMP
(d) thermal oxidation + HF wet etching.
5. How thick a silicon dioxide layer will be formed in-
side silicon when the implant dose is 2 × 1018 cm−2 in
SIMOX?
6. If hydrogen ion currents are in the milliampere range,
how many wafers per hour can be implanted for
Smart-cut?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 272]
282
Introduction to Microfabrication
7. What is the critical particle radius for 100 mm silicon
wafer bonding?
8. What is the non-bonded area caused by a 0.3 μm parti-
cle on 150 mm wafers? If 150 mm wafers are speciﬁed
to have 50 particles of size 0.3 μm, what fraction of
wafer area will be unbonded?
9. Analyze metallic bonding by copper as shown below.
What are its strengths and limitations?
grind
bond
<Si>
ox
poly
Cu
poly
ox
<Si>
Redrawn after Chen et al. (2005)
References and Further Reading
Alexe, M. and U. G¨osele (2004) Wafer Bonding, Springer.
Aminzadeh, M. et al. (2002) Pseudo epi – cost reduction ap-
proach and a paradigm shift in substrate material, IEEE
Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 15, 486–492.
Arokiaraj, J., S. Vicknesh and A. Ramam (2006) Integration of
indium phosphide thin ﬁlm structures on silicon substrates
by direct wafer bonding, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 34, 404–409.
Borghesi, A. et al. (1995) Oxygen precipitation in silicon,
J. Appl. Phys., 77, 4169.
Celler, G.K. and S. Cristoloveanu (2003) Frontiers in silicon-
on-insulator, J. Appl. Phys., 93, 4955–4978.
Chen, K.N. et al. (2005) Process development and bonding
quality investigations of silicon layer stacking based on cop-
per wafer bonding, Appl. Phys. Lett., 87, 031909
Cheng, X. et al. (2005) Patterned silicon-on-insulator technol-
ogy for RF Power LDMOSFET, Microelectron. Eng., 81,
150–155.
Dornberger, E., D. Temmler and W. van Ammon (2002) De-
fects in silicon crystals and their impact on DRAM device
characteristics, J. Electrochem. Soc., 149, G226–G231.
Falster, R., V.V. Voronkov and F. Quast (2000) On the prop-
erties of the intrinsic point defects in silicon: a perspective
from crystal growth and wafer processing, Phys. Stat. Solidi
(b), 222, 219–244.
Ghyselen, B. et al. (2004) Engineering strained silicon on in-
sulator wafers with the Smart CutTM technology, Solid-State
Electron., 48, 1285–1296.
G¨osele, U. et al. (1999) Wafer bonding for microsystems tech-
nologies, Sens. Actuators, 74, 161–168.
Graff, K. (2000) Metal Impurities in Silicon-Device Fabri-
cation, 2nd edn, Springer.
Matsumura, A. (2003) Technological innovation in low-dose
SIMOX wafers fabricated by an internal thermal oxidation
(ITOX) process, Microelectron. Eng., 66, 400–414.
Miller, D.C. et al. (2007) Characteristics of a commercially
available silicon-on-insulator MEMS material, Sens. Actua-
tors, A138, 130–144.
Muller, T. et al. (2000) Assessment of silicon wafer material
for the fabrication of integrated circuits sensors, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc., 147, 1604–1611.
M¨ussig, H.-J. et al. (2001) Can Si(113) wafers be an alternative
to Si(001)? Microelectron. Eng., 56, 195.
Pettinato, J.S. and D. Pillai (2005) Technology decisions to
minimize 450-mm wafer size transition risk, IEEE Trans.
Semicond. Manuf ., 18, 501–509.
Sama, S. et al. (2001) Investigation of Czochralski silicon
growth with different interstitial oxygen concentrations and
point defect populations, J. Electrochem. Soc., 148, G517.
Shimura, F. (ed.) (1994) Semiconductors and Semimetals:
Oxygen in silicon, Willardson.
Tang, Z. et al. (2009) Effect of nanoscale surface topography
on low temperature direct wafer bonding process with UV
activation, Sens. Actuators, A151, 81–86.
Taraschi, G., A.J. Pitera and E.A. Fitzgerald (2004) Strained
Si, SiGe, and Ge on-insulator: review of wafer bonding fab-
rication techniques, Solid-State Electron., 48, 1297–1305.
Tong, Q.-Y. and U. G¨osele (1999) Semiconductor Wafer
Bonding, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Varma, C.M. (1997) Hydrogen-implant induced exfoliation of
silicon and other crystal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 71, 3519.
von Ammon, W., E. Dornberger and P.O. Hansson (1999)
Bulk properties of very large diameter silicon single crystals,
J. Cryst. Growth, 198/199, 390–390.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 273]
23
Special Processes and Materials
This chapter is different from the previous ones: instead of
one topic, it is a collection of various specialty techniques
used in wafer processing. Some of the techniques are
materials speciﬁc, some are excellent in one limited appli-
cation and some require non-standard equipment. Many
of them are quite simple, but on the other hand they
may not offer full microfabrication beneﬁts. All these
techniques can be applied on a wafer scale, just like
other microfabrication processes, and this is the difference
from techniques to be presented in the following chapter:
those are serial methods for (slowly) writing one pattern
at a time.
23.1 Substrates other than Silicon
A plethora of materials have been used in addition to sil-
icon. Some of these have already been discussed: glasses,
fused silica and crystalline quartz (Chapter 19), and poly-
mers, for instance PET and Kapton (Chapter 18). Other
substrate materials used in microfabrication include:
• steel
• nickel
• alumina
• AlN
• ZnO
• GaN
• SiC
• sapphire
• PCBs
• LTCCs.
Steel is cheap and available in large areas, which is
good for solar cells; nickel can act as an electrode
in a fuel cell; alumina and aluminum nitride have
excellent microwave properties; ZnO is a transparent
conducting glass; GaN can be used for UV detection;
SiC is excellent in high-temperature, harsh-environment
cases; sapphire is hard and transparent and can support
silicon
epitaxy;
LTCCs
(Low-Temperature
Co-ﬁred
Ceramics) are ceramics that can be processed easily.
PCBs (Printed Circuit Boards) are polymer plates with
thick copper metallization ready-made on them. So for
larger linewidth applications which require metals on
a thermally insulating substrate, PCBs offer a quick
starting point.
Compared to round and standardized silicon wafers,
these exotic substrates have a number of issues that need
to be addressed. Square and rectangular shapes are not
well suited to photoresist spinning, but of course lami-
nate resist and spray resist are options. Non-standard sizes
complicate processing in equipment designed for silicon
processing. Multicrystalline silicon solar cells are most
often 5 and 6 inch squares, and they are much thinner
than silicon wafers, for example 200 μm. Handling thin
wafers is more delicate than with thicker ones. There are
also very thick substrates, and for example thermal equi-
librium of a thick insulating substrate in a single wafer
tool may take a lot longer than with a thin silicon wafer
of high thermal conductivity. And some substrates are 10
times heavier than silicon of the same diameter, which
may be an issue for handler robots.
Silicon and glass are ﬂat and smooth, which does not
apply to many other substrates. For instance, polished
metals might have a surface roughness of 100 nm, a hun-
dred times more than silicon. Thin ﬁlms of 100 nm thick-
ness cannot really cover such a mountainous substrate
very well. Some of the substrates are porous, for example
all polymers are somewhat porous. This leads to problems
in vacuum systems: water vapor (and other chemicals) are
slowly released from pores, leading to vacuum poisoning
and subsequently to poor metal quality.
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 274]
284
Introduction to Microfabrication
23.2 Pattern Generation
The general purpose pattern generation methods discussed
in Chapter 8 are applicable to all possible pattern shapes:
rectangles, circles, wedges, spirals, etc. There are, how-
ever, ways to make patterns in much simpler ways, but
these methods are usually capable of producing just one
shape only, for example lines, dots or circles.
23.2.1 Holographic lithography
Holographic lithography, also known as interference
lithography, uses intersecting laser beams to create line
gratings, dot arrays and 3D meshes. It is very easy
to create regular patterns by interfering laser beams,
with minimum linewidths in the 100 nm range for
visible wavelength lasers. It is also possible to vary the
line-to-space ratio, and to produce, for example, 200 nm
lines with 200 nm spaces, or with 1000 nm spaces. 3D
shapes can also be made (Figure 23.1).
23.2.2 Microstereolithography
Rapid prototyping of 3D objects can be accomplished by
the photohardening of negative-resist types of polymers.
There are several different ways of doing this:
• physical mask and blanket exposure of 2D layers
• virtual mask and blanket exposure of 2D layers
• x −y scanning laser and mechanical z-stage control
• two-photon laser polymerization
(the latter two are serial microfabrication methods and
belong to Chapter 24, really).
In all the approaches the 3D design is broken down to
2D layers which will be hardened layer by layer starting
from the bottom layer. After a layer has been exposed,
the z-controller lowers the stage, and new photopolymer
is allowed to cover the previous layer (Figure 23.2). In the
masked versions each layer requires a mask, and clearly
the physical mask approach is not amenable to any but the
simplest of designs. Virtual masks are patterns generated
by micromirrors or video projectors that use software to
create exposure pattern on-the-ﬂy.
Exposure times are similar to lithography (and no
wonder: similar photoactive polymers are used), with a
few seconds for layer thicknesses of tens of micrometers.
Structures with up to a thousand layers have been made,
in a few hours. Minimum feature sizes depend on mask
technology but tens of micrometers and larger are usual.
If direct laser writing is used, even micrometer sizes
are possible. The layer-by-layer structure of the ﬁnished
objects is clearly seen in Figure 23.3.
In
addition
to
polymers,
metallic
and
ceramic
microstructures
can
be
made
by
stereolithography.
Metallic or ceramic powders, with solvents and binders,
are hardened just like photoactive polymers. And it
is also possible to make metallic microstructures in
a roundabout way: a polymeric 3D structure is made
by stereolithography, and it is ﬁlled by electroplating.
Polymer is then removed. Compared to lithographic
resist molds, stereolithography enables retrograde shapes
and hollow structures to be made.
23.2.3 Block copolymer lithography
Block copolymers (BCPs) consist of blocks that are
bonded together covalently, but free to rotate and bend in
space. If the two blocks are chosen to repel each other,
for example by having hydrophobic and hydrophilic ends
in the chains, the block copolymer will self-organize into
a regular pattern.
The natural size scale for block (co)polymer structures
is the size of macromolecules, 5–50 nm. This is very
Built-in 3-D micromeshes
100µm
20µm
10µm
33.3µm
Figure 23.1
Built-in 3D meshes by three-laser interference lithography. Reproduced from Sato et al. (2006)
by permission of IOP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 275]
Special Processes and Materials
285
z-axis
stage
motor
µ-mirror
lamp
resin tank
Figure 23.2
Mask projection stereolithography: lamp, optical system, micromirror array virtual mask, resin tank and
z-stage. Adapted from Kang et al. (2005)
Figure 23.3
Example 3D objects made by microstereolithography: the magniﬁcation on the right clearly reveals the
layer-by-layer structure. Reproduced from Stampﬂet al. (2008) by permission of IOP
attractive for making nanostructures. There are a number
of drawbacks, however: the phase separation process
is very slow; and a 24 h bake might be needed to form
the pattern. Also, while local order can be very good,
long-range order of BCP patterns is often less perfect.
This might be acceptable for some applications, but fatal
in many others.
Depending on the particular polymers, many shapes
are possible. For example, dot and hole arrays and line
gratings can be made (Figure 23.4). It is essential that
one of the polymers can be selectively etched relative to
the other, to create a pattern that can be used as an etch
or plating mask.
BCP patterns are molecule size and also molecule thick,
5–50 nm, which means that they are very thin and not very
good as etch masks. In Figure 23.5 the BCP has been used
as a mask for SiO2 etching, and the oxide then acts as a
hard mask for SOI silicon layer etching.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 276]
286
Introduction to Microfabrication
1µm
Figure 23.4
Block copolymer lithography: left, PS–PB
BCP self-organized lines, reproduced from S.O. Kim et al.
(2003) by permission of Nature Publishing Group; right,
PS–b–PMMA BCP self-organized dots between lithograph-
ically deﬁned lines, reproduced from Park et al. (2003),
copyright 2003, Elsevier
PS
SiO2
Si
Si
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(c)
SiO2
Figure 23.5
Membrane ﬁlter fabrication by BCP lithogra-
phy: PS BCP nanostructures, other processing standard. Re-
produced from Black et al. (2006), copyright 2006, Amer-
ican Institute of Physics
23.2.4 Colloidal bead lithography
Colloidal lithography is also known by the names
of nanobead patterning and micro- and nanoparticle
assembly. All the same, the method is based on micro-
or nanobeads assembling into a regular hexagonal array
upon drying (Figure 23.6). The basic arrangement for
nanobead lithography is very easy: spinning or otherwise
spreading a nanobead-containing solution on a wafer,
and letting it dry in a controlled manner so that the
Figure 23.6
Bead lithography: single layer of polystyrene
beads, after drying. Courtesy Kestas Grigoras, Aalto
University
beads will self-organize. Both single layer structures and
multilayers can be done, see Figure 23.3.
The beads act like photoresist patterns, for example,
and they can be used as etch masks. Or metal can be
evaporated in the spaces between the beads, Figure 23.7.
These spaces between the beads are triangular, but an-
nealing and ball-up (surface energy minimization) will
lead to round metallic nanostructures. Alternatively, the
bead array can be buried completely by a thick polymer,
and then the beads dissolved, leaving an array of empty
spaces, known as inverse opals.
Figure 23.7
Evaporated metal through bead pattern, and
after bead dissolution
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 277]
Special Processes and Materials
287
23.3 Patterning
23.3.1 Microcontact printing (μCP)
Microcontact
printing
(μCP)
is
a
microlithographic
version of ink-and-stamp patterning: a soft polymeric
stamp (most often made of PDMS) is wetted by “ink,”
for
example
alkanethiol
CH3(CH2)15SH
or
octade-
cyltrichlorosilane OTS (Figure 5.14), and the wetted
stamp is pressed against a gold surface (Figure 23.8). A
reaction between thiol and gold leaves a self-assembled
monolayer (SAM) pattern on the wafer because the
bonds between the ink and surface are stronger than the
bonds between the stamp and ink.
Microcontact printing is an example of so-called soft
lithographies, which include a number of methods where
soft stamps and masters are utilized, as opposed to
hard masks of chromium-on-glass type. The claims that
soft lithography techniques work without cleanrooms is
not true: any technique that intends to produce micron
and submicron features requires cleanliness matching
those pattern sizes. But if 100 μm lines are made, then
micrometer particles obviously are not of great concern
and relaxed cleanliness requirements apply.
SAMs are usually only 2–3 nm thick, and their use-
fulness as a plating, etch or lift-off mask needs to be
improved, even though 20–30 nm etched depths have been
demonstrated, but this is clearly not enough for the ma-
jority of applications.
The stamps are soft and elastic, which ensures an in-
timate contact with the substrate, and allows for minor
irregularities. Soft materials are sensitive to printing force:
too much pressure will deform the soft stamp and the
patterns will be distorted. Stiffer materials offer higher
resolution, but worse contact. Hybrid stamps with a hard
backplate/soft cushion and a stiff stamping surface have
been devised in order to have the best of both worlds
(Figure 23.9).
Of course the patterns need not be ﬂat: in fact pyramid-
shaped tips are useful (Figure 23.10). If a very small
Figure 23.8
Microcontact printing on a gold coated sur-
face: left, alkanethiol-inked PDMS stamp and gold-coated
wafer; middle, alkanethiol stamped against the gold surface;
right, alkanethiol pattern on wafer, PDMS stamp lifted
Stiff patteren
Soft cushion
Hard backpkane
Figure 23.9
Composite stamp. Adapted from Michel
et al. (2001)
piezo scanner
backing plate
PDMS stamp
Figure 23.10
PDMS pyramid stamper. Adapted from
Huo et al. (2008)
pattern is needed, the tip is gently pressed, but if larger
patterns are needed, more force can be applied and the
soft PDMS will be pressed against the substrate, forming
a larger pattern.
The inks must balance between two opposing trends:
shorter molecules form better SAMs, but also diffuse
faster. Longer molecules result in imperfect SAMs, but
experience less diffusion, therefore they allow more
accurate pattern edges.
Contact area plays an important role: light-ﬁeld struc-
tures, with small contact area, are easier because the sep-
aration force is small. Structures with aspect ratios around
1:1 and structures with uniform ﬁll factors, such as pe-
riodic gratings, are easy. If aspect ratios of structures to
be stamped differ from unity or from each other consid-
erably, stamping becomes problematic. Structures of low
aspect ratio, say 0.1, are subject to sagging, and those
with high aspect ratio are subject to lateral instability and
collapse (Figure 23.11).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 278]
288
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 23.11
Problems with soft stamps: when spacing
is sparse, sagging can take place. In stamps of high aspect
ratio, lateral collapse can take place
23.3.2 Stamping non-planar objects
PDMS is ﬂexible, and this opens up special applications:
patterns can be contact printed on curved surfaces. Grat-
ings on optical ﬁbers have been realized. Similarly, a
round object can be rolled over a PDMS stamp and a
spiral structure created. Microcoils have been made this
way. Alternatively, the PDMS piece can be curved, and
used as mold.
23.4 Powder Blasting
In powder blasting abrasive particles are ejected toward
the wafer at about 100 m/s, leading to removal rates on
the order of tens of micrometers per minute. Material re-
moval is based on mechanical crack propagation. This
is the same as grinding in wafer thinning, and therefore
the methods share the same strengths and limitations: a
very high rate of material removal, but rough and dam-
aged surfaces, with the damage extending micrometers
inside the material. A powder blasting system is shown
schematically in Figure 23.12. In order to powder-blast a
full wafer, a scanning system has to be implemented.
When abrasive particles of tens of micrometers are
used, the rate is high, up to 1 mm/min, but surface
roughness is similar to particle size. When smaller
particles are used, the rate is lower but submicrometer
roughness can be obtained. A powder-blasted proﬁle is
sloped, and while powder blasting can be used to make
through-wafer holes, these are not holes with high aspect
ratios. Powder blasting is extensively used to blast holes
in glass wafers because both wet and dry etching of deep
holes is difﬁcult.
Masking in powder blasting requires something that is
not eroded by abrasive particles. Hard materials like per-
forated steel and thick electroplated metals like nickel are
candidates. Selectivities on the order of 50:1 are possi-
ble with metal masks. Photoresists cannot be used: they
are too brittle and will crack. Soft, elastomeric materials
Al2O3
Powder
Vibrating
feeder
Air feed
<6 bar
Cyclone
ventilation
Pressurized air
mixture 1~5 Bar
Nozzle
Nozzle
Mask
Average particle
size:3~30 µm
Nozzle
Box
X-Y
movement
Target
Substrate
Vparticle = 80~200 m/s
Roughness:
0.7~2.5 µm
Figure 23.12
Powder blasting. Reproduced from Cui
(2005) with kind permission of Springer Science and Busi-
ness Media
like PDMS absorb energy from the particles, and are de-
formed, not broken. Selectivities of 100:1 to 1000:1 are
possible with elastomeric masks. The minimum feature
sizes that can be made depend not only on mask size,
but also on particle size used, with minimum linewidth
roughly 10 times the particle size.
One special application of powder blasting is inclined
blasting (Figure 23.13). Because the particle jet is di-
rected, the sample can be tilted relative to the beam. This
enables free-standing structures to be made.
23.5 Deposition
23.5.1 Lift-off metallization
Lift-off is metallization with sacriﬁcial resist: after
lithography, metal deposition is done on the resist
pattern, followed by resist dissolution in solvent and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 279]
Special Processes and Materials
289
Al2O3
10 µm, 200 m/s
Incidence
angle q
Mask
Nozzle
1 mm
Figure 23.13
Inclined angle powder blasting, quartz pad-
dle resonator. Courtesy Martin Gijs, EPFL
Figure 23.14
Lift-off process: left, metal deposition on
resist pattern; right, resist dissolution and metal lift-off
lift-off, with all the metal that is not in contact with
substrate being removed (Figure 23.14).
Lift-off metallization should have poor step coverage,
and therefore the method of choice is evaporation, even
though sputtering can be used too. The deposition process
has, however, photoresist-imposed limitations: it must
take place under about 150 ◦C temperature because of
resist thermal stability. There is always some deposition
on the sidewalls, too, but if the ﬁlms are thin, they are
discontinuous, and resist dissolution can take place.
Special techniques have been devised to make lift-off
easier. One way is to use negative resists which typi-
cally have negative sidewall angles (Figure 9.10). Another
technique is to use a two-layer resist (Figure 23.15). The
bottom resist, called the lift-off resist (LOR), can be thick
because it has no role in deﬁning linewidth. LOR’s main
(a)
(b)
(c)
500 nm
Figure 23.15
Negative resist and two-layer lift-off re-
sist. SEM micrographs reproduced from Chen et al. (2004),
copyright 2004, Elsevier
role is to undercut the top resist in development, and it
is designed for a high development rate (and good adhe-
sion and thermal stability). The top resist is thin to enable
high-resolution patterning.
Lift-off is used in magnetic recording head (GMR
heads) fabrication: lead metallization has to make contact
with the GMR element as closely as possible. This
self-alignment is shown in Figure 23.16 and described in
the process ﬂow below.
Process ﬂow for GMR sensor
metallization
• GMR sensor deposition
• Lithography of lift-off resist
• Ion beam etching of GMR layers
• Deposition of hard bias metal
• Deposition of lead metal
• Resist stripping (= lift-off)
Ion beam etching (ion milling) is used to etch the GMR
sensor (Figure 7.19) because there are so many different
materials that ﬁnding RIE gases would be impossible,
and therefore argon ion milling is the straightforward
way. After milling the GMR head, the same resist acts as
the metallization lift-off mask: hard bias metal (CoPtCr)
and lead metallization (Au for resistance minimization)
are sputtered, and lifted off. Because one resist does it
all, the metallization will be automatically aligned to the
GMR sensor.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 280]
290
Introduction to Microfabrication
GMR sensor
lead metal
bias metal
(a)
(b)
(c)
resist
Figure 23.16
GMR head fabrication: (a) ion beam etch-
ing of GMR sensor with two-layer lift-off resist proﬁle;
(b) two-layer metallization; (c) lift-off. Adapted from Chil-
dress and Fontana (2005)
Lift-off is very general: all metals and their alloys can
be patterned with the same basic process. Lift-off is suited
for hard-to-etch metals like gold and platinum. A GMR
head is also suitable for ion beam etching because the
total thickness is only about 40 nm and the slow rate is
therefore not a major handicap.
Lift-off is, however, a special technique, and not an
alternative to etching in general. If an etching process ex-
ists, it is universally used, and lift-off is reserved for those
special applications where etching is difﬁcult or impos-
sible. Because lift-off calls for poor step coverage, it is
difﬁcult to make lift-off metallization over topography.
23.5.2 Shadow masks
Shadow masks (also known as stencil masks) are mechan-
ical aperture plates. Shadow mask patterning is basically
lift-off with a mechanical mask instead of a resist mask.
The shadow mask is aligned with and temporarily at-
tached to a substrate, and this stack is then positioned in
Figure 23.17
Deposition with a shadow mask
the deposition system (Figure 23.17). Basically any de-
position technique can be used, but line-of-sight methods
like evaporation lead to the smallest penumbra under the
mask. The smaller gap between the stencil and the wafer
minimizes unwanted deposition, too.
Some materials are so sensitive that their deposition has
to be the very last process step, for example (bio)chemical
sensor ﬁlms. The application of photoresist on these ﬁlms
is not possible, and solvent dissolution cannot be used,
ruling out lift-off. Another reason for using stencil masks
is that wafer topology does not allow photoresist spin-
ning: for example, there are through-wafer holes, or free-
standing cantilevers. And the shadow mask saves a lot of
process steps: resist spinning, baking, exposure, develop-
ment, rinsing and drying are eliminated.
If the shadow mask and wafer can be aligned
with each other in a mask aligner or a bond aligner,
micrometer
alignment
accuracy
is
possible;
often,
however, shadow masks are only used for non-critical
applications where manual ±10 μm alignment is enough.
Minimum linewidths that are possible with shadow
masks are in the 10 nm range. In practice, however, such
small apertures are quickly clogged by the deposited
ﬁlm, and the sidewall proﬁles of the deposited structures
are far from ideal. But in theory any hole larger than
atomic size can be used as a shadow mask. One special
limitation of shadow masks is the impossibility of
donut-shaped
structures.
There
are,
however,
tricks
around this: by using very narrow bridges and relying on
deposition penumbra under the mask, donut shapes can
be patterned. The general solution is to perform shadow
mask deposition twice, with “half-masks.”
23.5.3 Screen printing
Screen printing is an old technique which has emerged
as the major technique in solar cell metallization. A
perforated screen holding the metallization pattern is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 281]
Special Processes and Materials
291
Figure 23.18
Screen printing: a squeegee pushes metal
paste through the gridded screen
stretched over the wafer, and paste is applied to the
screen. A squeegee scans the screen, pushing paste
through the holes in it (Figure 23.18). Additional drying
and ﬁring steps are then required to ﬁnish metallization,
but this is similar to other thin-ﬁlm techniques: the ﬁlm
is seldom in ﬁnal form immediately after deposition.
Screen printing is cheaper than vacuum deposition
methods, and it can produce thick metal wires, for
example 10 μm, reducing resistive losses. Limitations are
similar to shadow masking: for example, donut-shaped
patterns cannot be made.
Other applications of screen printing in microfabrica-
tion include adhesive and glass-frit bonding: the adhesive
or glass frit is deﬁned by screen printing. In all these ap-
plications rather wide lines are satisfactory, in the range
of tens or hundreds of micrometers.
23.5.4 Inclined angle evaporation
The directionality of evaporation, its line-of-sight depo-
sition geometry, is favorable for lift-off, and if this is
combined with a tilted wafer, very small structures can be
made (Figure 23.19). Some of the smallest ever MOSFETs
have been demonstrated by oblique angle evaporation.
23.5.5 Glancing angle deposition
Columnar growth (Figure 7.2) is taken to extremes in
glancing angle deposition (GLAD). The wafer is tilted to
about 80◦relative to the arriving atoms, and the atoms
arrive obliquely. With low surface mobility and a shad-
owing effect from already deposited atoms, tall, narrow
crystals will grow. If the initial surface is smooth, random
columns will form, and if there are patterns, they will act
Figure 23.19
Inclined angle evaporation leads to struc-
tures smaller than the lithographic feature size
as shadowing elements and GLAD ﬁlm deposits on top
of those (Figure 23.20).
GLAD ﬁlms are highly porous but electrically con-
ductive. They can be used as top electrodes in chemical
sensors: ﬂuids can penetrate through the GLAD ﬁlm, and
interact with the sensor ﬁlm. Alternatives to GLAD top
electrodes include thin percolated metal ﬁlms – ﬁlms that
are so thin that they are physically discontinuous but elec-
trically continuous. Percolated ﬁlms have much higher
resistance than the much thicker GLAD ﬁlms. Normal
ﬁlms can also be used, but deposition, lithography and
etching of those ﬁlms on top of soft polymeric sensor
ﬁlms is undesirable.
23.6 Porous Silicon
Silicon is not etched in HF. If, however, silicon is
made an anode in an electrochemical etching set-up
(Figure
23.21),
etch
rates
of
about
1 μm/min
are
observed. Hydroﬂuoric acid, with or without ethanol and/
or water, is used as an electrolyte. Platinum is the
standard cathode. Depending on current density, silicon
can be etched in two rather different modes: pore
formation and electropolishing (Figure 23.22). Both elec-
tropolishing and pore formation take place in the anodic
regime. In pore formation etching proceeds anisotro-
pically downward leaving a silicon “skeleton” with up to
80% empty space.
The reactions that take place in HF electrolyte are
given by
Si + 6 HF ⇒H2SiF6 + H2 + 2 H+ + 2 e−
(pore formation, low current density)
(23.1)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 282]
292
Introduction to Microfabrication
Si + 6 HF ⇒H2SiF6 + 4 H+ + 4 e−
(electropolishing, high current density)
(23.2)
Pore formation starts at the wafer surface from a defect
or an intentional initial pit. Electronic holes from the bulk
silicon are transported to the surface, and they react at the
defect or pit. Further etching occurs at the newly formed
pore tips because they attract more holes due to higher
electric ﬁeld strength, and the process leads to a uniform
porous layer depth as the holes are consumed by the grow-
ing tips and other surfaces are depleted of holes. This
etching mode takes place under low hole concentration,
and it is limited by hole diffusion, not by mass transfer
in the electrolyte cell. If the hole density increases, some
holes reach the surface and react there, leading to sur-
face smoothing. This is the electropolishing regime and
ionic transfer from the electrolyte plays a role. These two
regimes are pictured in Figure 23.22.
Figure 23.20
GLAD ﬁlms: left, random crystals; right,
seeded crystals. Courtesy Marianna Kemell, University of
Helsinki
HF
Si
Pt
Figure 23.21
Electrochemical etching set-up for making
porous silicon
2.0
1.0
Log i (mA/cm2)
1.0
1.0
0.5
0
Log [HF] (vol %)
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
Porous silicon
Transition region
Electropolishing
Figure 23.22
Regimes of silicon anodic etching in HF:
porous silicon formation and electropolishing. Reproduced
from Collins (1997) by permission of Electrochemical
Society Inc.
In p-type silicon holes are naturally present, and in n-
type silicon they can be generated by illumination. A very
wide range of pore sizes from 2 nm to 20 μm can be etched
by varying electrolyte concentration, current density and
illumination. Pore size dependence on silicon resistivity
is shown in Figure 23.23. As a rough guide for n-type
silicon, the pore diameter in micrometers is half the re-
sistivity in ohm centimeters: for 1 μm pores in 2 ohm-cm,
and 20 nm pores in 0.04 ohm-cm material.
If the initial pits are prepared by lithography and etch-
ing, regular arrays of pores can be made (Figure 23.24).
Because etch rate depends on etching current, current
modulation can be used to increase etch rate, periodically,
leading to interesting 3D shapes.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 283]
Special Processes and Materials
293
10000
1000
100
10
1
0.001
0.01
0.1
Resistivity (ohmcm)
Porediameter (nm)
11
0
100
Macro
Meso
Micro
p-type
n-type
Figure 23.23
Pore
size
ranges
of
electrochemically
etched silicon: macroporous, mesoporous and microporous
regimes. Reproduced from Lehmann (1995) by permission
of IEEE
There are a couple of drawbacks in electrochemical
etching (and deposition): electrical contact has to be made
to the wafer back side, and this contact has to tolerate
the etchant. Concentrated HF (49%) is often employed,
which seriously limits the choice of metals. Alternatively,
a wafer holder can be used to protect the wafer back
side, and any metal is good. However, such a holder
takes up area on the wafer front, reducing the number of
usable chips.
Porous silicon is single crystalline silicon even though
it is a sponge-like network rather than continuous mate-
rial. Epitaxial deposition on porous silicon is possible, and
other thin ﬁlms can be deposited too. Depending on the
process, either pores will be ﬁlled or porous material will
be covered with a continuous surface of thin-ﬁlm material.
Conformal CVD into macroporous grooves is no different
from CVD into etched grooves of similar dimensions
23.6.1 Sacriﬁcial structures using porous silicon
The
electrochemical
etch
rate
of
n-type
silicon
(10–20 ohm-cm) in HF electrolyte is very low compared
to p-type silicon or low-resistivity n-type silicon (about
0.01 ohm-cm). Doping (by diffusion or epitaxy) can
therefore be used to create local porous silicon patterns.
Alternatively, protective etch masks can be used as in any
etching. Photoresist, silicon nitride, amorphous silicon
and silicon carbide are candidates; silicon dioxide cannot
be used because of the HF electrolyte, and photoresist is
limited to cases with dilute HF.
Free-standing microstructures can be made by deposit-
ing ﬁlms on top of porous silicon, patterning them and
then removing the porous silicon (Figure 23.25). Porous
silicon presents a curious case where etch selectivity can
be obtained between silicon and silicon: porous silicon
etching proceeds rapidly because the sidewalls between
the pores can be as thin as a few nanometers, whereas
solid silicon is attacked from the top surface only. Etch
selectivity can be as high as 100 000:1. The material for
the free-standing structure can be for instance silicon ni-
tride, but epitaxial silicon can also be used.
Porous silicon is a mechanically weak material, and it
can be destroyed by capillary forces during drying. It can
also be destroyed by gas bubbles: KOH etching releases
hydrogen (Equation 11.1) and if gas evolution is rapid the
bubbles can burst porous structures. For this reason dilute
KOH, 0.1–1%, is used, rather than the 20–50% typical of
silicon anisotropic etching.
In a modiﬁcation of the above scheme, a free-standing
structure can be made from bulk single crystal silicon.
A p-type silicon substrate (10 ohm-cm) is used. A
deep, heavy p-diffusion is done, followed by a shallow
Figure 23.24
Porous silicon: (a) random initial pits; (b) lithographically deﬁned initial pits and constant current etching,
reproduced from Grigoras et al. (2001); (c) lithographically deﬁned and modulated etching, reproduced from Trifonov
et al. (2008), copyright 2008, Elsevier
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 284]
294
Introduction to Microfabrication
p-silicon
n-diffusion
porous Si
deposited film
p-silicon
p-silicon
cavity
Figure 23.25
Fabrication of a free-standing bridge on a p-type substrate: left, n-diffusion of selected areas, followed by
electrochemical etching; middle, bridge material deposition; right, removal of porous silicon in dilute KOH resulting in
a bridge over a cavity. Adapted from Hedrich et al. (2000)
porous silicon
n-diffusion
p diffusion
cavity
single crystal
silicon beam
Figure 23.26
Single crystal silicon bridges by porous silicon sacriﬁcial layer: left, p-type and n-type diffusions; middle,
electrochemical etching; right, KOH etching of porous silicon. Adapted from Lee et al. (2000)
n-diffusion
(Figure
23.26).
Electrochemical
etching
attacks the p-diffusion and transforms it into porous
silicon. The n-type silicon is intact in electrochemical
etching. A short KOH etching removes the porous silicon,
leaving an n-type single crystal silicon microbridge.
23.7 Molding with Lost Mold
Hard-to-etch materials can be made into patterns by the
following methods:
• ion beam etching (argon ion milling)
• selective deposition
• blanket deposition and polishing
• molding and mold dissolution.
Ion beam milling is a brute force method. It suffers from
very slow rates. Selective deposition depends critically
on chemical surface processes which are hard to con-
trol. Highly conformal deposition combined with polish-
ing is quite universal, but conformal deposition processes
are rare.
Molding is rather a universal process because so many
different ways of transporting the material are available.
The reverse of the ﬁnal pattern is fabricated in silicon
or resist, ﬁlled with the desired material, and the mold
removed. AFM tips of silicon nitride are made this way:
inverse pyramids are etched into silicon, ﬁlled by LPCVD
nitride, and silicon is etched away. The diamond structures
shown in Figure 23.27 are made similarly: CVD diamond
deposition plus silicon wafer etching.
When the mold is completely removed, shape free-
dom is unlimited. These processes are variously called
dissolved wafer, lost mold or disposable mold processes.
Because there are no detachment problems (Figure 18.20),
the most pressing issue is ﬁlling of the mould. If the ma-
terial to be molded can ﬁll retrograde features, then any
shape can be made.
Etch selectivity between silicon and the molded
material limits the use of this method: the usual
silicon etchants, hot concentrated KOH or HF:HNO3
mixtures, are very aggressive solutions. Alternatively,
silicon
can
be
removed
by
isotropic
SF6
plasma
etching or by XeF2 or ClF3 dry etching. A number
of devices have been made with silicon molds: for
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 285]
Special Processes and Materials
295
Figure 23.27
Diamond microstructures made with silicon wafer disposable molds. Reproduced from Bj¨orkman et al.
(1999) by permission of Elsevier
Figure 23.28
Silicon mold (top) and cast PDMS replica
(bottom): the whole silicon wafer has been etched away to
release the PDMS “mushroom”, courtesy Lauri Sainiemi,
Aalto University
instance, PZT ultrasonic transducers and parylene needles,
in addition to hollow diamond channels. In Figure 23.28
the PDMS “mushrooms” have been made by etching
a mold in silicon in a fashion similar to Figure 21.15,
ﬁlling with PDMS and then completely removing the
silicon wafer.
Resist molds are easy to make and electroplating into
resist is widely used. Resist molds are, however, usable
only once. But resist can be used as a master to make
PDMS parts, which can be used as disposable molds.
In Figure 23.29 stainless steel powder (with solvent and
binder) has been cast into PDMS mold and cured. After
Figure 23.29
Steel powder molded by a PDMS mould.
Courtesy Pia Suvanto, Aalto University
detachment, it is further annealed to improve its mechan-
ical properties.
23.8 Exercises
1. How does shadow mask thickness affect the resulting
linewidth and proﬁle?
2. What is the gap effect on feature size and shape in
shadow mask patterning?
3. When new dielectrics are tested, it is usual to deposit
the top electrode through a shadow mask because
of speed and simplicity. How much error will be
introduced to dielectric constant εr if shadow mask
dimensional control is 100 ± 5 μm?
4. It has recently been proposed to use shadow masks
in ion implantation. Explore the issues that need to
be addressed for such an approach.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 286]
296
Introduction to Microfabrication
5. Explain in detail how donut shapes can be made using
shadow masks.
6. PDMS with CTE of 300 ppm/◦C is made by molding
over a 100 mm silicon wafer. By how much will
features shrink? What positional accuracy can be
achieved?
7. Explain in detail how the hollow diamond tubes
shown in Figure 23.27 are made!
8. What dimensional limitations apply to structures
made
by
the
porous
silicon
sacriﬁcial
layer
technique?
9. Estimate the feature sizes that can be made by in-
clined angle evaporation in Figure 23.19!
10. How could shadow mask and lift-off types of methods
work for liquid phase patterning?
11. How can the porosity of porous silicon be measured
by weighing?
12. What percentage of silicon atoms are surface atoms
if porous silicon has a 5 nm pore size and 3 nm wall
thickness?
13. Explain the difference (in materials, applications, pro-
cesses, temperatures, etc.) between the etching and
lift-off method.
References and Related Reading
Bj¨orkman, H. et al. (1999) Diamond replicas from microstruc-
tured silicon masters, Sens. Actuators, 73, 24.
Black, C.T. et al. (2006) Highly porous silicon membrane fab-
rication using polymer self-assembly, J. Vac. Sci. Technol.,
B24, 3188–3191.
Chen, Y., K. Peng and Z. Cui (2004) A lift-off process for
high resolution patterns using PMMA/LOR resist stack, Mi-
croelectron. Eng., 73–74, 278–281.
Childress, J.R. and R.E. Fontana (2005) Magnetic recording
read head sensor technology, C. R. Physique, 6, 997–
1012.
Collins, S.C. (1997) Etch stop techniques for micromachining,
J. Electrochem. Soc., 144, 2242.
Cui, Z. (2005) Micro-Nanofabrication, Higher Education
Press/Springer.
Ekkels, P. et al. (2009) Evaluation of platinum as a structural
thin ﬁlm material for RF-MEMS devices, J. Micromech. Mi-
croeng., 19, 065010.
Graff, M. et al. (2004) Microstenciling: a generic technology
for microscale patterning of vapor deposited materials, J. Mi-
croelectromech. Syst., 13, 956–962.
Grigoras, K., A.J. Niskanen and S. Franssila (2001) Plasma
etched initial pits for electrochemically etched macro-
porous silicon structures, J. Micromech. Microeng., 11,
371–375.
Hawkeye, M.H. and M.J. Brett (2007) Glancing angle depo-
sition: Fabrication, properties, and applications of micro-
and nanostructured thin ﬁlms, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 25,
1317–1335.
Hedrich, F., S. Billat and W. Lang (2000) Structuring of mem-
brane sensors using sacriﬁcial porous silicon, Sens. Actua-
tors, 84, 315.
Huie, J.C. (2003) Guided molecular self-assembly: a review of
recent efforts, Smart Mater. Struct., 12, 264–271.
Hulteen, J.C. and R.P. Van Duyne (1995) Nanosphere lithog-
raphy: a materials general fabrication process for periodic
particle array surfaces, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A13, 1553–
1558.
Huo, F. et al. (2008) Polymer pen lithography, Science, 321,
1658–1660.
Kang, H.-W., J.-W. Rhie and D.-W. Cho (2009) Development
of bi-pore scaffold using indirect solid freeform fabrication
based on microstereolithography technology, Microelectron.
Eng., 86, 941–944.
Kim, H.-C. and W.D. Hinsberg (2008) Surface patterns from
block copolymer self-assembly, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A26,
1369–1382.
Kim, S.O. et al. (2003) Epitaxial self-assembly of block
copolymers
on
lithographically
deﬁned
nanopatterned
substrates, Nature, 424, 411–414.
Kim, G.M., M.A.F. van den Boogaart and J. Brugger (2003)
Fabrication and application of a full wafer size mi-
cro/nanostencil for multiple length-scale surface patterning,
Microelectron. Eng., 67–68, 609–614.
Lee, C.-S., J.-D. Lee and C.-H. Han (2000) A new wide-
dimensional freestanding microstructure fabrication technol-
ogy using laterally formed porous silicon as a sacriﬁcial
layer, Sens. Actuators, 84, 181.
Lehmann, V. (1995) Porous silicon – a new material for
MEMS, Proceedings of IEEE MEMS’95, p. 1.
Michel, B. et al. (2001) Printing meets lithography: soft ap-
proaches to high-resolution patterning, IBM J. Res. Dev., 45,
697–719.
Park, C., J. Yoon and E.L. Thomas (2003) Enabling nanotech-
nology with self assembled block copolymer patterns, Poly-
mer, 44, 6725–6760.
Pawlowski, A.-G., A. Sayah and M.A.M. Gijs (2005) Accurate
masking technology for high-resolution powder blasting, J.
Micromech. Microeng., 15, S60–S64.
Perl, A., D.N. Reinhoudt and J. Huskens (2009) Microcon-
tact printing: limitations and achievements, Adv. Mater., 21,
2257–2268.
Sato, H. et al. (2006) An all SU-8 microﬂuidic chip with built-
in 3D ﬁne microstructures, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 16,
2318–2322.
Sayah, A. et al. (2005) Elastomer mask for powder blasting
microfabrication, Sens. Actuators, A125, 84–90.
Shibata, T. et al. (2002) Stencil mask ion implantation tech-
nology, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 15, 183–188.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 287]
Special Processes and Materials
297
Stampﬂ, J. et al. (2008) Photopolymers with tunable mechani-
cal properties processed by laser-based high-resolution stere-
olithography, J. Micromech. Microeng., 18, 125014.
Sun, C. et al. (2005) Projection micro-stereolithography using
digital micro-mirror dynamic mask, Sens. Actuators, A121,
113–120.
Syms, R.R.A. et al. (2009) Silicon microcontact printing
engines, J. Micromech. Microeng., 19, 025027.
Trifonov, T. et al. (2008) Macroporous silicon: a versatile ma-
terial for 3D structure fabrication, Sens. Actuators, A141,
662–669.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 288]
24
Serial Microprocessing
Microfabrication manufacturability stems largely from the
fact that millions or even billions of identical structures
are made simultaneously, by lithography, imprinting, em-
bossing or molding, and then etched, implanted, metal-
lized or otherwise further processed in parallel fashion. In
this chapter we will discuss different breeds of processes:
single features are made, slowly and painstakingly, but
with great precision. Pixel by pixel, single feature pro-
cessing is slow, but there are major beneﬁts: the cost
and waiting time for the photomask/master/mold is elim-
inated, and new designs can be implemented on-the-ﬂy
by changing the code that drives the writing tool. The cy-
cle time of experimenting becomes much faster than with
mask/master/mold-based techniques. These processes are
used in research and development, and whenever a lim-
ited number chips are enough. And of course they are
used when no alternatives exist, as in photomask writing.
There are two main varieties of serial microprocess-
ing tools: beam based and tip based. The beam spot size
and the tip radius vary greatly, but all rely on scan-
ning the sample surface to create the pattern. Focused
ion beams (FIBs), focused electron beams (FEBs) and
laser beams are all used, with or without additional gases
(Figure 24.1). The same beams can also be used to ex-
pose resist, but in this chapter we are interested in fab-
ricating the microstructures directly in the ﬁnal material,
sidestepping the intermediate polymer step. The tip-based
methods have also been used to write resist patterns, but
again we are interested in direct etching/deposition of the
ﬁnal structures.
Vacuum, atmospheric and liquid phase systems are all
in use. Ion and electron beams are of course vacuum
techniques, but lasers and tips can operate in all envi-
ronments. However, there are no universal techniques:
all are more or less specialized in some materials and
some environments.
24.1 Focused Ion Beam (FIB)
Processing
Ion beams are energetic, as we know from ion implan-
tation (Chapter 15). The processes that occur include not
only implantation but also amorphization and sputtering,
that is ion beam etching. Secondary electrons are also
emitted (Figure 24.2).
In order to achieve high enough beam current, a liquid
gallium ion source is commonly used in FIB systems (and
in SIMS analysis systems, too). In serial microprocessing
ion energies are similar to ion implantation (e.g., 50 keV),
but they are focused to very small spot sizes, for example
10 nm at 10 A/cm2 current density. Sputtering, which is
also present in implantation to a minor extent, can be
the dominant phenomenon in FIB. The ion beam-induced
secondary electron emission is most useful and in fact
FIB systems act as electron microscopes, too.
Ion beam etching was mentioned in Chapter 11. In
ion beam etching (as in ion implantation) a broad beam
system is used. The mechanism is the same for focused
beams but now we do not need a mask because etching
only takes place where the beam hits. This is used in re-
pairing photomasks: chromium pinspots, protrusions and
bridges are etched away (Figure 8.10). The small spot
size of FIB is essential in this application. The imaging
capability of secondary electrons is also essential.
The FIB etching process is slow, but the rate can be
enhanced by adding a reactive gas, for example ﬂuorine-
containing gases like triﬂuoroacetamide (C2H2F3NO) for
silicon etching. The same trick is used in broad beam
etching where the method is called CAIBE (for chemically
assisted ion beam etching) and also RIBE (for reactive ion
beam etching). In addition to the slow rate, another major
problem with ion beam etching is the high energy which
erodes sharp corners, leading to rounding (Figure 24.3).
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 289]
300
Introduction to Microfabrication
Precursor
Pump
Sample Stage
Pump or
carrier gas
Scan coils
Secondary
Electron Detector
Internal gas
injection
Pump
FEB / FIB gun
Beam Control
External gas
injection
Figure 24.1
Serial writing by focused beam system. Reproduced from Utke et al. (2008), copyright 2008, American
Institute of Physics
FIB
SE
(Detector)
Sputtered Atoms
Implantation
Amorphisation
Substrate
Sputtered Atoms
Figure 24.2
Atomistic processes in FIB. Reproduced
from Utke et al. (2008), copyright 2008, American Institute
of Physics
This high ﬂuence of ions can be used to locally dope sil-
icon, just as in ion implantation. But because the doses are
very high locally, ion concentration can be orders of mag-
nitude higher than in ion implantation, for example peak
concentration 10% vs. 0.1%. This has been used to create
Figure 24.3
Focused ion beam, chemically enhanced
etching of silicon pillars. Courtesy Antti Peltonen, Aalto
University
a gallium-doped layer 30 nm thick, which can be used as
an etch mask for subsequent DRIE steps (Figure 24.4).
Ion
beam
deposition
of
tungsten
according
to
Equation 24.1 is used to deposit metal. Gaseous tungsten
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 290]
Serial Microprocessing
301
Figure 24.4
Gallium-doped etch mask for DRIE. Design
by Alvar Aalto, processing by Nikolai Chekurov, Aalto
University
hexacarbonyl source gas is broken down by the gallium
ion beam and tungsten is deposited, releasing carbon
monoxide:
W(CO)6 (g) →W (s) + 6 CO (g)
(24.1)
The resulting tungsten thin ﬁlm is not of very high quality:
it contains a lot of residual carbon, and its resistivity can
be 100 μohm-cm vs. 10 μohm-cm for CVD tungsten. It
is useful for instance when a defective chip needs to be
rewired so that it can be measured.
One application where the high resistivity is not a con-
cern is mask repair. The role of the deposited metal is
to block light, and the electrical properties are irrelevant.
FIB-deposited tungsten and carbon are used to repair pho-
tomask defects.
24.2 Focused Electron Beam (FEB)
Processing
Electrons do not dislodge atoms, but they can induce reac-
tions. With suitable gases both deposition and etching are
possible (Figure 24.5). Electrons interact with molecules
both in the gas phase and on the surface.
One application for FEB is mask repair. Missing
chrome can be repaired by deposition. For instance,
platinum organometallic source gases can be used to
deposit opaque layers which are similar to chrome, both
optically and mechanically, that is they can tolerate
FEB
Volatile
Fragments
Diffusion
SEs
Adsorption
Desorption
Deposit gas
injection
Dissociation
& Deposition
Figure 24.5
FEB deposition. Reproduced from Utke
et al. (2008), copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics
mask cleaning. The repair of extra chrome is done by
electron beam-enhanced etching. The etch gas is injected
in the vicinity of the beam spot, at very small ﬂow rate
because the e-beam requires a high vacuum. The etch
gas is selected to produce volatile products just as in
RIE. Molybdenum silicide mask repair is easier than
chrome mask repair because there are more volatile
molybdenum compounds. Mask metals are rather thin,
in the range of 100 nm, so the slow etch rates can be
tolerated. But accuracy requirements for advanced masks
are formidable: linewidth errors of only 10–15 nm are
tolerated on the mask (and a factor of four smaller at
wafer level due to reduction optics).
FEB can also be used to create 3D objects: the focal
point is moved in space, and new material is deposited
at that focal point. Precursor gases similar to those of
Equation 24.1 are used to deposit delicate 3D structures,
like the nanotip shown in Figure 24.6.
24.3 Laser Direct Writing
Laser beam writing can be done in room air whereas elec-
tron and ion beams always require high vacuum. Laser
processing is therefore scalable to larger areas, as dis-
cussed already in mask making (Chapter 8). Laser beam
spot size is larger than electron or ion beam spot size,
and submicron spot size is difﬁcult to achieve. And when
spot size is made smaller, writing time increases according
to Equation 8.2: writing with 1 μm spot takes 100 times
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 291]
302
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 24.6
SEM micrograph of a gold nanotip made by
FEB. Reproduced from Utke et al. (2008), copyright 2008,
American Institute of Physics
longer than with 10 μm spot. In the following discus-
sion typical linewidths are in the 10–100 μm range. This
includes many solar cell, ﬂat panel display and microma-
chining applications like via drilling and wafer scribing.
Laser processes fall into three major categories:
ablation,
photolytic
and
photothermal.
In
ablation
material is explosively evaporated when intense laser
beam is absorbed by the material. This hints at one
limitation of laser processing: laser wavelength and
material absorbance need to match. It is less of a problem
with newer picosecond and femtosecond lasers because
non-linear effects take place and practically all materials
can be ablated. However, nanosecond lasers have higher
pulse energies and therefore higher machining speeds.
In photolytic processes laser light induced reactions are
important. In laser assisted CVD (LCVD or LACVD)
breakdown of source gases is a photolytic effect. Metals
can be made in processes resembling FIB metallization,
Equation 24.1. Similar to FIB-deposition, metals made by
LACVD are not very good in terms of resistivity.
In photothermal processes the localized heat produced
by the laser drives the processes. Laser annealing and
sintering are thermal effects. When laser pulses are short,
the heat supplied by laser does not have time to diffuse:
x ≈
√
Dt, with thermal diffusivities of 0.1–1 cm2/s for
silicon result in submicrometer diffusion distances for
nanosecond pulses. Therefore laser thermal processes can
be done on sensitive substrates: for example amorphous
silicon crystallization on glass and polymer substrates
is possible.
Lasers used in direct writing are usually diode pumped
solid state (DPSS) lasers, like Nd:YAG (λ = 1064 nm)
and Ti:sapphire (680–1100 nm). Laser parameters of
interest include not only wavelength but also energy
(μJ/pulse), power (10–100 W), pulse temporal duration
(ms to fs), pulse repetition rate (from a few Hz to tens
of MHz) and ﬂuence (0.1–10 J/cm2). Beam shape is also
important: when Gaussian beams are used, there can be
ablation at beam center, and thermal processes at edges,
leading to heat affected zones.
Excimer lasers form the other major class of microma-
chining lasers. They are suitable for large area processing,
for example square centimeter areas are treated. Masked
ablation is often done with excimer lasers. This resem-
bles optical lithography and in fact same excimer lasers
KrF (248 nm) and ArF (193 nm) are used in lithography,
too (Chapter 10). Laser ﬂuence is, however, much higher.
Beam shaping enables larger area ﬂat beam proﬁle (known
as top hat). Carbon dioxide laser of 10.6 μm wavelength
which is extensively used in metal machining is seldom
used in micromachining, but for example PMMA and
some other polymers can be processed with CO2 lasers.
The case of ablating indium tin oxide (ITO) thin ﬁlm
on top of glass shows many important issues in laser pro-
cessing: Nd:YLF laser with 1047 nm wavelength is used.
In this wavelength range ITO absorbs strongly but glass
is transparent, and ablation without damage to substrate
is possible. At second harmonic (523.5 nm) and third har-
monic (349 nm) wavelengths both ITO and glass have low
absorption, and much higher ﬂuencies are required for ab-
lation. But at 262 nm (4th harmonic) absorption in ITO
is strong, and heating is limited to a very thin top layer,
leading to excellent ablation. Every harmonics generation,
however, reduces pulse energy to half, which leads to
lower overall removal rate. Therefore if the fundamental
wavelength works, it is preferred.
All materials can be ablated, but not all materials are
volatile, meaning that some materials will start condens-
ing, forming particles and redepositing on the wafer. This
depends on laser pulse duration, with shorter pulses gener-
ally vaporizing the sample more completely, and resulting
in less residue. Atmosphere is also important: ablated ma-
terial may react and form for example oxide particles. This
depends on material reactivity, and it can be minimized
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 292]
Serial Microprocessing
303
Figure 24.7
Silicon wafer dicing by laser: a) scribe lines; b) vias, from ref. Otani by permission of Springer
by working under vacuum, which makes systems more
complex. A protective polymer or oxide layer is often
used on silicon during ablation. After ablation, this layer
is removed and the particles with it.
24.3.1 Laser scribing/drilling/etching
Just as in etching, there are three main cases in laser
machining: removing thin ﬁlms selectively against un-
derlying material, cutting a limited depth into substrate
(sometimes called blind via) which requires good rate
control, and scribing and drilling through-wafer (Figure
24.7) which calls for high rate. In laser ablation of sili-
con 100–1000 nm of material is removed per pulse and
10 μm/pulse has been demonstrated.
Silicon removal rate of 10 mm3/ second translates to
300 mm/s of 100 μm deep, 10 μm wide trench. In many
applications sidewall proﬁle is important, for example
ﬂow channels and nozzles. Laser ablated grooves and
holes are seldom vertical walled. Gaussian beam shape
leads to gaussian groove proﬁle, as shown in Figure 24.8.
A through-wafer hole might have 50 μm entrance diame-
ter, and 20 μm exit diameter on wafer backside.
Lasers are used in dicing wafers. There are a number
of beneﬁts: irregular shapes can be cut easily, brittle sub-
strates pose no problems and water is eliminated. This is
important for MEMS structures with moving parts which
might stick upon drying. Speed is also faster than dicing
with a mechanical saw. Laser dicing is especially attrac-
tive for thin substratres (<200 μm) because such wafers
are fragile and because laser dicing time is reduced for
thinner wafers, unlike mechanical dicing.
Just as in electron beam mask writing (Figure 8.3)
lines are made up of circular spots, and certain overlap is
needed to have straight edges, and not “pearl-necklace”.
But there are applications like electrical isolation in solar
cells where separation is enough, and line quality irrele-
vant. The edges of laser cut lines have burr, or residue
wall (Figure 24.8). Using more pulses and larger overlap
between the pulses will minimize burr but careful cleaning
is needed if bonding is to be done.
24.3.2 Laser annealing
Laser annealing (sometimes known as ELA, for excimer
laser annealing) is used in ﬂat panel display fabrication:
amorphous silicon on glass plates is crystallized by laser.
The high temperature needed for crystallization is lim-
ited to a top micrometer layer by using nanosecond laser
pulses, and therefore the glass substrate is not excessively
heated up. A problem with ELA is orientation depen-
dence: the grains are not randomly oriented, but aligned
along the laser scan direction. Therefore transistors fabri-
cated in different orientations will have slightly different
properties.
In photomask repair laser annealing can be used: metal-
containing thin ﬁlm is spin coated on the mask, and the
laser locally anneals the ﬁlm to become opaque. Untreated
ﬁlm can be selectively etched away.
Writing and erasing CDs and DVDs is also a laser
annealing process: GST ﬁlm (Germanium Antimony Tel-
luride) is turned to amorphous state by rapid heating and
cooling, and to crystalline state by slow heating and cool-
ing, resulting in reﬂectivity change by a factor of two
between the states.
24.3.3 Laser processing of solar cells
Solar cells make use of laser processing in many in-
stances: it has for example replaced lithography and etch-
ing in many steps. Process ﬂow for buried contact solar
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 293]
304
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 24.8
Proﬁle of grooves in silicon by 800 nm wavelength, 150 fs pulses: a) burr (residue) with 20 pulses; b)
burr-free, with 100 pulses, from ref. Crawford by permission of Springer
plated Ni/Cu/Ag
Silicon nitride
100 Ω/sq emitter
10 Ω/sq groove diffusion
Al/Ni/Cu/Ag
Al back surface field
p-type base
Figure 24.9
Buried collector solar cell in crystalline silicon, from ref. Neuhaus (creative commons article)
cell is given below, and the resulting cell is shown in
Figure 24.9. This cell has the following features: lithogra-
phy is completely eliminated and metallization is done in
the laser cut grooves by electrochemical techniques. The
20 μm deep and 30 μm wide grooves need to be smoothed
and cleaned after laser processing by wet chemical etch-
ing. Laser grooves enable close spacing of metallization,
and even though they are narrow, they offer low resistance
because they are deep.
Process ﬂow for buried contact solar cell
from ref. Neuhaus
• P-type silicon wafer
• Texturing etch in KOH
• Phosphorous oxide (P2O5) deposition on front
• PECVD nitride on front
• Laser grooving
• Groove damage etching
• POCl3 gas phase diffusion & P2O5 drive in
• Aluminum evaporation on back
• Rear contact diffusion
• Electroless nickel plating into grooves
• Sintering
• Electroless copper and silver metallization
• Laser edge isolation
Thin ﬁlm solar cell processing uses lasers, too. The
thin ﬁlm layers of a thin ﬁlm solar cell are shown in
Figure 24.10. In this cell the light enters the cell through
glass and zinc oxide, and is absorbed by the amorphous
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 294]
Serial Microprocessing
305
Top contact
2nd Laser scribe
1st Laser scribe
Interconnection
loss
Active
cell
Bus
bar
Contact
cell (+)
3rd Laser scribe
Absorber
Window
TCO
Contact
cell (−)
Substrate
Ag
ZnO
ZnO
glass
deposition sequence
a-Si:H (n)
μc-Si:H (i)
μc-Si:H (p)
Figure 24.10
Thin ﬁlm solar cell with ZnO as transparent conducting oxide (TCO): a) thin ﬁlm layers, from ref.
Repmann by permission of Elsevier; b) three laser cuts, from ref. Chopra by permission of John Wiley & Sons
silicon layer, while the current is collected on top by
the thick silver conductor. Cell processing consists of
seven main steps, including three laser patterning steps, as
shown below:
Process ﬂow for μc-Si thin ﬁlm solar cell
(from ref. Repmann)
1. ﬁrst conductor (ZnO) deposition
2. ZnO texture etching in HCl
3. ZnO patterning by laser
4. PECVD of Si:H p–i–n structure
5. silicon patterning by laser
6. ZnO/Ag back contact sputtering
7. back contact laser patterning
The ﬁrst laser cut patterns ZnO (transparent conducting
oxide, TCO) front electrode (which was deposited ﬁrst);
the second one cuts through the active semiconductor
material (μc-Si:H) and the third cut deﬁnes the back met-
allization (which was deposited last). ZnO is textured to
enhance light trapping. Similar texture etch process is
used in silicon solar cells, Figure 1.14a.
Lasers can also be used to sinter/anneal screen
printed metallization. Metal-to-silicon contact is made by
forcing metal through silicon nitride by a laser annealing
step. Contact hole lithography and etching are then
eliminated. Laser doping is also possible: contact arrays
in solar cells are made by local drive-in by laser pulses
(Figure 37.6).
24.4 AFM Patterning
AFM tip radius of curvatures are in the 10 nm range, and
this then is the range where minimum feature sizes lie.
AFM tips can be used in various modes of localized pro-
cessing:
• subtractive: removal of material
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 295]
306
Introduction to Microfabrication
• additive: deposition of material
• material modiﬁcation.
In subtractive mode etching, electrochemical etching or
discharge machining is used to remove material. By ap-
plying a voltage between the AFM tip and the substrate,
anodic oxidation of silicon is also possible. In additive
mode the STM (Scanning Tunneling Microscope), the
vacuum brother of the AFM, has been used to move and
position individual atoms. While this is the ultimate in
patterning accuracy, it is hopelessly slow: it takes minutes
to move each atom.
The dip pen is an AFM tip which writes with liquid
ink, with speeds of 10 μm/s. There are three steps in dip
pen writing: a water meniscus forms between the tip and
the surface, ink is transported from the tip to the surface,
and ﬁnally ink is attached to the surface. A typical ink
would be thiol SAM, which has active sulfur atoms ready
to react with a gold surface. The tip has to be occasionally
replenished, by dipping into the ink reservoir. In order to
increase dip pen writing speed, ink can be supplied contin-
uously, as in a fountain pen. Such a microﬂuidic fountain
pen design in shown in Figure 24.11. Its fabrication is left
as an exercise in Chapter 30.
Thermomechanical actuation of AFM tips has been
used to press dimples into polymer, as a future memory
technology. This process is similar to hot embossing, as
can be witnessed by comparing Figures 18.15 and 24.12.
Thermomechanical memory, as well as other AFM-based
techniques, can be made to run in parallel, by fabricating
Shell
Core tip
Water meniscus
Microchannel
Reservoir
Ink
Volcano tip
Liquid-air
interface
Figure 24.11
Dip pen writing: top, detail of tip show-
ing thiol–SAM attachment on a gold surface; bottom,
fountain pen principle for dip pen. Reproduced from
Salaita et al. (2007) by permission of Nature Publishing
Group
AFM tip
Figure 24.12
Polymer imprinting by a hot AFM tip.
Adapted from Vettiger et al. (2002)
Figure 24.13
AFM tip array for thermomechanical data
storage. Reproduced from Despont et al. (2004), copyright
2004, by permission of IEEE
arrays of AFM tips with, for instance, thousands of tips
(Figure 24.13).
24.5 Ink Jetting
Ink jet printers routinely produce dots in the 20–100 μm
range at kilohertz frequencies. Ink-jetted lines can be used
as molding masters for PDMS ﬂuidic channels as such:
the typical thickness of 10 μm is quite suitable for mi-
croﬂuidics. Layer-by-layer ink jetting can produce real 3D
structures in much the same way as microstereolithogra-
phy: heights up to 400 μm have been demonstrated with
ceramic powders.
Picoliters and tens of picoliters are typical droplet vol-
umes. This may sound small but it results in droplets tens
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 296]
Serial Microprocessing
307
of micrometers wide on the substrate. Droplet spreading
on the surface depends on surface energy and ink surface
tension. Surface tension is not a free variable, because ink
jetting requires a certain surface tension (30–300 mN/m).
The surface energy of the substrate can be modiﬁed by
the same methods as always, for example HMDS or OTS
coating. Adhesion on the surface is delicate: it depends
on smoothness/roughness, as well as contact angle; a large
ﬂat droplet evaporates faster than a hemispherical droplet.
Higher contact angle (lower surface energy) surfaces re-
sult in narrower lines, but are subject to occasional drop
bulging. Additionally, heated surfaces can be used, to con-
trol spreading and evaporation.
Many classes of materials are amenable to ink jetting.
Metals can be ink jetted using metal nanoparticles,
metal salts or organometallic compounds as precursors;
oxides can be made from metal halides by oxidation
after ink jetting; and various polymers can be used.
Nanoparticle inks use very small particles (5–200 nm) to
avoid clogging, even though ink jet nozzles are tens of
micrometers. Metal salt concentrations are for example
10–20%. Dilute polymer solutions must be used because
of ink jet viscosity requirements. On the other hand,
running the ink jet chip hot enables ink jetting of molten
waxes, for instance. Inks typically consist of many com-
ponents: water and solvents, binders (if ceramic particles
are printed), dispersion agents (preventing nanoparticle
coalescence) and adhesion promoters. Piezo jets are
preferred for complex ﬂuid mixtures because the high
temperatures in thermal ink jets may degrade some ink
components.
Polymer transistors have been made using ink jet print-
ing for selected features, like the channel polymer de-
position and silver metallization for source and drain in
the device of Figure 24.14. Sometimes silicon microtech-
nology elements are included, like thermal oxidation in
the transistor of Figure 24.14. Because this device is pro-
cessed on silicon, heat treatments pose no limitations. This
is usually not the case in all-polymer electronics: temper-
atures must be kept low, and the annealing temperature is
limited to for example 150 or 200 ◦C. Silver conductivity
will then be for example only 50% of bulk conductivity.
Gold nanoparticle inks have achieved 70% but in many
experiments the result is 1% of bulk conductivity. Adhe-
sion is as important in polymer devices as in any others,
and before the conducting polymer PQT-12 for the tran-
sistor channel is ink jetted, OTS SAM was applied to the
wafer to improve adhesion.
Traditional techniques are routinely mixed with ink jet-
ting. For instance, wax can be ink jetted on metal and used
as an etch mask. Embossing/imprinting has been used to
create some of the smallest features made by ink jetting.
n+ Si gate
SiO2
Ag S/D
PQT-12 channel
Figure 24.14
Polymer transistor with ink jet printed silver
source/drain and ink jet printed conductive polymer chan-
nel. Adapted from Doggart et al. (2009)
PDMS stamp
PDMS stamp
Figure 24.15
Planar SAM-coated PDMS stamp has been
printed against embossed substrate, leaving high parts
coated by hydrophobic SAM and recesses hydrophilic
A droplet lands on the embossed surface and adheres to
feature bottoms which are hydrophilic, while the upper
surfaces have been rendered hydrophobic by microcontact
printing (Figure 24.15).
Another mixed technology approach is used in ink jet
printing color ﬁlters for displays. Lithographically deﬁned
polyimide forms fences around each subpixel. This pre-
vents ink-jetted droplets from spreading over neighboring
pixels. This is necessary because subpixel sizes are on the
limit of ink jet resolution. Additionally, plasma treatment
has been done to render the imide hydrophobic, so that
the ink will adhere to the feature bottom only. The brute
force method would require three lithography steps, one
for each color.
24.6 Mechanical Structuring
Practically all traditional machining techniques, cutting,
grinding,
drilling,
turning,
dicing,
etc.,
have
their
microscopic counterparts. The main strength of these
techniques
is
their
simplicity
and
applicability
to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 297]
308
Introduction to Microfabrication
milling
drilling
drill
cutter
pencil
wheel
grinding
turning
single crystalline
diamond
Figure 24.16
Mechanical structuring. Reproduced from H¨ulsenberg et al. (2008) with kind permission of Springer
Science and Business Media
practically all materials, but of course the dimensions
are usually not comparable to true microfabricated
dimensions. Surface quality is often inferior to mi-
crofabrication, and this may pose limitations, even in
applications where dimensions would be sufﬁciently
small. This is the case with microﬂuidic molds: a
100 μm linewidth is ﬁne for many applications but
a 0.3 μm roughness makes demolding difﬁcult. Yet
another limitation is shape: cutting and milling can make
complex shapes but many others are limited to certain
shapes only, as shown in Figure 24.16.
Wafer dicing is a grinding process with a wheel. It can
produce vertical walls, and the thinnest blades are quite
thin, 20–60 μm; the placing accuracy is very good, so
quite delicate microstructures can be made. Dicing saws
have 1–10 cm/s feed rates, and if coarse microstructures
are sufﬁcient, a dicing saw is an excellent tool.
When dicing saw structures are combined with wet
etching, even more advanced structures can be realized
(Figure 24.17). Vertical (100) walls will etch just like
horizontal (100) walls, and all the familiar shapes will
develop as etching proceeds.
Drilling is often needed in ﬂuidics, to create inlet holes.
While this works ﬁne in research, making tens of holes,
it is much more difﬁcult in production. Drill bits wear
down rapidly and need to be replaced in rapid succes-
sion. If not replaced, the wearing down will affect hole
shape. And while 100 μm drill bits are available, much
larger ones are usually used, for example 250 or 500 μm.
Glass wafers with 1000 drilled holes are available, but
mechanical drilling cannot go much further. Laser drilling
and DRIE are options when a large number of holes with
high aspect ratio are needed.
Cutting by pencil cutters gives shape freedom, but as
a serial technique it is slow and limited to about 200 μm
minimum
dimensions.
Microfabrication
offers
some
improvement in cutting pencils: CVD diamond coatings
add to the working life of the pencils. Water microjets
can also be used to cut structures of about 200 μm.
And in both methods, adding abrasive particles speeds
cutting up.
24.7 Chemical and Chemomechanical
Machining Scaled Down
24.7.1 Micro electric discharge machining (μEDM)
In electric discharge machining (EDM) a conductive piece
is machined by applying a voltage between the piece
and a conductive electrode, in an insulating ﬂuid. A high
enough voltage leads to dielectric breakdown of the ﬂuid,
causing a spark. This leads to local heating, melting and
vaporization. The only important material property is elec-
trical conductivity, and hard materials like tungsten, which
are otherwise difﬁcult to machine, are readily amenable
to EDM.
μEDM is a miniaturized version of EDM, and it is
capable of drilling holes in the tens of micrometers
range
(Figure 24.18).
Surface
roughness is
a
few
micrometers, but this can be improved by inclusion of
an electropolishing step (with a conducting electrolyte),
to obtain submicrometer roughness. Even though the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 298]
Serial Microprocessing
309
Top view
A
A
Si
SiO2
Si wafer
1st dicing
(flow channel)
Etching mask
2nd dicing
Formation of 2.5-D shape by dicing
Formation of needle by wet etching and dicing
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
{110}
{110}
{100}
(g)
1st anisotropic wet etching
(pyramidal needle)
3rd dicing
(pen-pointed needle)
Pen-pointed needle
Mouths of flow channels
A–A cross scetion
Figure 24.17
Microneedles by multiple dicing saw cuts and anisotropic wet etching: the vertical sidewalls of (100) wafers
formed by dicing are also (100) planes, and will etch accordingly. Minimum diced dimension is 30 μm. Reproduced from
Shikida et al. (2006) by permission of IOP
Figure 24.18
μEDM
with
electropolishing
post-
treatment.
Reproduced
from
Hung
et al.
(2006)
by
permission of IOP
resolution of μEDM would sufﬁce for mold master
fabrication
for
many
microﬂuidic
devices,
surface
roughness is often excessive, making detachment of a
molded piece difﬁcult.
Machining rates can be micrometers per second. High
aspect ratios are difﬁcult to make, and wall verticality is
also problematic: due to wear of the electrode, the shape
of the wall changes as machining proceeds.
24.7.2 Micro electrochemical machining (μECM)
Micro
electrochemical
machining
(electrochemical
etching and deposition) uses an inert microelectrode,
for example platinum, that is not consumed in the
process. Therefore it can be used to make much smaller
structures than μEDM (μECM electrodes are often made
by μEDM!). And because there is no tool wear, structure
dimensions are better preserved, and higher aspect ratios
can be made.
In μECM local electrolysis or electroplating takes place
in the space between the electrode and the working piece.
Voltages are a few volts and frequencies are in the kilo-
hertz range. Electrode gap control in the 10 μm range is
essential for reproducible machining. Typical feature di-
mensions are in the tens and hundreds of micrometers
(Figure 24.19).
Steel can be machined in sulfuric acid, and copper can
be plated in CuSO4/H2SO4 electrolyte, at 5 μm/s. When
a high rate is used, however, hydrogen evolution leads
to a rough surface. The rate can be further increased by
having multiple electrodes, as in Figure 24.20.
24.7.3 Spark-assisted machining
Various spark-assisted methods have been developed over
the years. They rely on the high temperature created by
local discharge in the electrolyte. The mechanism of ma-
terial removal is believed to be thermal melting, even
though chemical etching is assumed to be in action, too.
SACE, for spark-assisted chemical engraving, is suitable
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 299]
310
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 24.19
Stainless steel 60 μm structures. Repro-
duced from Kim et al. (2005), copyright 2005, Elsevier
Figure 24.20
Multiple electrode ECM: 45 μm diameter,
200 μm deep holes in copper. Reproduced from Kim et al.
(2005), copyright 2005, Elsevier
for non-conductive substrates. Very high machining rates
of 10–100 μm/s are possible.
There are several parameters which affect the results:
• electrolyte parameters
• tool electrode parameters
• power supply parameters
• workpiece parameters.
The electrochemical discharge process is a complex phe-
nomenon which depends on a multitude of factors, for
instance electrolyte electrical and thermal conductivity
and surface tension, gas generation, and workpiece ther-
mal conductivity and local temperature.
24.8 Conclusions
Serial writing is like writing with a pen: anything can be
written, even if you change your mind at the last minute,
and it is very fast for writing short notices. But writing a
book with a pen is very slow, and if you need a copy of
your book, the writing time for the second copy is almost
identical to that for the ﬁrst.
Parallel writing, optical lithography, imprinting, mold-
ing are like a printing press: it is very cost efﬁcient to
produce huge volumes of identical works. But the cost of
making the ﬁrst copy is very high, and if changes need
to be implemented, the starting cost of the second version
is close to that of the ﬁrst because of the non-recurring
costs of masks/masters/molds.
Some techniques exist in both serial and parallel for-
mats. Stereolithography is practiced in projection mode
(Figure 23.2), but it can also be done in serial mode: in-
stead of masks, direct laser writing is used to solidify
photopolymer. Powder blasting can also be done serially
by microjets. This is analogous to ion beams: ion implan-
tation is a masked process but FIB is serial.
In large-area applications direct processing is advan-
tageous because the mask price goes up with area, and
resist coating large rectangular areas is difﬁcult. Even in
smaller area applications where the line length to be drawn
is small, laser processing may win, because resists, devel-
opers, etchants and other consumables are eliminated.
The main criteria of the patterning process, namely
linewidth, patterning speed and alignment, are difﬁcult to
achieve simultaneously. AFM, FIB and electron beams
excel in linewidth and alignment is good too, but the
writing speed is very slow. Nanoimprint and injection
molding are strong in linewidth and speed, but poor
in alignment. Laser beams are a good compromise
when ultimate linewidths are not required, but optical
lithography is currently the dominant solution to this
optimization problem.
24.9 Exercises
1. What problems does redeposition in laser grooving
cause, and how can they be overcome?
2. What differences does photomask repair with ion
beams, electron beams and laser beams have?
3. How do laser cutting and dicing saw compare in chip
dicing?
4. How could a multiple head ink jet system speed up
deposition?
5. Consider the question of using an ink jet as a spray
etcher to locally etch away material.
6. Explain in detail how the microneedles of Figure 24.17
are made!
7. How could local thermally driven processing be done
by resistive heating instead of laser beam heating?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 300]
Serial Microprocessing
311
References and Further Reading
Calvert, P. (2001) Inkjet printing for materials and devices,
Chem. Mater., 13, 3299–3305.
Chopra, K.L., P.D. Paulson and V. Dutta (2004) Thin-ﬁlm
solar cells: an overview, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 12,
69–92.
Crawford, T.H.R., A. Borowiec, and H.K. Haugen (2005) Fem-
tosecond laser micromachining of grooves in silicon with
800nm pulses, Appl. Phys., A80, 1717–1724.
Despont,
M.
et al.
(2004)
Wafer-scale
microdevice
transfer/interconnect:
its
application
in an
AFM-based
data-storage
system,
J.
Microelectromech.
Syst.,
13,
895–901.
Doggart, J., Y. Wu and S. Zhu (2009) Inkjet printing narrow
electrodes with <50 μm line width and channel length for
organic thin-ﬁlm transistors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 94, 163503.
Edinger, K. et al. (2004) Electron-beam-based photomask re-
pair, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B22, 2902–2906.
Gierak, J. et al. (2005) Exploration of the ultimate patterning
potential achievable with focused ion beams, Microelectron.
Eng., 78–79, 266–278.
Harder, N.-P. et al. (2009) Laser-processed high efﬁciency sil-
icon RISE-EWT solar cells and characterization, Phys. Stat.
Solidi, C6, 736–743.
Henry, M., P.M. Harrison and J. Wendland (2007) Laser direct
write of active thin ﬁlms on glass for industrial ﬂat panel
display manufacture, J. Laser Micro/Nanoeng., 2, 49–56.
H¨ulsenberg, D., A. Harnicsch and A. Bismarck (2008) Mi-
crostructuring of Glasses, Springer
Hung, J.-C. et al. (2006) Micro-hole machining using micro-
EDM combined with electropolishing, J. Micromech. Micro-
eng., 16, 1480–1486.
Kim, B.H. et al. (2005) Micro electrochemical machining
of 3D micro structure using dilute sulfuric acid, CIRP
Ann. – Manuf. Technol., 54, 191–194.
Kim, K.-H. et al. (2008) Direct delivery and submicrometer
patterning of DNA by a nanofountain probe, Adv. Mater.,
20, 330–334.
Kumagai, M. et al. (2007) Advanced dicing technology
for semiconductor
wafer – stealth dicing,
IEEE Trans.
Semicond. Manuf ., 20, 259–265.
Neuhaus, D.-H. and A. M¨unzer (2007) Industrial silicon wafer
solar cells, Adv. OptoElectron., 24521.
Ogane, A. et al. (2009) Laser-doping technique using ultravi-
olet laser for shallow doping in crystalline silicon solar cell
fabrication, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 48, 071201.
Repmann, T. et al. (2006) Microcrystalline silicon thin ﬁlm
solar modules on glass, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 90,
3047–3053.
Reyntjens, S. and R. Puers (2001) A review of focused ion
beam applications in microsystem technology, J. Micromech.
Microeng., 11, 287–300.
Salaita, K., Y. Wang and C.A. Mirkin (2007) Applications of
dip-pen nanolithography, Nature Nanotechnol., 2, 145–155.
Shikida, M., T. Hasada and K. Sato (2006) Fabrication of
densely arrayed micro-needles with ﬂow channels by me-
chanical dicing and anisotropic wet etching, J. Micromech.
Microeng., 16, 1740–1747.
Straub, M. et al. (2004) Complex-shaped three-dimensional
microstructures
and
photonic
crystals
generated
in
a
polysiloxane polymer by two-photon microstereolithogra-
phy, Opt. Mater., 27, 359–364.
Sun, Y. (2002) Laser link cutting for memory chip repair, Proc.
IEEE, 90, 1627–1636.
Sun, Y. et al. (2006) Low-pressure, high-temperature thermal
bonding of polymeric microﬂuidic devices and their appli-
cations for electrophoretic separation, J. Micromech. Micro-
eng., 16, 1681–1688.
Tekin, E., P.J. Smith and U. S. Schubert (2008) Inkjet print-
ing as a deposition and patterning tool for polymers and
inorganic particles, Soft Matter, 4, 703–713.
Tseng, A.A. (2004) Recent developments in micromilling using
focused ion beam technology, J. Micromech. Microeng., 14,
R15–R34.
Utke, I., P. Hoffmann and J. Melngailis (2008) Gas-assisted
focused electron beam and ion beam processing and fabri-
cation, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B26, 1197–1276.
Vettiger, P. et al. (2002) The “Millipede” – nanotechnology en-
tering data storage, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 1, 39–55.
W¨uthrich, R. (2008) Micro-machining Using Electrochemi-
cal Discharge Phenomena, William Andrew.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 301]
25
Process Integration
Process integration is the task of putting together
individual process steps to create functional devices. This
necessitates interfacing device design and processing,
knowledge of process capability and device operation,
understanding materials interactions, being prepared for
equipment limitations – all aspects of microfabrication.
Process
integration
is
about
questions
like
the
following.
Wafer selection:
– Are wafer mechanical speciﬁcations important, or
electrical, or both?
– Do we need transparency or thermal insulation?
– Can single-sided polished wafers be used, or should
DSP wafers be used?
Materials compatibility:
– What is the maximum temperature the materials can
tolerate?
– Will thermal expansion coefﬁcient mismatches create
stresses?
– Will the polymer parts withstand the chemical treat-
ments that follow?
Process–device interactions:
– How
do
thermal
treatments
add
to
diffusion
proﬁles?
– Are etch proﬁles important for device perfor-
mance?
– Does the stress-relief anneal affect structures already
fabricated?
Equipment and process capability:
– What is the surface roughness allowed for good
bonding?
– What is step coverage of sputtered ﬁlms in contact
holes?
– Can thick bonded wafer stacks be inserted into wafer
boats?
Design rules:
– What is the minimum allowed linewidth?
– What is the minimum allowed spacing between
lines?
– Do we need to design dummy patterns to equalize
area usage?
Mask considerations:
– Which
photomasks
are
critical,
which
are
non-critical?
– Does etch undercutting need to be compensated on
the mask?
– Can test structures be ﬁtted in dicing lanes?
Order of process steps:
– Should front-side processing be completed before
back-side processing?
– What processes can be done after through-wafer
etching?
– Can any steps be done after thin-membrane forma-
tion?
Reliability:
– Do current densities in wiring need to be limited?
– How do stresses build up when more layers are de-
posited?
– What is the breakdown voltage of thin oxides?
We will start by discussing the general features of wafers
in different process steps: sometimes processes act on both
sides and sometimes on one side only. We will then go
through a few examples: a solar cell, ﬂuidic sieves, a
DNA ampliﬁcation chip (PCR) and an integrated passive
chip (RCL chip). The solar cell is a bulk wafer process
with critical properties deﬁned oxidation and diffusion
steps. The ﬁlter case involves comparing many differ-
ent technologies which all result in more or less the same
functionality, but via very different processes. Etching and
bonding are the key technologies. In the PCR chip poly-
mer processing and bonding are key elements. In the RCL
chip alignment and etch selectivities, as well as multiple
thin-ﬁlm depositions, are important. General issues will
be discussed along with the examples.
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 302]
314
Introduction to Microfabrication
25.1 The Two Sides of the Wafer
Processes come in two forms: directional and diffuse
(beam-like and immersion, if you wish). The former
include processes where beams of atoms, photons,
electrons, ions or ﬂuid sprays impinge on the wafer (like
lithography, evaporation and implantation); the latter are
immersion processes where wafers are surrounded by
vapors, gases or liquids (like wet etching or oxidation). In
order to prevent immersion processes acting on the whole
wafer, both sides of the wafer have to be protected by
masking layers. Sometimes back-side protection comes
free of charge, when for instance thermal oxidation
oxidizes both sides of the wafer. Additionally, directional
processes can also be blanked by absorbers, collimators
or stencil masks, which are not on the wafer but above it
(Figure 25.1).
CVD, PECVD and plasma etching processes can be
either directional or diffusive: if wafers are loaded upright
in a wafer boat (Figure 11.8), deposition/etching takes
place on both surfaces, but if wafers are loaded ﬂat, or
clamped, on an electrode (Figure 13.1), only the top side is
processed (Table 25.1), with some unintentional spillover
over the edge.
Figure 25.1
Left: directional process blanked by a sten-
cil above the wafer. Right: diffuse process blanked by a
masking layer on the wafer
Table 25.1
Double-sided and single-sided processes
Double sided
Single sided
Furnaces, oxidation
Sputtering
Furnaces, CVD
Evaporation/MBE
Furnaces, diffusion
Ion implantation
Furnaces, annealing
PECVD
Furnaces, RTA
Lithography
Wet etching and cleaning in a
tank
CVD epitaxy
Spray processing
CMP
Barrel plasma
etching/stripping
RIE/plasma etching
Resist stripping in a tank
Spin processing
In most equipment inserting the wafers into the reactor
upside down is allowed, but potential damage to the pat-
terns on the front by transport mechanisms, clamping
or chucking must be considered. Temperature permitting,
photoresist is a quick ﬁx that protects the front side. Some-
times a ﬁlm that was deposited on both sides is ﬁrst
patterned on the back, while the front side is covered.
Processing must be tailored so that both sides of the wafer
are under controlled conditions at all times.
Three kinds of processes take place on the wafer
back side:
1. Patterning.
2. Blanket processing (doping, growth, deposition).
3. Unintentional processes.
Thin ﬁlms on the wafer back side are often of poor qual-
ity because most processes are optimized for the front
side only. If single-sided polished wafers are used, back-
side roughness (Figure 4.12) prevents proper ﬁlm growth.
Sometimes back-side ﬁlms result from front-side process-
ing spillovers: photoresist will cover the wafer edge er-
ratically, and some resist will be deposited on the wafer
back side; or, alternatively, material from the wafer chuck
or transport system will adhere to the wafer back.
Thermal oxidation oxidizes both sides of the wafer,
which may, or may not, be advantageous. Oxide on the
back side can be a useful protective layer, for example to
prevent diffusion in the next step. LPCVD nitride simi-
larly covers both sides.
Diffusion from the gas phase will dope both sides of the
wafer. Again, oxide or nitride ﬁlms can prevent unwanted
diffusion. Doping by implantation and from thin-ﬁlm
sources (e.g., PSG or BSG) are single-sided processes.
Epitaxy presents a special case of back-side effects on
the front side: if a lightly doped epilayer is grown on
a highly doped substrate wafer, evaporated dopant from
the substrate will mingle with the source gases and affect
epilayer doping. Therefore, CVD oxide is used as a back-
side capping layer to prevent dopant outdiffusion from
the substrate.
Blanket processing involves growth and deposition of
ﬁlms either simultaneously or sequentially on both sides.
Thermal diffusion can be done either way, with an oxide
ﬁlm to prevent diffusion on the protected side. Ion im-
plantation doping is inherently one sided. Applications of
blanket processing include doping to improve back-side
metal contact or etch mask formation.
Rather thick stacks of ﬁlms can build up on the wafer
back side. If both sides of the wafer are coated, the stresses
are initially hidden, but when the ﬁlm on either side is
processed, stress is able to deform the wafer. Stresses
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 303]
Process Integration
315
can cause ﬂaking and rupture, which generate particles.
For these reasons back-side ﬁlms are sometimes removed
even though no device reason would necessitate it.
25.2 Device Example 1: Solar Cell
The simple solar cell (Figure 25.2) process described be-
low features many important interactions between pro-
cess steps which arise when complete processes are put
together. Volume manufacturing of solar cells uses ad-
ditional techniques to reduce costs (some of them are
discussed in Chapters 24 and 37) but the integration as-
pects remain similar.
Process ﬂow for solar cell
• Wafer selection
• Front-end processing
– wafer cleaning
– thermal oxidation
– photoresist spinning on front
– back-side oxide etching
– resist stripping
– wafer cleaning
– p+ backside diffusion
– front-side oxide etching
– wafer cleaning
– n-diffusion
• Back-end processing:
– resist spinning on front
– aluminum sputtering on back side
– resist stripping
– wafer cleaning
– PECVD nitride deposition on front side
– lithography for contact holes
– RIE of front-side nitride
– resist stripping
– wafer cleaning
– aluminum deposition on front side
– resist spinning on back side to protect aluminum
– lithography for front aluminum
– aluminum etching
– photoresist stripping
– wafer cleaning
– contact improvement anneal
All processes begin with substrate selection: p-type
silicon is chosen, and the pn junction will be made by
n-diffusion. If an n-type wafer were chosen, opposite
diffusions would need to be made. It is advantageous
to do back-side p+ diffusion before the pn junction.
back-side metallization
top metallization
antireflection coating (ARC)
p-substrate
p+ diffusion
n-diffusion
Figure 25.2
Solar cell cross-section
The
heavy
p+
diffusion (e.g.,
boron
concentration
of 1019 cm−3) on the back is unaffected by the light
n-diffusion (e.g., 1016 cm−3) on the front because of the
huge difference in doping levels. If n-diffusion were
done ﬁrst, another oxidation would be needed to protect
the lightly n-doped front side during heavy p+ back-side
diffusion. Wafer orientation is not important in this
application.
The
process
is
divided
into
two
very
different
parts: front end and back end. The front end contains
high-temperature
steps
where
silicon
is
oxidized,
diffused, implanted and annealed at temperatures around
1000 ◦C. Cleaning steps are especially important before
high-temperature steps because whatever contamination
is present will diffuse rapidly at high temperatures.
Thermal oxide is superior in quality to CVD oxides,
and if thermal oxidation can be used, it usually is. It is,
however, a slow process step with a duration of hours,
even tens of hours. (PE)CVD systems are fast, which may
favor CVD oxides in the case thick oxides are needed.
Sometimes the temperature forbids thermal oxidation,
and CVD and PECVD remain the only options.
After ﬁrst-metal deposition (back-side metallization for
this solar cell) the process temperatures must be limited to
about 450 ◦C to stabilize the silicon–metal interface. This
rules out many deposition processes for the antireﬂective
coating (ARC), for example thermal oxide, TEOS CVD
oxide or LPCVD nitride.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 304]
316
Introduction to Microfabrication
Back-side metallization is done before front-side ARC
and metal. This is because the front side is more im-
portant for device operation, and we would not like to
clamp the wafer face down in a sputtering system after
front-side processing is completed. PECVD nitride ARC
is deposited at 300 ◦C.
We now have to etch holes in this nitride to make con-
tact with silicon. If the top metal were the same size as
the contact holes, perfect alignment and zero undercut
etching would be needed for the metal to cover the hole
completely. Because such processes do not exist, the top
metal is designed to be somewhat wider than the contact
hole, to make sure that minor misalignment or linewidth
loss in etching will not result in structures where some
silicon (in n-diffusion) would be exposed to ambient air.
If this were the case, cell performance would rapidly dete-
riorate as humidity and other environmental agents would
make contact with the pn diode. Nitride ARC (with a re-
fractive index n ≈2) is not only an optical matching layer
between air (n = 1) and silicon (n ≈4), but also serves
scratch resistance, moisture and ion barrier functions.
Top surface metallization should be as narrow as pos-
sible, because it blocks part of the incoming sunlight. It
should, however, be capable of carrying considerable cur-
rents. Therefore, metallization of high aspect ratio should
be used. Electroplated copper is a good choice, but for
research devices sputtered aluminum will do.
The back end and front end are independent of each
other: metallization can be changed from sputtered alu-
minum to electroplated copper to screen-printed silver
paste without changing the front end. Similarly, diffusion
conditions can be changed and there is no need to modify
the back end because of that.
25.3 Device Example 2:
Microﬂuidic Sieves
Microﬂuidic sieves are low-pass ﬁlters which block parti-
cles larger than their speciﬁed pass size. There are many
designs that can be used to realize such devices, and four
of them are pictured in Figure 25.3: the etched hole sieve,
pillar sieve, bonded Weir and sacriﬁcial layer sieve.
In the etched hole sieve pass size is simply determined
by lithography and etch capability. Silicon provides me-
chanical strength. In another version the holes are etched
in silicon nitride but the nitride membrane is thin com-
pared to silicon, which can be made into practically any
thickness, and one ﬁgure of merit for a sieve is the pres-
sure it can withstand. Another ﬁgure of merit for a sieve
is the aperture ratio, or the percentage of holes. It is
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 25.3
Fluidic sieves: (a) etched hole; (b) pillar;
(c) sacriﬁcial; (d) Weir
limited to about 25% for a lithographically deﬁned sieve
(recall Figure 9.13). Lithographic size limitations can be
somewhat circumvented by conformal thin-ﬁlm deposi-
tion after etching: it makes the holes smaller. The back-
side access hole can be etched by DRIE or KOH/TMAH,
depending on the application.
The pillar sieve calls for DRIE and bonding. The lithog-
raphy requirement is similar to that for the etched sieve,
but etching requirements are more demanding because pil-
lars of high aspect ratio must be made. Narrowing the gap
between the pillars by conformal deposition is not an op-
tion: the deposited ﬁlm will cover the tops of the pillars
too, and this will make cover bonding difﬁcult. The pillar
sieve is more expensive than the etched hole sieve: DRIE
is an expensive step, and a second wafer is needed for
capping. The beneﬁts come from the shape freedom of
DRIE, and the fact that the ﬂow channels can be made
with pillars parallel to the ﬂow, while in the etched hole
sieve the ﬂow is through the ﬁlter, which makes clogging
a problem.
The sacriﬁcial layer sieve relies on thin-ﬁlm deposi-
tion for pass size deﬁnition. Holes are etched in silicon
and covered by a conformal thin ﬁlm, for example oxide.
Polysilicon is then deposited and patterned. Oxide is then
etched away, and very narrow holes created. In theory
any thickness that can be controllably deposited can be
used. Sacriﬁcial ﬁlters with 10 nm gaps are feasible from
a fabrication point of view, but ﬂuid dynamics, clogging
and other issues have to be handled, too. Even though
the pass size can be made really small, the aperture ratio
remains very small.
In the Weir sieve the shallow etch depth determines
the pass size, and the deep groove etching deﬁnes the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 305]
Process Integration
317
ﬂow channels. Shallow etches in the micrometer range
are easy, and shallower ones could be made. However,
the anodic bonding process and glass structural stability
determine how the shallow passages will remain open (as
discussed in Chapter 22). Auxiliary pillars can be made to
support the glass roof, with minimal effect on the ﬂuidics
and no effect on pass size. In the Weir sieve sacriﬁcial
techniques can also be used: instead of etching silicon to
the desired depth, thermal oxidation and HF–wet etching
could be used. This is beneﬁcial for two reasons: pass size
can easily be checked by ellipsometry after oxidation, and
oxide thickness control is much better than etching depth
control. The surface quality of the silicon after HF oxide
removal is also superior to an etched silicon surface.
25.4 Wafer Selection
Wafer selection and process design go hand in hand. Bulk
silicon wafers are the default choice for practically any
microdevice. The use of more special wafers must always
be thoroughly justiﬁed. Czochralski (CZ) wafers are also
the default choice, and ﬂoat zone (FZ) wafers are reserved
for special applications only, for instance when extremely
high resistivity is needed.
<100> wafers are used unless otherwise speciﬁed.
MOS transistors are made on <100> for silicon/oxide
interface quality: fewer trapped charge and interface
defects are generated in the oxidation of <100> silicon
than <111> silicon. For MEMS, anisotropic etching
of <100> silicon is standard technology. In bipolar
technology <111> is used. When both MOS and bipolar
transistors are on the same chip (BiCMOS), <100>
wafers are used because oxide for the MOS part is more
critical than <111> special features of the bipolar part.
Wafers of crystal orientations other than <100> have
some special applications. Wafers of <110> orientation
enable wet-etched 90◦sidewalls, which has a compet-
itive advantage over DRIE in some special cases. Re-
cently, <110> wafers have been explored as alternatives
to <100> in advanced CMOS because they offer 50%
higher hole mobility than <100> , thus boosting PMOS
transistor performance, but electron mobility is less than
with <100> wafers. Similarly, <113> wafers have been
studied for future CMOS, because of a better silicon/oxide
interface.
CZ wafers are available over a wide range of dopant
density, or, in other words, over a wide range of resistiv-
ities. Typical CZ resistivities are listed in Table 25.2.
If epitaxial wafers are used, then process design offers
both greater freedom, because some bulk effects can be
Table 25.2
CZ silicon resistivity ranges
p-type
Boron
0.01–60 ohm-cm
n-type
Phosphorus
0.01–40 ohm-cm
n-type
Antimony
0.008–10 ohm-cm
n-type
Arsenic
0.002–20 ohm-cm
ignored, though it also introduces some limitations, and
incurs extra wafer costs. SOI wafers usually require full
process rethinking, in order to realize their full potential in
reducing the number of process steps or enhanced device
performance.
Wet etching in MEMS calls for wafers cut exactly to the
[100] normal vector. Whereas the standard cut is speciﬁed
±1◦, MEMS wafers can have ±0.02◦speciﬁcation. Mis-
cut <111> wafers have terraces and kinks (Figure 4.10)
which are preferred sites for deposited atoms to attach to,
an important issue in epitaxy and thin-ﬁlm deposition in
general. A large miscut of 4◦changes the apparent lat-
tice constant of silicon and offers possibilities to grow
epitaxial oxides like <Y2O3> on silicon.
Wafer thickness increases with diameter to improve me-
chanical strength. Mechanical strength is important, espe-
cially during the high-temperature steps of oxidation, dif-
fusion and epitaxy. Above 1000 ◦C, thermally generated
stresses may cause slip dislocations on uneven cooling.
Thick wafers are also generally more robust to handle.
In many applications thin wafers are needed. Solar
cells would be cheaper if they used less silicon, wet-
etched bulk MEMS devices with 54.7◦angle require less
area in through-wafer etching, and in power transistors
resistive losses are minimized by using thin wafers.
Wafer thicknesses down to 200 μm are readily available
but they require special attention during processing.
Wafers can also be thinned down to ﬁnal thickness after
all device processing is done. This improves ﬂexibility of
the silicon dies and helps packaging in applications like
smart cards.
For surface micromachining almost any wafer is good
because by deﬁnition the structures will be made in the
thin ﬁlms deposited on top of the wafer. Most people
use silicon wafers, but there are surface micromachined
devices fabricated on quartz, glass, GaAs, polyimide and
other substrates. For test runs reclaimed wafers could
be used. For CMOS transistors prime-quality wafers
must be used.
Non-silicon substrates commonly used include fused
silica and glass. They are transparent, thermally and elec-
trically insulating, and have surface chemistry similar to
silicon. They are also available in shapes and thicknesses
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 306]
318
Introduction to Microfabrication
identical to silicon. Processing non-silicon substrates need
not be problematic, but if silicon and glass are processed
in the same fabrication facility, contamination issues arise.
25.5 Masks and Lithography
The lithography tool must be speciﬁed early on in process
design because, with the tool, the exposure wavelength,
mask size, wafer size and chip size become ﬁxed. The
exposure wavelength sets limits on photoresist selection,
mask plate material and resolution. In 1× exposure tools
the mask size is somewhat larger than the wafer size
(e.g., 5 inches for 100 mm wafers; 7 inches for 150 mm
wafers). With the 1× aligner, chip size is limited by wafer
size and edge exclusion. With step-and-repeat lithography
tools chip size is limited by the exposure ﬁeld size which
is about 8 cm2 maximum. Optimization is needed to ﬁt
many small chips in the ﬁeld, or, alternatively, stitching
is needed to make larger chips.
Photoresist polarity, negative or positive, needs to be
selected before mask making. It is possible to draw the
design in one polarity, and to invert polarity computation-
ally in the mask making process, but once the physical
mask plates have been drawn, the mask and resist are tied
together. Minimum linewidth affects the choice of mask
material: soda lime is acceptable for micrometer dimen-
sions, but in submicrometer projection lithography with a
365, 248 or 193 nm wavelength, fused silica is used.
Not all lithography steps are equal; some are more crit-
ical than others. Critical levels determine device function-
ality in a critical way, for example the CMOS gate mask
determines the gate length, which affects transistor speed
and leakage current. It is possible to mix two lithographic
techniques: this approach is known as mix-and-match. For
instance, in 0.50 μm CMOS technology the critical levels
might be exposed by a 365 nm 5× stepper and the non-
critical levels by a 1× tool. This approach is investment
related: some additional work from mix-and-match (in,
for example, an alignment scheme) is traded for major
savings in equipment purchase prices.
Undercutting in wet etching can be compensated by bi-
asing the photomask. The patterns on the mask are made
wider by the amount of etch undercutting for light-ﬁeld
structures, and narrower for dark-ﬁeld structures. Mask
biasing can be done in a global fashion: for example,
all structures on an aluminum level can be biased wider
by, say, twice the designed aluminum ﬁlm thickness.
For 3 μm nominal linewidth this translates to patterns
5 μm wide assuming 1 μm aluminum thickness, and thus
1 μm etch undercutting per side. If the resolution of the
lithography tool is 6 μm (capable of printing 3 μm lines
with 3 μm spaces), mask biasing cannot be done, because
1 μm spaces would need to be resolved. Mask biasing
wastes silicon real estate, and the resolving power of the
lithography tool is not fully utilized for increasing device
packing density.
On a 1× mask there are usually three elements: de-
vice chips, test structures and alignment marks (Figure
1.20). The area usage between these elements depends on
process and device maturity. In early phase development
more area is spent on test structures, but in volume man-
ufacturing device chips take up practically all the area,
with test structures embedded in the scribe lines between
the chips. Test structures include both device-speciﬁc and
process-speciﬁc measurements. The latter are identical in
all runs using the same process, and they are used for
collecting information on process performance, stability,
drifts and variation, for statistical process control (SPC).
If the ﬁrst process step is diffusion or implantation,
there will be nothing visible (or something barely visible)
on the wafer, and the second lithography step – the ﬁrst
alignment – cannot be done. Therefore it is common
practice to etch special alignment marks into the silicon
at the very beginning of the process. This is called
zero level. Planarization later in the process may smear
alignment marks, and it might be that in some process
steps the alignment marks must be protected in order to
maintain them.
25.6 Design Rules
Design rules are statements about allowed structures, with
regard to linewidths and spacings, overlap and layer-to-
layer positioning. These are often referred to as layout
rules, as opposed to electrical design rules, which include
information about sheet resistances, contact resistances,
current density limitations, etc. Layer thickness design
rules are needed in capacitor design: oxide thickness de-
termines capacitance density, both when the oxide is used
as the capacitor dielectric as such and when it is used
as a sacriﬁcial layer in the fabrication of an air gap ca-
pacitor. In addition to design rules, device models (for
transistors, resistors, capacitors) are higher level abstrac-
tions of the process for circuit designers. Design rules
and models are always process speciﬁc. They are also
company speciﬁc: for example, 0.13 μm CMOS processes
from different suppliers have different sets of rules and
models even though the basic dimensions and devices
are similar.
Device interactions come in many guises and are de-
vice and process speciﬁc. Transistors need to be isolated
from each other, and this isolation takes up space. Inductor
coils must be placed rather far away from each other be-
cause of magnetic ﬁeld coupling over distance. It is also
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 307]
Process Integration
319
important to understand and to limit structures that can
be placed between two coils as these can couple into the
magnetic ﬁeld.
25.6.1 Single level layout rules
Layout design rules are formal geometric rules which
relieve the designer from the details of the fabrication
process. The process engineer has distilled the physical
capabilities and limitations of the fabrication process into
the design rules, with the aim of making the process more
robust. Sometimes breaking the rules leads to zero yield,
sometimes more subtle effects are encountered. The de-
sign rules are often divided into compulsory and advisory
rules, the latter being hints of known good practice.
Minimum size and spacing are basic layout rules. Three
elements contribute to them:
1. Lithographic process capability.
2. Structure widening in subsequent process steps.
3. Device interactions.
Lithographic capability involves the optical tool, pho-
tomask quality, resist properties and resist thickness. If
the lines are not accurate on the mask, the design width
cannot be obtained on the wafer. Breaking the minimum
line and space rules will lead to catastrophic failures.
Very often minimum space is different from minimum
linewidth. For one thing, lithographic resolution (pitch) is
not usually divided equally between a line and space: it is
typical that, for example, the 0.5 μm linewidth process has
0.5 μm minimum line and 0.7 μm minimum space. Some-
times processes are speciﬁed by half-pitch: the previous
process would then be classiﬁed as a 0.6 μm process.
The ﬁnal structure width is determined by process
step properties. Diffusion is an isotropic process and
a 3 μm diffusion depth leads to sideways spreading of
about 3 μm, too. Similarly, isotropic etch undercutting
necessitates
similar
design concerns:
namely,
equal
spacing of 10 μm width; grooves 5 μm deep would result
in touching of the neighboring grooves.
Some processes behave differently for different sizes:
for example, DRIE rate and sputtering step coverage are
different in small holes compared to large ones. The most
blatant design rule is to allow only one hole size. Areas of
low pattern density tend to etch faster (loading effect) and
polish slower. It is then useful to design dummy features.
These are used to ﬁll area, to equalize things. In emboss-
ing/NIL the force needed goes up as the fourth power of
the structure radius, and it makes sense to break up large
areas into small dummy lines and spaces if possible.
Stresses build up in large structures, and it is advisable
to break large uniform areas into smaller segments, if
possible. This is true for wide aluminum metallization and
large SU-8 ﬂuidic structures alike. Stress minimization
is also important in injection molding and other high-
pressure processes, and sturdy dummy patterns can help
delicate microstructures to survive.
25.6.2 Alignment and layer-to-layer rules
When structures on two different layers need to coincide,
overlap rules must be invoked.
Overlap rules make sure that the layers that need to
touch will do so irrespective of process variation, and
structures that must not touch will stay separated. The
alignment of structures on different levels depends on
three factors:
1. Lithography tool alignment performance.
2. Pattern placement accuracy.
3. Alignment sequence.
It is not advisable to place two structures on different
mask levels exactly on top of each other because misalign-
ment (and resist linewidth variability and etch undercut)
will always introduce some uncertainty into edge posi-
tion. If the underlying structure is the same width as the
upper level structure, misalignment will lead to the forma-
tion of a severe crevasse. This is pictured in Figure 25.4
for contact holes. When the contact hole is etched into
CVD oxide, a misaligned contact exposes the underlying
oxide, which will also be etched. The subsequent metal
sputtering and/or CVD process will have difﬁculties in
ﬁlling the crevasse. In order to make sure that the contact
hole will touch the resistor, the resistor contacting area is
made larger to accommodate any misalignment. This is
termed collar or border or dogbone. It wastes area but it
is necessary for process robustness.
Different mask levels may have different linewidth
rules. One mask level may contain critical structures,
and narrow lines are allowed, but other levels may have
only non-critical structures. For example, pads for wire
bonding are, say, 50 × 50 μm or 100 × 100 μm and
the design rules are then much more relaxed, with for
instance a 5 μm minimum overlap rule, while a 0.3 μm
overlap rule is used for the 1 μm minimum linewidth
critical levels.
Tool alignment performance is roughly one-third or
one-ﬁfth of minimum linewidth. If a tool with a 3 μm min-
imum capability (typical of 1× proximity mask aligner)
is used to print contact holes 3 μm wide, an alignment
tolerance of 1 μm needs to be designed in.
The second contribution to alignment accuracy between
levels comes from pattern placement on the mask: the
masks for two different layers are two separate physical
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 308]
320
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 25.4
Top views and cross-sectional views of
contact holes with different alignment cases: left, perfect
alignment of contact hole with underlying metal; middle,
misaligned contact without misalignment allowance etches
into underlying oxide; right, oversized misalignment rela-
tive to metal
objects and the exact position of structures on the mask
plate is subject to its own statistical variation. If image
placement error on the mask is one-tenth of minimum
linewidth, its contribution is

x2
1 + x2
2 ≈
√
2x
if mask errors are identical on both plates. This translates
to about 14%, usually less than the contribution from mis-
alignment.
Alignment sequence is the third factor. Layers are
not aligned to the previous layer but to some important
layer: for instance, in making resistors both contact holes
and metallization are aligned to the resistor; after all, the
whole idea of the structure is to make metal-to-resistor
contact. If metal were aligned to the contact hole,
we would have to account for two tool misalignment
tolerances: one for contact hole-to-resistor alignment and
another for contact hole-to-metal alignment. Assuming a
Gaussian distribution, this leads to an alignment tolerance
of δ√n, where n is the number of alignments involved.
Automatic checking of design rules is a standard pro-
cedure for advanced chips. Design rule checking (DRC)
includes both individual level checks (dimensional rules)
as well as layer-to-layer checks (overlap rules, positioning
rules).
25.7 Resistors
Resistors are simple elements, but they offer good insights
into many aspects of process integration. First of all, re-
sistors can be made by widely different technologies:
• diffused bulk silicon
• SOI silicon
• polysilicon
• metals.
They can be used for many different applications:
• heater resistors
• precision analog resistors
• load resistors in SRAM
• piezoresistors in MEMS
• thermal sensors.
Resistance is determined by linewidth (W), line length
(L), thickness (T ) and resistivity (ρ), and usually sheet
resistance Rs (≡ρ/T ) is used. High resistance values call
for thin resistors, long and narrow lines or high-resistivity
material. In practise different resistances are obtained by
changing L and W, keeping ρ and T unchanged. This is
because thin-ﬁlm resistivity is thickness dependent, which
would necessitate new characterization of the material if
different thickness were to be used.
Resistors for analog ICs are usually made of polysilicon
or metal alloys and compounds. Poly resistors have sheet
resistance values between 50 and 5000 ohm/sq for typical
ﬁlm thicknesses of hundreds of nanometers. Tantalum ni-
tride can be used when low resistance values are needed:
1–10 ohm/sq (100–200 μohm-cm resistivity). Alloys like
SiCr enable high-resistance resistors to be made by sput-
tering, with 2000–20 000 μohm-cm resistivity. NiCr has
a resistivity of 100 μohm-cm. In advanced analog device
processes there are two different materials for resistors,
that is two polysilicon layers with different doping levels,
to enable a wide range of resistances.
Resistor linewidths are seldom the minimum linewidths
that are available in the process, but rather large, in order
to improve absolute value control. Long, straight resistors
complicate circuit topology and meandering resistors are
usually employed. However, corners do not contribute to
resistance equally with the linear parts.
When isotropic etching is used in the resistor process,
etch undercutting of the resistor and contact holes work in
opposite directions: the resistor is narrowed by etch under-
cutting, whereas the contact holes become wider. These
processes add up and the overlap rule has to accommo-
date that. The resistor process is outlined in Figure 25.5.
In a similar fashion, contact holes and metal etching work
in opposite directions. In general, the overlap rules for
plasma-etched processes are much tighter than those for
wet-etched processes. Plasma etching increases device
packing density not only by its ability to make narrower
lines, but also through smaller overlap requirements.
Different resistor applications have different require-
ments: analog components are more demanding than
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 309]
Process Integration
321
#1 resistor 
#2 contacts
#3 metallization 
Figure 25.5
Thin-ﬁlm resistor: photomasks and cross-
sectional view of ﬁnished device. The resistor has collars
in the ends to ensure that the contact holes in the oxide
will always land on the resistor; and metallization has an
overlap relative to contact holes so that no resistor will be
exposed. Metal is, however, aligned to the resistor, not the
contact hole
digital ones, for instance in digital MOS transistors 10%
linewidth variation will not affect on/off action, but it
changes the resistance of a resistor by 10%. In many
cases absolute values of resistances (or capacitances)
are not used, rather the ratios of two resistances
(or
capacitances).
The
deposition
process
may
be
non-uniform across the wafer, but locally within the chip
area uniformity is usually very good.
Diffused resistors are simple in the sense that they often
come “free of charge”: if diffusions are made during wafer
processing, resistors can be made. In addition to sim-
plicity, diffused resistors can tolerate high temperatures
during processing. They can also tolerate high tempera-
tures during device operation, and they have been used in
microrockets as heaters. In the design rules for diffused
resistors the lateral extent of diffusion must be accounted
for: a diffused resistor 5 μm wide and 2 μm deep ends up
9 μm wide.
Metal resistors are used as heaters in various chemical
microsystems
and
sensors.
Platinum
has
a
linear
temperature coefﬁcient of resistivity (TCR) and it is
easy to make a thermometer along with the heater. But
depending on the required temperature range, many other
metals can be used. Glass wafers are useful for thermal
isolation, and then metal resistors must be used, because
glasses do not stand poly deposition temperatures.
In micro hotplate chemical sensors (Figures 20.21,
20.22), in bolometers (Figures 11.15, 11.16) and in ther-
mal ﬂow sensors, resistors must be placed on thermally
isolated membranes in order to reduce the heating require-
ments or to improve sensitivity. Resistor ﬁlm stresses
must then be considered: silicon nitride or alumina mem-
branes are often very thin (to reduce thermal conductivity)
and if stresses that are too high are present in heater
metallization, the membrane will be stressed. It is also
important to consider whether the resistor is made ﬁrst,
and release etching afterward, or perhaps shadow mask
patterning is used to make the resistor after membrane
formation. It is easier to process on a solid wafer than
on a thin membrane, but it may be that the release etch
also etches the resistor material. The alternatives are then
either to protect the resistor, or to ﬁnd another material.
Diffused bulk resistors (both piezo- and standard) be-
have differently from SOI and polysilicon resistors: at ele-
vated operating temperatures the pn junctions leak and set
an upper limit to diffused bulk resistors of about 150 ◦C
(application dependent). Because there are no pn junc-
tions in SOI or polysilicon resistors, they can operate at
much higher temperatures, for example 300 ◦C.
Polysilicon
can
be
“true”
polysilicon,
LPCVD
deposited at about 625 ◦C, or amorphous silicon (a-Si),
deposited about 570 ◦C. This difference pops up when
the ﬁlms are doped by ion implantation and annealed: the
originally amorphous ﬁlms will have lower resistivity,
for example 1019 cm−3 boron will result in 1 ohm-cm
for polycrystalline material but 0.1 ohm-cm for the
amorphous ﬁlm (and 0.01 ohm-cm for single crystal
silicon). This can be explained by the relative roles of
grains and grain boundaries: in the originally amorphous
material a greater portion of dopants will be incorporated
into grains, but in the polycrystalline material more
dopant is trapped at grain boundaries early on, and those
dopants do not effectively contribute to conductivity.
TCR is also dependent on the original state of the ﬁlm:
a-Si has a smaller TCR than poly: boron doping with
2 × 1018 cm−3 results in TCRs of −1%/◦C for amorphous
material vs. −2%/◦C for polycrystalline material. Small
grains and grain boundaries have negative TCRs, while
large grains and single crystals have positive TCRs. This
can be utilized to fabricate resistors with zero TCR, as
shown in Figure 25.6.
Making electrical contact to high-resistivity poly is
not straightforward, and the customary procedure is to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 310]
322
Introduction to Microfabrication
small-grain poly-Si
small-grain poly-Si
poly-Si deposition (TD > 600 °C)
B and Ge I/I (high dose)
amorphous Si
annealing (recrystallization)
large-grain poly-Si
small-grain poly-Si
positive Tc
negative Tc
Figure 25.6
Fabrication of zero-TCR polysilicon resistor:
boron and germanium ion implantation, amorphization and
subsequent annealing result in large-grained poly with pos-
itive TCR, which compensates the negative TCR of small
grained poly. Reproduced from Washio et al. (2003), copy-
right 2003, by permission of IEEE
make a contact enhancement implantation (which adds
one lithography step to the process). This, however, sets
limits on resistor length: it has to be long enough so that
the heavily doped contact region does not contribute to
resistance. In a short resistor the heavily doped region
acts as a solid phase diffusion source, and dopes the
whole resistor!
25.8 Device Example 3: PCR Reactor
The PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) chip is a DNA am-
pliﬁcation device. Nucleotides and primers are added to a
microﬂuidic chamber that is repeatedly ramped between
60 and 95 ◦C to produce copies of the original DNA. One
design for a PCR chip is shown in Figure 25.7. As far
as process design goes, the ﬁrst issue is wafer selection.
Glass is chosen because this is a thermal reactor, and a
thermally insulating substrate will reduce heating power
requirements and enable faster thermal ramps. Platinum
is chosen for heater resistors because it is easy to fabri-
cate temperature sensors from platinum, due to its linear
cap wafer
fluid inlets
thermally insulating substrate
PCR chamber
heater
T-sensor
bond layer
SU-8
layers 
Figure 25.7
PCR reactor. Redrawn after El-Ali et al.
(2004)
TCR. Because platinum is a noble metal, its adhesion is
poor. Therefore 10 nm of titanium is sputtered before a
platinum layer 200 nm thick. The resistors are covered by
spin-coated SU-8 epoxy (5 μm thick) to prevent metal-to-
DNA contact. Epoxy SU-8 is also chosen as the chamber
material. SU-8 has excellent chemical stability (for a poly-
mer) and low adsorption of analytes. It is also thermally
stable (glass transition temperature in excess of 200 ◦C)
and therefore suitable for PCR operating temperatures.
The second SU-8 layer determines the chamber height,
which can be 400 μm.
The cover lid is the biggest challenge. One approach is
to use PDMS sheet. PDMS is transparent, which is good
for ﬂuorescence measurements and visual monitoring of
chamber ﬁlling (and clogging), but there are a number
of problems: it is permeable to water vapor and air, and
loss of liquid during operation is expected (Figure 18.29).
Some monomers can leak out PDMS during 95 ◦C opera-
tion. PDMS is mechanically soft, and the device is rather
large (1 cm2), so a roof made of PDMS is not mechani-
cally very stable. It is, however, simple to implement and
reversibly bondable, which is an advantage in the initial
tests. A more stable roof can be made by spin coating a
PDMS layer on a carrier wafer, and transfer bond the thin
PDMS to a (non-permeable) glass wafer that has ﬂuidic
access holes etched (or drilled) in it. This bond is made
permanent by oxygen plasma treatment before bonding.
This two-layer structure is then bonded to SU-8 with-
out plasma treatment, for reversibility. The thin PDMS
is manually pierced to open the ﬂuidic ports. For further
development of the device a more manufacturing-friendly
way will probably be implemented.
Another approach would be to use SU-8 for the roof.
A glass wafer with ﬂuidic ports is laminated by SU-8
dry resist, and this is bonded to the base chip. Fluidic
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 311]
Process Integration
323
ports can be exposed in SU-8 through the glass wafer,
which will also cure the SU-8 and form the bond. The
accuracy of lithography through the wafer is not good, but
ﬂuidic ports are hundreds of micrometers in diameter, and
their lithography is non-critical. The SU-8-to-SU-8 bond
is permanent. Now all the walls of the reactor are made of
the same material, which is beneﬁcial: the same contact
angle will ensure uniform liquid wetting, and if there is
analyte adsorption, it should be identical everywhere. SU-
8 is optically not as good as PDMS, but optical detection
can be done at longer wavelengths (above 550 nm).
25.9 Device Example 4: Integrated
Passive Chip
An integrated passive chip (RCL chip) with two differ-
ent resistors, a capacitor and an inductor coil is shown
in Figure 25.8. A fused silica wafer is chosen to elim-
inate parasitic substrate capacitances. A high-resistivity
silicon wafer could be used, but some parasitics would
then have to be tolerated. In order to improve inductor
behavior, it could be possible to remove the silicon by
back-side through-wafer etching, but this is a considerable
cost issue because through-wafer DRIE is an expensive
process step. A glass wafer is not an option because the
high-quality LPCVD nitride capacitor dielectric requires
a deposition temperature of about 800 ◦C. Molybdenum is
used for low-resistivity resistors (ρ ≈10 μohm-cm), SiCr
for high-resistivity resistors (ρ ≈2000 μohm-cm), molyb-
denum and aluminum for capacitor electrodes and gold
coils for inductors. LPCVD nitride is used for the capac-
itor dielectric, and three layers of CVD oxide insulate the
devices from each other.
Process ﬂow for RCL chip (cleaning
steps omitted)
• Wafer selection
• Molybdenum deposition
• Lithography 1: molybdenum resistor and capacitor
bottom plate
• Molybdenum etching and resist stripping
• Nitride deposition by LPCVD
• CVD oxide 1 deposition
• Sputtering of SiCr high-resistivity resistor
• Lithography 2: SiCr resistor pattern
• SiCr etching and resist stripping
• CVD oxide 2 deposition
• Lithography 3: contact holes to molybdenum
• Plasma etching of CVD oxide 2/CVD oxide 1/nitride
and resist stripping
• Lithography 4: contact holes to SiCr resistor and to
capacitor top
• Wet etching of CVD oxide 2/CVD oxide 1 and resist
stripping
• Aluminum deposition
• Lithography 5: aluminum pattern
• Aluminum etching and resist stripping
• CVD oxide 3 deposition
• Lithography 6: contact holes to aluminum
• Etching of CVD oxide 3 and resist stripping
• Lithography 7: inductor coil pattern
• Gold electroplating and resist stripping
The ﬁrst lithography step deﬁnes the molybdenum
resistor and capacitor bottom plate. Because resistors
SiCr resistor
fused silica
CVD ox-1
CVD ox-2
CVD ox-3
Mo resistor
capacitor
nitride
Au-coil
Figure 25.8
RCL chip on a fused silica substrate: four metallic layers (Mo, Al, SiCr, Au) and four insulator layers (a
LPCVD nitride and three CVD oxides) are used. Adapted from VTT Microelectronics Annual Review 2000
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 312]
324
Introduction to Microfabrication
and capacitors do not use aggressively scaled linewidths,
and because the ﬁlms are thin (50–200 nm), both wet
etching and plasma etching can be used. The second
lithography deﬁnes the SiCr resistor. SiCr is etched in
chlorine plasma, but there is a danger of chromium
residues (recall Table 11.6).
In the third lithography step contacts to the capacitor
bottom molybdenum electrode and molybdenum resistor
are made. Plasma etching is chosen because etching
through both oxide and nitride is needed, and nitride
wet etching is difﬁcult. Selectivity against molybdenum
is
somewhat
of
a
concern
because
oxide,
nitride
and molybdenum are attacked by ﬂuorine plasmas.
Partial thinning of molybdenum does not affect device
performance, however.
In the fourth lithography step the capacitor area and
contacts to the SiCr resistor are deﬁned. Wet etching in
HF is now used because high selectivity is needed: if the
capacitor nitride is etched, the capacitance will change.
There will be undercut because of wet etching, and the
contacts to SiCr especially will be subject to extended
overetching because oxide there is thinner than in the
capacitor area. Underetching is acceptable because con-
tact hole size is not very important and capacitors are
large-area devices, and the minor undercut can be de-
signed in. Of course it is possible to fabricate the capacitor
and SiCr contacts separately, with dedicated photomasks
and lithography and etching steps, but because the struc-
tures are non-critical, it makes sense to eliminate extra
process steps.
Sputtered aluminum serves as the capacitor top elec-
trode, and it also makes contacts to the resistors. In the
RCL chip with CVD oxide ∼0.5 μm thick and 3 μm mini-
mum linewidth (1:6 aspect ratio), sputtering step coverage
is reasonably good in both plasma-etched and wet-etched
contact holes. Aluminum serves as a seed layer for gold
electroplating. The gold plating must be done outside the
main cleanroom, to avoid gold contamination.
25.10 Contamination Budget
Wafer cleaning can be viewed as an important stabiliza-
tion tool: surfaces will be in a known state after wafer
cleaning. Cleaning steps are the most numerous of all
process steps: most other major steps are both preceded
and followed by cleaning steps.
Cleaning processes need to be tailored for the particular
process steps that follow: processes have different toler-
ances for different kinds of contamination. Wafer bonding
is a major challenge for particle cleaning. Thermal oxida-
tion is very sensitive to metal contamination because met-
als diffuse rapidly at elevated temperatures and degrade
oxide quality. Epitaxy requires crystal information and
is extremely sensitive to native oxides or other surface
layers.
The processes generate contamination themselves: ion
implantation and sputtering where energetic ion bombard-
ment is present produce metallic contamination, by sput-
tering metals from shield plates; deposition processes gen-
erate ﬁlms, and particles form when ﬁlms on reactor walls
ﬂake; and lithography chemicals (HMDS, photoresist) are
major sources of organic contamination, as is plasma etch-
ing where (CF2)n types of etch gas fragments and pho-
toresist debris are abundant.
Contamination is partly a materials selection problem:
some materials are allowed and some are forbidden. This
can be either device related, or tool related: in the RCL
example (Figure 25.8) a separate LPCVD nitride tube
must be used for nitride-on-molybdenum deposition, and
another LPCVD tube is reserved for non-metal processes.
CMP is carried out in a separate cleanroom, because of
the danger of excessive particle contamination.
Cleaning strategies are also process integration issues.
Iron contamination increases oxide defect density and re-
sults in a lower oxide breakdown voltage. Use of p-type
wafers differs from n-doped wafers because some iron is
held immobile in Fe–B pairs. Contamination is strongly
oxide thickness dependent, and a pre-oxidation cleaning
strategy must be designed accordingly. Use of ultrapure
chemicals in a 20 nm gate oxide process is a waste of
money but an absolute must when the gate oxide thickness
is below 10 nm.
Photoresist developers are hydroxides, and NaOH-
based developers were once the mainstay, also in MOS
fabrication, but organic developers like TMAH do not
pose alkali contamination risks. MEMS fabrication with
KOH etching tends to be strictly separated from all
MOS activities. If MEMS fabrication is done in a MOS
fabrication lab, TMAH etchant is used to eliminate the
risk of alkali ion contamination. However, the TMAH
and KOH etching processes are similar only in their
gross features, and all details of rates, crystal plane
selectivities and etch stop properties need to be redone,
as discussed in Chapter 20.
Wet cleaning baths must also be dedicated to certain
processes only. In CMOS pre-gate cleaning is very criti-
cal, and only wafers which are very clean to begin with
can be processed in pre-gate cleaning baths. Gate ox-
ide usually has an oxidation tube of its own, not shared
even with other front-end oxidation processes. Wet etch-
ing baths may additionally be divided into no-resist/resist.
For example, of two HF baths one is used for sacriﬁcial
oxide removal, the other for pattern etching. Photoresist
stripping can similarly be divided into metallized and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 313]
Process Integration
325
non-metallized wafers (non-metallized meaning that the
wafer has not yet been metallized during the process).
25.11 Thermal Processes
25.11.1 Film modiﬁcation
Dielectric ﬁlms deposited at 300 ◦C by PECVD can be
annealed at any desired temperature, other materials per-
mitting. Metal ﬁlms have limitations both because of the
presence of metal/silicon interfaces, and because of oxida-
tion danger. Sputtering, evaporation and electrochemical
deposition are basically room temperature processes, and
even mild thermal treatments, at and below 400 ◦C, can
modify ﬁlm properties dramatically. Electroless copper
can have a resistivity of 4 μohm-cm as-deposited, but a
400 ◦C anneal in N2/H2 can bring it down to 2 μohm-
cm. This results from grain growth and void annihilation.
Grain growth is proportional to the square root of anneal
time, indicative of a diffusion-limited process (cf. thermal
oxidation).
CVD ﬁlms and spin-coated ﬁlms are often porous
and unstable. PECVD ﬁlms may contain up to 30 at.
% hydrogen, which can be annealed out. Inert anneal
at 900 ◦C will densify (PE)CVD oxide ﬁlm, with for
example a thickness reduction of 10%. This densiﬁcation
is seen as HF wet etch rate reduction and CMP polish rate
reduction. There is room for high-temperature annealed
(PE)CVD oxides because thermal oxide thicknesses are
limited by the diffusion-controlled parabolic growth law,
whereas (PE)CVD ﬁlm thickness scales linearly with
deposition time. PECVD of ﬁlm 2 μm thick plus anneal-
ing can be completed in about 2 hours, whereas thermal
oxidation would require 2 days. Thick oxides (>1 μm) are
needed as mask oxides in MEMS and in optical devices
as waveguides.
Deposited ﬁlms may need stoichiometry tailoring, and,
for oxide ﬁlms, an oxygen anneal can result in more stoi-
chiometric ﬁlms. Sputter- and MOCVD-deposited Ta2O5
ﬁlms are often annealed at 700 ◦C in oxygen. This causes
crystallization and oxygen deﬁciency is compensated. The
dielectric constant ε of amorphous Ta2O5 is about 25
whereas ε for crystalline Ta2O5 is about 35.
Annealing temperature can be used to tailor stresses:
a long low-temperature anneal of a-Si (deposited at
580 ◦C) will result in a slightly compressively stressed
ﬁlm, while a high-temperature anneal will result in
tensile stress (Figure 25.9).
25.11.2 Surface modiﬁcation
Silicon nitride is the standard masking material for local-
ized thermal oxidation of silicon (LOCOS). The surface
Tension
Compression
Anneal curves
for polysilicon
Strain vs time
600 °C
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
30
60
90
120
150
180
Time (min)
1050 °C
850 °C
700 °C
650 °C
950 °C
Figure 25.9
Deposited a-Si at 580 ◦C is compressively
stressed; annealing can reduce the stress and even turn it
to tensile stress. Reproduced from Guckel et al. (1988) by
permission of IEEE
of the nitride will react with oxygen, even though oxygen
cannot diffuse through the nitride. This modiﬁed surface
layer is termed oxynitride. Its thickness is limited to a few
nanometers. Somewhat similar, extremely etch-resistant
material can be deposited by PECVD, using a process
that mixes elements of oxide and nitride processes.
Molecular nitrogen (N2) is unreactive and often em-
ployed in place of argon when inert gas is needed. When
wafers are loaded into an oxidation furnace, nitrogen is
used as a curtain gas. It is, however, possible that nitride
a few atomic layers thick is formed because the temper-
atures are fairly high.
Intentional nitridation is usually done with ammonia.
Oxide can be nitrided in NH3. Oxynitride ﬁlm has a
higher dielectric constant than pure oxides and better elec-
trical quality. Films like this are known as NO, ONO and
RONO, for nitrided oxide, oxidized nitrided oxide and re-
oxidized nitrided oxide. These ﬁlms are standard CMOS
gate dielectrics in deep submicron technologies where ox-
ide thickness is below 10 nm.
The most commonly encountered unintentional surface
modiﬁcation is oxidation: some residual oxygen or mois-
ture in a furnace atmosphere will lead to oxidation. Cop-
per annealing in a moist atmosphere will result in cop-
per oxide, and 5 ppm of water vapor is enough to lead
to titanium oxidation, which will disturb titanium sili-
cide formation. Oxidation is sometimes done to protect
the surface: for example, aluminum oxide is chemically
much more stable than aluminum, and it is preferable to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 314]
326
Introduction to Microfabrication
oxidize the aluminum surface. Room temperature plasma
oxidation (e.g., a RIE step with oxygen) will do the job.
25.11.3 Thermal budget
The thermal budget concept is central to front-end pro-
cess integration. Diffusion of dopants takes place in all
high-temperature steps: in addition to diffusion itself, it
manifests itself during epitaxy, oxidation, densiﬁcation
anneal and implant damage annealing. The ﬁnal doping
proﬁle is the sum of diffusion in all these steps. Ef-
fective Dt, which is a measure of diffusion distance, is
calculated as
(Dt)eff =

Dntn
(25.1)
where the D are diffusivities under appropriate conditions
and the t are the times for the high-temperature steps.
In an aluminum gate CMOS process source/drain (S/D)
diffusions are done before gate oxidation, and dopants
will thus diffuse further during gate oxide growth. In a
self-aligned polygate process, gate oxide growth is done
before S/D formation, therefore shallower junctions are
possible because there are fewer high-temperature steps
after doping.
A thermal budget sets limits on possible process
steps. PSG and BPSG are called glasses, and glasses
ﬂow at elevated temperatures. Flow (also called reﬂow)
was once a standard technique to make topography
smoother in CMOS processes in linewidth generations
above 1 μm. Of course, it was only applicable after
polysilicon, not after metal deposition, because it was
done at about 950–1000 ◦C, depending on the boron
and phosphorus content. With more advanced processes
the thermal budget had to be limited to make shallower
junctions (reduce
dopant diffusion) and
glass ﬂow
became non-usable. In order to reduce thermal loads,
rapid thermal processing (RTP, also called rapid thermal
annealing, RTA) has been introduced: it combines very
short anneal times with very high temperatures, in the
extreme millisecond anneal times.
Dopant segregation must be taken into account when
designing a fabrication process. Segregation of dopants
between silicon and oxide can seriously deplete the in-
terface of dopants, but this segregation is dependent on
the annealing/oxidation atmosphere: wet oxidation, dry
oxidation, inert anneal in nitrogen or reducing anneal in
hydrogen-rich ambient can behave differently.
Ion implantation annealing has two different elements:
activation of dopants and damage removal. Activation
energies for these processes are different and, depending
on temperature, damage removal can either be ac-
complished in a few seconds, or take hours. Typical
temperatures
are
950–1150 ◦C.
Transient-enhanced
diffusion has major implications for diffusion proﬁles, as
will be discussed in connection with shallow junctions in
Chapter 26.
25.12 Metallization
All electrical devices need at least one level of metalliza-
tion in order to connect to the outside world, and so do
most mechanical, thermal, ﬂuidic and biodevices because
electrical sensing and actuation are widely used.
In order to be able to probe devices, or to wire-bond
them, bonding pads must be made. For both probing and
bonding, soft metals are better: aluminum and gold are the
standard choices. Pads made of chromium, molybdenum
or tungsten may survive processing better than aluminum
or gold, but they cannot be used as bonding pads.
Metal-to-semiconductor contacts come in two basic
varieties (Figure 25.10): ohmic (resistive) or diode-like
(Schottky). Even
ohmic
contacts have
some
diode
character because the metal and semiconductor work
functions are never exactly equal. If the semiconductor
doping level is below 1019 cm−3, charge carriers will
have to overcome the barrier (which is proportional to
the difference of metal work function and semiconductor
electron afﬁnity, ϕmetal −χsemiconductor) by thermionic
emission. In heavily doped semiconductors the situation
is different: charge carriers can tunnel through the barrier
because it is thin. Barrier thickness is related to depletion
width in the semiconductor (which is proportional
to 1/ND).
The silicon doping level needs to be in excess of
1019 cm−3 for good ohmic contact. This often leads to
one extra doping step to increase contact hole doping.
Figure 25.10
Metal–semiconductor contact I –V curves:
left, ohmic; middle, diode-like (Schottky); bottom, real
metal–semiconductor contact
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 315]
Process Integration
327
Aluminum is the most widely used ohmic contact metal
to silicon. Aluminum, which is a p-type dopant for
silicon, can also be used to make ohmic contact to
lightly doped p-type silicon: during the contact anneal
(in N2/H2, the forming gas, at 450 ◦C), aluminum will
dope the top surface of silicon, and good contact is
made. Schottky contacts to silicon are usually made with
PtSi.
25.13 Passivation and Packaging
Final passivation provides protection against the environ-
ment. There are mechanical elements to passivation, like
scratch resistance, chemical aspects like moisture resis-
tance and gettering, and physical effects, like the preven-
tion of sodium diffusion. Electronic chips can be fairly
easily passivated, but MEMS chips with movable parts are
much more demanding to protect. A hermetic package for
a MEMS resonator costs easily $5 or more, while a non-
hermetic package costs perhaps 50 cents. So there is a big
incentive to understand exactly the vacuum requirements
for each device.
The standard passivation materials are PSG and
PECVD nitride, either alone or as a two-layer stack
(Figure 5.19). Phosphorus doping of CVD oxide ﬁlm
is beneﬁcial for sodium ion gettering, but too much
phosphorus makes the oxide hygroscopic, so there is
a delicate balance. Usually the phosphorus content is
about 5% wt. Nitride provides mechanical strength and
chemical resistance, but this chemical stability translates
to plasma etching for bonding pad opening, whereas
oxide passivation can be etched in HF-based solutions
(not, however, without difﬁculty, because HF–water
solutions
attack
aluminum;
acetic
acid + NHF4
(or
ethylene glycol + NHF4) are known as pad etches or
PSG etch). Packaging introduces more materials into
the system. This is problematic because more materials
compatibility issues
must
be
addressed.
Each
new
materials interface is a potential reliability problem, with
diffusion, reaction, thermal expansion mismatch and
other issues that need to be addressed.
25.14 Exercises
1. How many lithography steps are needed to fabricate
the solar cell shown in Figure 1.14? How many crit-
ical alignments are there?
2. Design a fabrication process for the JFET shown be-
low.
n− epi
n+ substrate
p+
p+
n+
gate
gate
source
drain
3. Redo Exercise 9.4, this time for 5× step-and-repeat
lithography and quartz masks.
4. List step by step the fabrication process for the plat-
inum silicide Schottky diode shown below. Platinum
silicide is formed by metal/silicon reaction.
Al
PtSi
SiO2
n
n
p+
p
Si
Source: Chen, C.K. et al. (1991) by permission of
IEEE
5. Draw the photomask set required to fabricate the RCL
chip of Figure 25.8. Include design features such as
overlaps.
6. In an integrated passive chip (Figure 25.8):
(a) What is the nitride thickness if the areal capaci-
tance density is 4 nF/mm2 and nitride ε = 7?
(b) Why is the ﬁrst contact etching by plasma and
the second by wet etching?
(c) SiCr thin-ﬁlm resistor resistivity is 2000 μohm-
cm. Design a 5 kohm resistor!
7. Capacitor nitride deposition uniformity across the
wafer is ±1%, and across the batch ±2%. The top
electrode area is deﬁned by etching CVD oxide
(thickness and etch non-uniformity ±5%) against the
capacitor nitride. If the oxide thickness is 200 nm and
nitride thickness 10 nm, plot capacitance variation as
a function of oxide:nitride etch selectivity.
8. Design a process where the capacitor top metal is
deposited directly after the capacitor dielectric.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 316]
328
Introduction to Microfabrication
9. Can you reduce the pass size of an etched sieve
(Figure 25.3a) if KOH etching is used?
10. Design a process for a sacriﬁcial sieve (Figure 25.3c)
and include the mask layout ﬁgures showing which
parts will stop the polysilicon from falling apart.
11. What is the aperture ratio of hole, pillar and sacriﬁcial
sieves if all use the same lithography process?
12. Explain the fabrication steps for the capacitor shown
below.
2nd metal
Reproduced from Washio et al. (2003) by permission
of IEEE
13. Explain the design rules for the bipolar transistor of
Exercise 14.7. Assume that the deepest diffusion is
about 5 μm and minimum linewidth 1 μm. What is
the transistor area?
References and Related Reading
Andersson, H., W. van det Wijngaart and G. Stemme (2001)
Micromachined ﬁlter-chamber array with passive valves for
biochemical analysis, Electrophoresis, 22, 249–257.
Barlian, A. A. et al. (2007) Design and characterization of
microfabricated piezoresistive ﬂoating element-based shear
stress sensors, Sens. Actuators, A134, 77–87.
Brody, J. P. et al. (1996) A planar microfabricated ﬂuid ﬁlter,
Sens. Actuators, A54, 704–708.
Chen, C. K. et al. (1991) Ultraviolet, visible, and infrared re-
sponse of PtSi Schottky-barrier detectors operated in the
front-illuminated mode, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 38,
1094.
Chu, W.-H. et al. (1999) Silicon membrane nanoﬁlters from
sacriﬁcial oxide removal, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 8, 34.
El-Ali, J. et al. (2004) Simulation and experimental validation
of a SU-8 based PCR thermocycler chip with integrated
heaters and temperature sensor, Sens. Actuators, A110,
3–10.
Guckel, H. et al. (1988) Fine-grained polysilicon ﬁlms with
build-in tensile strain, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 35,
800.
Honer, K. A. and G. T. A. Kovacs (2001) Integration of sput-
tered silicon microstructures with pre-fabricated CMOS cir-
cuitry, Sens. Actuators, A91, 386–397.
Leslie, T. et al. (1994) Photolithography overview of 64 Mbit
production, Microelectron. Eng., 25, 67.
Lin, H. et al. (2008) Test structures for the characterization
of MEMS and CMOS integration technology, IEEE Trans.
Semicond. Manuf ., 21, 140–147.
Neuhaus, D.-H. and A. M¨unzer (2007) Industrial silicon wafer
solar cells, Adv. OptoElectron., 24521.
Ono,
M.
et al.
(2002)
A
complementary-metal-oxide-
semiconductor-ﬁeld-effect
transistor-compatible
atomic
force microscopy tip fabrication process and integrated
atomic force microscopy cantilevers fabricated with this
process, Ultramicroscopy, 91, 9–20.
Washio, K. (2003) SiGe HBT and BiCMOS technologies for
optical transmission and wireless communication systems,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 5, 656.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 317]
26
MOS Transistor Fabrication
CMOS is and remains the most voluminous microfab-
ricated device by a wide margin. Many of the process
steps of microfabrication were developed originally for
CMOS fabrication and later adapted to other microde-
vices. Linewidth scaling has been driven almost exclu-
sively by CMOS. Technology generations have followed
at the pace of roughly 30% linewidth reduction every
three years (generations are described by the minimum
linewidths or half-pitches). The path from 0.8 μm CMOS
in the late 1980s to 45 nm CMOS 20 years later equals
eight generations, involving a lot of ingenuity in device
structures, materials and fabrication methods. This chapter
discusses some generic issues of MOS transistor fabrica-
tion, but not the latest generation of advanced devices.
These will be covered in Chapter 38.
In the 1950s there was an argument between whether
single crystal silicon (SCS) or polycrystalline silicon
should be used for transistors. Polycrystalline silicon
was more readily available, and single crystal growth
difﬁcult. However, the rapid advances in single crystal
growth led to its adoption for transistors. Pixel driver
transistors in ﬂat-panel displays (i.e., LCDs) are MOS
transistors made of amorphous or polycrystalline silicon,
known as thin-ﬁlm transistors (TFTs). TFTs made of
polycrystalline silicon are inferior compared to SCS
transistors, but adequate for display applications. More
recently,
polymers
have
emerged
as
materials
for
MOSFETs. Again, performance is not even close to that
of SCS transistors, but the applications are in intelligent
price tags or in disposable diagnostic devices.
26.1 Polysilicon Gate CMOS
Early MOS processes used aluminum for gates, thermal
diffusions for source and drain, and a single level of
aluminum for metallization. Then came the polysilicon
Table 26.1
Aluminum gate vs. polygate
Al gate
Polygate
Linewidths
>5 μm
<10 μm
Doping
Thermal diffusion
Ion implantation
Isolation
pn junction
Oxide (LOCOS)
Gate material
Aluminum
Doped polysilicon
Gate process
Non-self-aligned
Self-aligned
Etching
Wet/isotropic
Plasma/anisotropic
gate CMOS, which exhibited most of the essential
process
steps
that
have
characterized
CMOS
from
the mid 1970s till today: CMOS is an oxide-isolated,
ion-implanted, plasma-etched, self-aligned polysilicon
gate process (Table 26.1). CMOS linewidths were in the
5 μm range in the mid 1970s but the basic design was
very successful and it has gone through many generations
up to the 65 nm processes in the 2000s, and only very
recently have new paradigms emerged, with deposited
oxides replacing thermal oxide, and metal gate (TiN, Ta,
W) replacing polygate.
CMOS transistors are made infront-end: by oxidation,
diffusion and ion implantation. Back-end processes create
wiring to interconnect the transistors to each other. Over
the years the number of metal levels has increased to 10.
Back-end is about metal and dielectric deposition, etching
and CMP. In today’s chips back-end contributes to more
process steps than front-end. Chapter 28 is devoted to
multilevel metallization.
Contact hole fabrication deﬁnes the division between
front-end and back-end: after the metal/silicon interface
has been formed, process temperatures are limited to
about 450 ◦C.
The CMOS process can be further divided into
modules: wells, isolation, gate, contact, metallization
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 318]
330
Introduction to Microfabrication
Wells
Isolation
Gate
Contact
Metallization 
Passivation
Back-end
Front-end
Figure 26.1
Main modules of a CMOS process
and passivation. These are further divided into process
sequences, where the detailed recipes for ion implantation
doses and energies are speciﬁed, or oxidation times
and atmospheres given. The main modules of CMOS
fabrication are pictured in Figure 26.1.
26.2 Polysilicon Gate CMOS: 10 μm
to 1 μm Generations
26.2.1 Wafer selection
Process integration begins with wafer selection: n-type
silicon, of 4 ohm-cm (phosphorus concentration about
1.5 × 1015 cm−3), is chosen as the starting material. This
means that NMOS transistors will be made in p-well, and
PMOS transistors directly in the substrate. The choice
of p-type starting material would lead to a reversed
conﬁguration. Simple polygate CMOS is shown in
Figure 26.2. Note that this and the following ﬁgures are
highly schematic, so, for instance, the lateral spreading
of implants during oxidation or etch proﬁles are not
drawn realistically.
n-substrate
p-well
LOCOS isolation oxide
NMOS
PMOS
S/D diffusions
gate
gate
Figure 26.2
Prototypical CMOS
26.2.2 Isolation
LOCOS isolation is used. Wafers are cleaned, a thermal
oxide (pad oxide) of 40 nm is grown in dry oxygen, fol-
lowed by LPCVD nitride deposition (100 nm). The ﬁrst
lithography step deﬁnes the transistor active areas. Ni-
tride will cover these transistor active areas, and it will
be etched away from areas that will become isolation ox-
ide. Nitride etching in CF4 plasma stops on pad oxide. By
stopping the etch at the oxide, the silicon surface is not
damaged and cleaning of the wafer will be easy.
Figure 26.3 shows a top view of the photomask, to-
gether with a cross-sectional view of the CMOS device
(showing also parts that will be made later on).
After photoresist strip, arsenic is implanted with an
energy of 50 keV and dose 1012 cm−2. No lithography
Figure 26.3
Mask 1: nitride plasma etching, stopping on
pad oxide, with resist still in place. Mask 1 is also called
the active area mask because the transistors will eventually
be made in the area protected by nitride, as seen in the
bottom ﬁgure
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 319]
MOS Transistor Fabrication
331
is required (Figure 26.4 top). The implant penetrates the
thin pad oxide but not the thicker nitride. Later on, when
LOCOS oxidation will be done, the arsenic implant
will be buried under the LOCOS oxide. This ﬁeld
oxide implant improves isolation between neighboring
transistors.
The second lithography step deﬁnes p-well areas
(Figure 26.4). Boron is implanted with a dose of
2 × 1013 cm−2 and energy 40 keV. Drive-in diffusion
is performed next: the implanted boron will be driven
deeper by a two-step process; a short oxidation step
(50 min at 950 ◦C, dry oxidation) is followed by a
500 min, 1150 ◦C diffusion in nitrogen. The oxidation
will result in oxide about 30 nm thick. Note that diffusion
spreads laterally: the ﬁnal size of the diffused area is
signiﬁcantly bigger than the area deﬁned by mask 2.
Figure 26.4
The arsenic implant is done without photore-
sist, with energy so low that oxide is penetrated but not the
oxide/nitride stack (top ﬁgure). Mask 2: boron ion implan-
tation for the p-well. The implant energy is high enough to
penetrate the oxide/nitride stack.
LOCOS oxidation then follows: 6 h at 1050 ◦C, wet
oxidation. This will result in oxide about 1.2 μm thick.
The p-well is diffused to a depth of about 4 μm. After
oxidation, the nitride/oxide stack is removed: nitride in
CF4 plasma and oxide in HF.
26.2.3 Gate module
The third lithography step (Figure 26.5) is used to tailor
the threshold voltage of PMOS transistors. The threshold
voltage (Vth) where the transistor turns on is proportional
to the square root of doping concentration in the channel,
and this can be modiﬁed by implantation. This is true for
NMOS and PMOS alike, but in a simple CMOS process
NMOS Vth control is not done. A dose of 1 × 1012 cm−2
of boron is implanted with an energy of 50 keV.
Gate pre-cleaning then commences. An RCA-1, HF,
RCA-2 cleaning sequence is used (but other combina-
tions are used, too). Dry oxidation at 1050 ◦C for 65 min
produces gate oxide about 80 nm thick. The threshold-
implanted boron diffuses further during gate oxidation.
Polysilicon, about 500 nm thick, is deposited undoped.
A separate POCl3 gas phase doping step is performed
after deposition, and the resulting poly sheet resistance is
about 30 ohm/sq. Both NMOS and PMOS gates are made
of the same material, namely phosphorus-doped poly.
The fourth photomask (Figure 26.6) deﬁnes the polysil-
icon gates. Gate poly etching is done either with ﬂuorine
Figure 26.5
Mask 3: PMOS threshold voltage implant.
Arsenic ﬁeld stop implant is seen under ﬁeld oxide
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 320]
332
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 26.6
Mask 4: after polysilicon etching and resist
stripping
(SF6 or CF4) or with chlorine-based plasmas. The selec-
tivity requirement is not very demanding because gate
oxide is fairly thick, so the process can be optimized
for sidewall proﬁle, rate and/or uniformity. After photore-
sist stripping and cleaning, a mild oxidation step (900 ◦C,
10 min, dry oxidation) is performed, and about 50 nm of
oxide grown on polysilicon. This removes plasma etch
damage and regrows gate oxide on the source/drain areas
a little.
The ﬁfth mask deﬁnes PMOS S/D implants. In fact
this ﬁfth photomask is actually the same mask as mask 3,
the PMOS threshold voltage mask: it deﬁnes the PMOS
transistor area. This time it protects the NMOS areas
from PMOS S/D boron ion implantation. A high dose,
2 × 1015 cm−2, of boron is implanted at 40 keV.
The sixth mask (Figure 26.7) is for NMOS high-dose
S/D implants. Phosphorus is implanted at 50 keV energy
and 5 × 1015 cm−2 dose. This is a non-critical mask: it is
rather large in size and LOCOS oxide all around active
areas means that minor misalignment does not matter.
Insulator deposition follows. Phosphorus-doped CVD
oxide (PSG) of about 1 μm thickness is deposited.
PSG is a glassy material and above its glass transition
temperature (about 1050 ◦C) it will ﬂow, resulting in
beneﬁcial smoothing of the top surface. This is the
last high-temperature step,
and
dopant proﬁles are
now “frozen.”
Figure 26.7
Mask 6: after NMOS S/D implantation, with
resist still in place
Junction depths of both PMOS and NMOS transis-
tors are about 1 μm, with S/D sheet resistances of about
30 ohm/sq for NMOS and about 90 ohm/sq for PMOS;
p-well depth is about 4 μm and its sheet resistance is about
4 kohm/sq. Threshold voltages for NMOS and PMOS are
about 1.3 V and −1.5 V, respectively.
26.2.4 Contact
The seventh mask (Figure 26.8) deﬁnes the contact holes
in the oxide. Wet etching in BHF is used to open the
contacts. Contact hole design rules must take into account
that there will be about 1 μm undercut in this etching step.
After photoresist stripping and wafer cleaning, about 1 μm
of aluminum is sputtered on the wafers.
26.2.5 Metallization
The eighth mask (Figure 26.9) deﬁnes aluminum pat-
terns. Aluminum (1 μm thick) is etched in H3PO4-based
wet etch. Overlap rules must make sure that the metal
covers the contact completely. After stripping and wafer
cleaning, a forming gas anneal at 450 ◦C improves silicon-
to-aluminum contact by breaking any native oxide that
might be at the interface. The hydrogen atoms in the
forming gas will also bond to dangling bonds, stabilizing
CVD oxide.
A passivation layer of silicon oxynitride is deposited
by PECVD. Mask 9 deﬁnes bonding pad openings, and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 321]
MOS Transistor Fabrication
333
Figure 26.8
Mask 7: contact holes after resist stripping.
The cross-sectional drawing is across the S/D contact holes,
therefore the polygate contacts do not show
plasma etching of oxynitride opens those pads. Wafer-
level processing is now complete.
The wafers will be tested electrically, at wafer level,
and non-functional chips will be inked. Dicing will sepa-
rate the chips, and functional chips will proceed to encap-
sulation and packaging. Many tests cannot be performed
at the wafer level and more characterization will take
place on packaged chips. The cost of testing can be very
high if the chips need to be tested for a multitude of
parameters.
26.2.6 CMOS process variations
A prototypical 5 μm CMOS process was described above.
There are many variations between different CMOS man-
ufacturers: implant doses and diffusion times differ, oxide
thicknesses and junction depths vary, mask compensations
can be used, etc. More variety enters the picture if, for
example, analog CMOS is made. Then some of the doping
steps will be used to make resistors, and extra lithography
masks may be needed. In more advanced analog CMOS
processes an extra polysilicon layer is added for resistor
and capacitor fabrication. EEPROM processes also need
Figure 26.9
Mask 8: after aluminum etching and resist
stripping
extra polysilicon, for the ﬂoating gate. A couple of masks
have been added in each CMOS generation, with some 35
masks in modern devices. Bipolar transistors can be added
to the CMOS process, to create BiCMOS, a topic that will
be discussed in Chapter 27 on bipolar technologies. This
needs one to four extra masks.
26.3 MOS Transistor Scaling
As linewidths were scaled from 5 μm to about 1 μm,
plasma etching replaced wet etching in all patterning
etch steps, poly, oxide and metal alike. Oxidation and
diffusion times were scaled down in order to make
shallower junctions. We will now discuss some issues
relevant to the scaling of CMOS, from both the device
and fabrication points of view.
26.3.1 Transistor scaling
CMOS transistor scaling is most often discussed from a
lithographic, linewidth scaling point of view. But vertical
scaling is equally important. S/D diffusions must be made
shallower because they must not extend sideways under
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 322]
334
Introduction to Microfabrication
the gate. If the diffusions touch, catastrophic failure oc-
curs, but even in the case where they do not touch, they
degrade device performance via increased leakage current
and parasitic capacitances. Sideways diffusion is kept to a
minimum when vertical diffusion, and therefore junction
depth xj, is minimized.
The transit time from source to drain, which is a proxy
for device speed, can be calculated as
τ = L
v = L
μE =
L2
μVds
(26.1)
where L is channel length, v the velocity and μ the elec-
tron mobility in electric ﬁeld E = Vds/L. The gate and
the substrate form a capacitor, with the gate oxide as the
capacitor dielectric of thickness T . The gate capacitance
is then
C = εWL
T
(26.2)
where W is the width of the gate and ε is the dielectric
constant of the oxide. The charge in transit is
Q = −Cg(Vgs −Vth) = −εWL
T
(Vgs −Vth)
(26.3)
and the current is
Ids = Q
τ = μεW
LT (Vgs −Vth)Vds
(26.4)
where Vgs is the gate/source voltage, Vth is the threshold
voltage where the gate starts to control the charge carriers,
and Vds is the drain/source voltage.
Scaling down transistor lateral dimensions L and W,
and the vertical dimension, oxide thickness T , by a factor
n (n > 1), leads to the following new dimensions:
L′ = L/n
W ′ = W/n
T ′ = T/n
(26.5)
For many CMOS generations the operating voltage was
kept constant at 5 V, but the electric ﬁeld cannot be in-
creased without limit because of dielectric breakdown and
hot electron considerations, which necessitate lower op-
erating voltage, V ′, given by V ′ = V/n. Using the short-
hand V ≡Vgs −Vth, we can write the physical parameters
for the scaled devices (Table 26.2).
Scaling is mostly beneﬁcial: the transistor area is scaled
as 1/n2, transistor speed increases as 1/n, switching power
decreases as 1/n2, and switching energy decreases as 1/n3.
Power density (P ′/A′) remains constant. Junction depth
scaling xj has been mostly in line with oxide thickness
scaling, but more recently it has been difﬁcult to main-
tain the pace. This is because ion implantation damage
Table 26.2
MOS scaling by a constant factor n (>1)
τ ′ = 1
μ
L2
n2
V
n
−1
= 1
μ
L2
V = τ
n
V ′ = V
n
C′ = C
n
I ′ = I
n
P ′
switch = C′V ′2
2τ ′
= Pswitch
n2
E′
switch = C′V ′2
2
= Eswitch
n3
P ′
dc = I ′V ′ = Pdc
n2
A′ = L′W ′ = LW
n2
= A
n2
Table 26.3
Front-end scaling (about 1980–1995),
supply voltage constant at 5 V
Generation 3 μm 2 μm 1.5 μm 1 μm 0.7 μm 0.5 μm
Tox (nm)
70
40
30
25
20
14
xj (nm)
600
400
300
250
200
150
Gate delay
800
350
250
200
160
90
(ps)
Table 26.4
Front-end scaling (about 1995–2005),
supply voltage scaling
Generation
0.35 μm
0.25 μm
0.18 μm
0.13 μm
Tox (nm)
8
6
4.5
4
Supply (V)
3.3
2.5
1.8
1.5
Vth (V)
0.65
0.6
0.5
0.45
necessitates high-temperature annealing, which inevitably
leads to diffusion, however shallow the original implan-
tation proﬁle. Table 26.3 lists real-world CMOS scaling
data from the 1980s and 1990s, and Table 26.4 gives more
recent trends.
Note that gate oxide thickness is roughly linewidth di-
vided by about 50 and junction depth is approximately
linewidth divided by 5. Linewidth scaling is just one
factor in packing density increase: process and device
cleverness can contribute amazingly large area reductions.
26.3.2 Front-end simulation
CMOS front end simulation involves diffusion proﬁle
and oxide thickness calculations, which are fed into
device simulators to obtain transistor properties like
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 323]
MOS Transistor Fabrication
335
Oxide growth
conditions
Ion implantation dose
and energy
process simulator
device simulator 
Optimize
Device
performance,
Ioff vs. Vth
doping profiles
Figure 26.10
Front-end
process
development
loop
depends heavily on process simulation
threshold voltages and current-voltage characteristics.
1D, 2D and 3D simulations are used, depending on
application. If a 1D process simulator is used, it feeds
1D device simulation, and similarly 2D for 2D and 3D
for 3D. This process development loop is pictured in
Figure 26.10.
26.4 CMOS from 0.8 μm to 65 nm
The 5 μm CMOS process presented above has the main
features of any modern CMOS process. Even though the
basic features of a 65 nm CMOS process certainly dif-
fer from the nine-mask 5 μm process, the basic idea has
remained unchanged. We will not discuss changes gen-
eration by generation, but rather look at some important
trends in processes and structures themselves.
Several new design ideas, structures and materials have
been invented to keep polygate CMOS scaling going to
submicron dimensions. A schematic 0.25 μm CMOS is
shown in Figure 26.11. It includes for instance the fol-
lowing new features which will be discussed shortly:
• Lithography: i-line step-and-repeat 5× reduction lithog-
raphy with λ = 365 nm
• Device structures: spacers and lightly doped drain
(LDD) implants
• New materials: silicides
• New processes: CVD-W plugs with etchback.
engineered
channel
p+
n+
NMOS
PMOS
STI
p- epi
p+ substrate
gate oxide
STI
STI
silicide 
n-well
p-well
Figure 26.11
Deep
submicron
CMOS:
200 nm
gate
length, 5 nm gate oxide, 70 nm junction depth; n+ poly for
NMOS and p+ poly for PMOS. Shallow trench isolation
on epitaxial n+/p+ wafer
Deep submicron (0.35, 0.25, 0.18 and 0.13 μm) genera-
tions have taken advantage of many more new techniques
and materials:
• DUV lithography with λ = 248 nm
• SiO2 gate oxide replaced by nitrided oxides
• The p+ gate for PMOS and the n+ gate for NMOS
• Tilted and halo implants for S/D engineering
• RTA junction annealing.
26.4.1 Wafer selection
CMOS process integration begins, like all other processes,
with wafer selection (Table 26.5). Note that the tight-
ening of wafer speciﬁcations goes hand in hand with
wafer size via the linewidth: 300 mm wafer specs are
tighter because 90 nm linewidth devices with gate ox-
ides 2 nm thick are made on 300 mm wafers, whereas
0.5 to 0.8 μm linewidths and 10 nm oxides are typical of
150 mm wafers.
26.4.2 Wells and isolation
Wells are the deepest diffusions in CMOS, and they must
be fabricated early on in the process. There are several
ways of making the wells, depending on starting wafer
choice and device design requirements: n-well, p-well and
twin-well processes are all possible.
The twin-well process requires two lithography steps,
but both NMOS and PMOS doping levels can be opti-
mized independently.
LOCOS isolation served CMOS fabrication for 30
years, and it has been scaled to much smaller linewidths
than was previously thought possible. Below half-micron
technologies, LOCOS was ﬁnally replaced: ﬁrst, bird’s
peak lateral extent wastes area (Figure 13.9); second,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 324]
336
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 26.5
Wafer speciﬁcations for CMOS
Specs
100 mm
125 mm
150 mm
200 mm
300 mm
Thickness (μm)
525 ± 20
625 ± 20
675 ± 20
725 ± 20
775 ± 25
TTV (μm)
3
3
2
1.5
1
Warp (μm)
20–30
18–35
20–30
10–30
10–20
Flatness (μm)
<3
<2
<1
0.5–1
0.5–0.8
Oxygen (ppma)
20
17
15
14
12
OISF (cm−2)
100–200
100
<10
None
None
Particles (per wafer)
10@0.3 μm
10@0.3 μm
5–10@0.3 μm
10–100@0.16 μm
50–100@0.12 μm
100@0.2 μm
20–30@0.2 μm
10–20@0.16 μm
5–10@0.20 μm
Metals (atoms/cm2)
1012
1011
1011
5 × 1010
109
ﬁeld oxide growth in narrow spaces is suppressed by
compressive stresses, that is oxide does not grow to full
thickness in narrow spaces. The main isolation method
in the deep submicron technologies is shallow trench
isolation (STI) (deep trench isolation of bipolar transistors
will be described in Chapter 28). A schematic STI
process is described below and shown in Figure 26.12.
Process ﬂow for shallow trench isolation
(STI)
• Pad oxide (thermal)
• Pad nitride (LPCVD)
• Lithography
• Etching nitride/oxide/silicon
• Resist strip and cleaning
• Liner oxide (thermal) (Figure 26.12a)
• CVD oxide deposition (Figure 26.12b)
• CMP planarization of the oxide (Figure 26.12c)
• Nitride etching
• Oxide etching (Figure 26.12d)
Dimensions for STI are scaled down with each tech-
nology generation, but for 0.25 μm CMOS the following
values are representative:
• pad oxide thickness 40 nm
• nitride thickness 100 nm
• narrow trench width 250 nm
• trench depth 300 nm
• liner oxide thickness 30 nm
• CVD oxide thickness 500 nm.
There are tens of variations of STI, but all of them
have to fulﬁll certain common criteria. The liner oxide
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 26.12
Shallow trench isolation (STI): trench ﬁll-
ing and polishing. See text for details
is a thermal oxide. Its role is to minimize silicon/oxide
interface defects (as discussed in Section 13.4 on oxide
structure). The CVD oxide process must be able to ﬁll
conformally both narrow and wide spaces and it must be
thicker than the trench (see Figure 16.7 for step cover-
age, gap ﬁlling and the requirements for planarization).
CMP planarization has also to be able to polish narrow
and large areas at the same rate. If the large-area polish
rate is higher, planarization will only work for the narrow
gaps. Instead of CMP, various etchback processes have
also been tried, but they have the pattern size and pattern
density effects similar to or worse than CMP, and the
results are therefore no better. In addition to CVD, spin
coating of dielectrics can also be used to ﬁll trenches.
26.5 Gate Module
The gate module is critical for transistor action. Gate ox-
ide thickness, channel doping, gate length and S/D doping
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 325]
MOS Transistor Fabrication
337
proﬁles determine critical transistor parameters such
as threshold voltage, switching speed, leakage current
and noise.
26.5.1 Gate oxide
Making thin gate oxides is a major wafer cleaning chal-
lenge: 100 nm particles are permissible in 0.35 μm tech-
nology from a linewidth point of view, but compared to
oxide thicknesses of less than 10 nm, they are not allowed.
Atomic contamination also becomes more crucial as ﬁlm
thicknesses are scaled down. Metals and organics can be
removed from the wafers by cleaning, but for very thin
oxides impurities in the gas phase also matter: residual
water vapor at a concentration level of 20 ppm in the
oxidation tube will dramatically enhance the dry oxida-
tion rate. Surface roughness also affects oxide electrical
quality and channel mobility because in MOS transistors
the current is conﬁned to about the top 10 nm of the
silicon layer parallel to the surface. The effects of var-
ious metals on CMOS device properties are described in
Table 26.6.
Segregation of contaminants between Si and SiO2 has
a major impact on the effects of metallic contamination:
during thermal oxidation Al, Ca, Cr, Mg and Zn are in-
corporated into the oxide and contribute to oxide quality
problems, whereas Fe, Cu and Ni diffuse in bulk silicon
and contribute to decreased minority carrier lifetime.
Deep-level impurities act as majority carrier traps. The
recombination velocity is maximum when deep-level en-
ergy is in the middle of the forbidden gap, therefore Zn,
Cu, Au and Fe are especially harmful impurities.
A number of methods and materials have been
investigated as replacements for thermal oxide. Nitrided
oxide (NO) and oxidation of nitrided oxide (ONO) are
evolutionary developments based on thermal oxidation.
New alternatives are CVD and ALD ﬁlms, a major
paradigm shift. Hafnium oxide (HfO2) and hafnium
Table 26.6
Metal contamination effects in MOS
devices. Adapted from Hattori (1998)
Metallic species
Contamination effects in MOS
Heavy metals (Cu,
Junction leakage current increase
Fe, Ni)
Lifetime degradation
Oxide dielectric strength failure
Alkali metals (Na,
K, Ca, etc.)
Threshold voltage shift
Transition metals
(Al)
Interface state increase
Noble metals (Au)
Lifetime degradation
silicates (HfSixOy) are prime candidates. If, during
deposition of the high-ε material, silicon dioxide is
formed at the interface, the system that is formed
is a SiO2/high-ε two-layer structure, which must be
analyzed
as
capacitors
in series.
Interfacial silicon
dioxide formation is difﬁcult to avoid because high-ε
dielectrics are oxides, and oxygen is present in some
form or another during their deposition.
Equivalent oxide thickness (EOT) is often used in de-
scribing high-ε materials which replace silicon dioxide.
The equivalent oxide thickness is given by
EOT = εSiO2
εhigh k
× thigh k + tSiO2
(26.6)
where tSiO2 is the interfacial silicon dioxide thickness, if
any.
Zirconium oxide (ZrO2, ε ≈23) ﬁlm 6 nm thick has
EOT ≈1 nm, under the assumption of zero interfacial
SiO2. Even a 1 nm SiO2 layer will cause a drastic effect on
EOT. Furthermore, dielectric constants of very thin ﬁlms
are different from bulk values, or from values measured
for thicker ﬁlms (recall Figure 5.2). It is also possible that
very thin ﬁlms are amorphous, but slightly thicker ﬁlms
are polycrystalline, as shown in Figure 26.13 for ZrO2.
The interfacial oxide is also visible in these TEM micro-
graphs. Note that we have used classical capacitance for-
mulas above: in the 3 nm thickness range a quantum me-
chanical description should be used for accurate results.
26.5.2 Self-aligned gate
Gate linewidth scaling is a combined lithography and
etching problem: namely, feature size in resist vs. etched
feature size. Etching is also related to gate oxide thick-
ness: polygate etching has to stop on the thin gate oxide.
The length of a gate-level conductor is only a few mi-
crons, or tens of microns, and low resistivity is not a
major requirement. Instead, ease of patterning and ther-
mal stability in contact with oxide are primary concerns.
The gate pattern is, together with contact holes, the most
demanding lithographic and etching challenge of modern
ICs.
The self-aligned polygate was a major milestone
in MOS evolution: S/D diffusions were automatically
aligned to the gate. But as transistor scaling continued,
more complex doping patterns were called for. One
motivation was to reduce hot-electron effects: high
electric ﬁelds in the channel accelerate electrons to high
energies, and these electrons can degrade the gate oxide.
In order to reduce these high electric ﬁelds, the lightly
doped drain (LDD) structure was introduced. In LDD,
S/D implantation is done in two steps.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 326]
338
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 26.13
ALD ZrO2: the 4 nm thick ﬁlm is amorphous but the 12 nm thick ﬁlm is polycrystalline. Reproduced from
Kukli et al. (2007), copyright 2007, Elsevier
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 26.14
Gate-implant
possibilities:
(a)
standard;
(b) lightly doped drain LDD; (c) large-angle tilt device
(LATID) and (d) inverse-T gate. Reproduced from Stinson,
M. & Osburn, C.M. (1991), by permission of IEEE
After polygate etching, a self-aligned, low-energy, low-
dose implant is done, followed by CVD oxide deposition
and spacer etching (Figure 26.14). This spacer shifts the
second high-dose S/D implant further away from the gate
edge, where the highest electric ﬁeld occurs. This mini-
mizes hot-electron damage to thin gate oxide.
Process ﬂow for LDD structure
• Polysilicon gate etching
• Implantation for S/D extension (20 keV, 1013 cm−2)
• CVD oxide conformal deposition (250 nm)
• Anisotropic oxide plasma etch for spacer formation
• Etch damage removal/cleaning
• Implantation for source/drain (50 keV, 1015 cm−2)
The spacer etching end point is difﬁcult to see be-
cause the most abundant material under CVD oxide is
the ﬁeld oxide, and no selectivity is possible between two
oxides. Some ﬁeld oxide loss is therefore inevitable, and
the spacer etch may etch some silicon in S/D areas.
In addition to junction depth, junction proﬁle must
be tailored more carefully in deep submicron CMOS.
Large-angle tilted (halo) implants are extended beneath
the gate. Various double implant scenarios are depicted
in Figure 26.14.
26.5.3 Junction depth
Shallow junction formation is the interplay between
implantation and annealing (recall Figure 15.7). Junction
quality means controllable and reproducible junction
depth, low leakage current and good (ideal) forward
characteristics.
Low
sheet
resistance
requirements
necessitate a high degree of electrical activation of
dopants. Low leakage current requirements equal efﬁcient
damage removal and a low level of contamination. Solid
solubility sets limits on activation and plays a role in
damage dissolution. Clearly the demands are at odds
with a typical damage annealing approach.
Point defects are critical for diffusion: vacancies cre-
ated by the implantation process add to thermally gener-
ated vacancies and enhance diffusion. Boron diffusion is
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 327]
MOS Transistor Fabrication
339
dependent on silicon self-interstitials which are created,
for instance, during thermal oxidation. Boron diffusion
under an oxidizing atmosphere is thus faster than in an
inert atmosphere.
Points defects created during implantation offer fast
diffusion paths. This is known as transient-enhanced diffu-
sion (TED). If defects can be annealed away rapidly, TED
is eliminated and thermal diffusion determines the doping
proﬁles. Rapid thermal annealing (RTA) is a solution to
this problem. A very short high-temperature step (seconds,
or even subsecond, at 1000 −1100 ◦C) eliminates TED
and activates dopants, without too much diffusion (Figure
2.12). RTA will be further discussed in Chapter 32.
26.5.4 Self-aligned silicide
Titanium, cobalt and nickel silicides (TiSi2, CoSi2, NiSi)
are used in advanced CMOS (Figure 26.11) to reduce
resistance. Metal is deposited all over but metal-silicon
reaction only takes place on the polygates and S/D areas;
no reaction takes place on oxides (recall Figure 7.15).
In scaled devices spacers are narrow and careful process
optimization is needed to prevent silicide overgrowth and
shorting of gate and S/D. When junction depths are scaled
down, silicide thickness needs to be scaled accordingly.
Therefore nickel, with the least consumption of silicon, is
currently favored.
26.5.5 Contact to silicon
The selectivity requirement for contact hole etching is re-
lated to junction depth. If the selectivity between oxide
and silicon is poor, oxide etching might reach through
the shallow junction. With better selectivity, etching will
stop with minimal silicon loss. Etching selectivity of oxide
against silicide is much higher than selectivity against sil-
icon, which also makes silicided contacts beneﬁcial from
a process integration point of view.
Contact resistance Rc is given by
Rc = ρc
WL
(26.7)
where ρc is contact resistivity, and W and L are contact
dimensions.
Contact resistivity depends on barrier height (0.55 eV
half band gap of silicon) and silicon doping concentra-
tion (2 × 1020 cm−3 maximum dopant solubility) which
cannot be changed. Therefore metal-to-silicon contact re-
sistivities cannot be much less than 10−7 hm-cm2. This
translates to about 0.1 ohms for 1 × 1 μm contacts. Metal-
to-silicide and metal-to-metal contact resistivities are in
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26.15
(a) MOS-transistor current paths in non-
silicided contact; (b) current paths in multiple contact non-
silicided contacts and (c) silicided contacts. In the case of
silicided contacts, metal lines can run over the transistor,
leaving greater freedom for signal routing. Adapted from
Liu, R. Metallization, in C.Y. Chang & S.M. Sze (eds.)
(1996), by permission of McGraw-Hill
the 10−8 ohm-cm2 range, and this is one added bene-
ﬁt of silicides in submicron technologies. As shown in
Figure 26.15, the silicide-to-silicon contact area is much
larger than the contact hole area.
In Table 26.7 two processes, 130 nm and 65 nm CMOS,
are compared. The 130 nm process is typically processed
on wafers of 200 mm diameter, while the 65 nm process
is done on 300 mm wafers. There were roughly 7 years
between the processes: 130 nm dates from 2000, 65 nm
from 2007.
26.6 SOI MOSFETs
SOI devices were commercially introduced in the late
1990s. SOI wafers command less than 10% of the silicon
wafer market, in terms of money, and much less in terms
of area. In spite of the high price of SOI, SOI devices are
found in a wide variety of applications, especially in high-
performance, low-power and high-operating-temperature
devices.
Vertical isolation comes naturally in SOI, and lateral
isolation is much easier than in bulk devices: it is
sufﬁcient to etch the SOI device layer and form isolated
silicon islands for each device (Figure 26.16). No wells
are needed, and many high-temperature process steps are
eliminated. This beneﬁt becomes more pronounced with
each successive generation, while bulk devices require
more and more process steps. Because pn junctions
are eliminated, leakage currents and latch-up are also
eliminated, enabling low-power operation. Elimination
of parasitic capacitances leads to faster devices, and it is
especially in low-power and high-speed applications that
SOI excels.
Performance and power beneﬁts over bulk devices can
be 20–50%, which is considerable, but not necessarily
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 328]
340
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 26.7
Scaling trends from 130 to 65 nm. Adapted
from International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors (http://www.itrs.net)
Technology
generation
130 nm
65 nm
Half-pitch (processor)
150 nm
65 nm
Physical gate length
Lg
65–100 nm
25–37 (HP vs.
LP)a
Lg variation (3σ)
6 nm
2.5 nm
Gate oxide thickness
1.3–2.4 nm
0.6–1.4 nm (HP
vs. LP)a
Drain extension
depth
27–45 nm
12–19 nm
Contact junction xj
48–95 nm
18–37 nm
Spacer thickness
48–95 nm
18–37 nm
Drain extension
junction abruptness
7.2 nm/dec
2.8 nm/dec
Rs drain extension,
PMOS
400 ohm/sq
760 ohm/sq
Rs drain extension,
NMOS
190 ohm/sq
360 ohm/sq
Silicide thickness
36 nm
14 nm
Silicide sheet
resistance
4.2 ohm/sq
10.5 ohm/sq
Channel doping
4 × 1018 cm−3
2.3 × 1019 cm−3
aHP for high performance, LP for low power (portable appli-
cations).
enough to compensate for the high price of starting
wafers. Extra beneﬁts come from manufacturing eco-
nomics: chip yield depends on the number of process steps
(Equation 1.2), and because SOI devices require fewer
steps, yields should be higher. Similarly, yield depends
on chip area (Equation 1.3), and SOI circuits take up less
area. Taken together with the higher prices commanded
by more powerful chips, SOI has made inroads.
26.7 Thin-Film Transistors
Thin-ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) are MOS devices made of de-
posited ﬁlms. Great variety exists for substrates, semicon-
ductors, conductors, insulators and passivation, as shown
in Figure 26.17. While TFTs can be processed on silicon
wafers (and this is often done in developing new devices),
the real interest in TFTs comes from the fact that any
substrate can be used. And for large-area electronics, like
displays, glass and polymer sheets, or steel foils, are used
instead. Then a number of limitations step in, for example
temperature budget and metal contamination. Limitations
that hold for glass plates hold for most parts also to TFTs
made on steel foils, but there are some differences too.
Higher processing temperatures can be used from a me-
chanical strength point of view, but iron contamination is
a concern. Steel is a conducting material and an electri-
cal insulator layer must be deposited before any electrical
devices. Iron contamination from steel and sodium from
glass both necessitate an ion barrier. If one ﬁlm can act as
electrical insulation, ion barrier and smoothing layer, the
better. Steel surface smoothness is inferior to glass, and
planarization may be needed. Spin-coated polyimide has
been used as a barrier and planarization layer, reducing
the roughness from 60 to 2 nm on a steel substrate. Spin-
on glass is capable of a similar performance. In both cases
multiple coatings can be done to improve planarization.
TFTs come in two basic geometries: bottom gate
(Figures 26.18, 26.20, 26.22) and top gate (Figure 26.19).
The channel material can be for example PECVD
amorphous silicon or polysilicon, and many organic
materials are used as channel materials. However, carrier
mobilities vary a lot: electron mobility in SCS is about
500 cm2/V-s,
polysilicon
about
100 cm2/V-s,
a-Si:H
about 1 cm2/V-s and organic ﬁlms between 0.001 and
1 cm2/V-s. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) show promising
Si
BOX
Si
Si
Figure 26.16
SOI MOSFET with ﬁrst-level metal, schematic and TEM. Courtesy Brandon Van Leer, FEI Company4
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 329]
MOS Transistor Fabrication
341
Substrate:
silicon
glass
steel
polymer
Gate:
metal
doped silicon
conductive polymer 
Gate dielectric:
deposited oxide/nitride
insulating polymer
functional polymer
Channel:
silicon
conjugated polymer
organic semiconductor
S/D metallization:
doped silicon
metal
conducting polymer
organic conductor 
Figure 26.17
Choice of materials for TFTs. Adapted from
Leising et al. (2006)
mobilities higher than silicon with the ﬂexibility of
polymers.
26.7.1 Silicon channel TFTs
The most common channel material in TFTs for ﬂat-
panel displays is polysilicon (LTPS, for low-temperature
polysilicon) deposited on glass. Silicon deposition usually
results in an amorphous state, and a separate crystalliza-
tion step is performed. Silicon self-implantation and a
long low-temperature (600 ◦C) anneal is one possibility,
but one that results in fairly low mobility. MILC, or metal-
induced lateral crystallization, is being actively studied.
Nickel induces crystallization, but nickel has to be made
inactive after the process, by for example phosphorus get-
tering. Another option is excimer laser anneal (ELA). The
highest mobilities have been achieved by ELA, but re-
sults are sensitive to the direction of laser scanning; that
is, whether current ﬂows in the direction of grains or
against them.
Dielectrics are (PE)CVD deposited. Maximum process
temperatures are limited to about 500 ◦C because of glass
softening. TFT performance can be improved by the same
techniques used in silicon MOSFETs. Most often this
involves increased mask counts. An eight-mask TFT pro-
cess includes lightly doped drains (LDDs) for NMOS, and
similar improved TFTs have been made with self-aligned
silicides and with CMP being used in lab devices, but it
is not really suitable because of cost considerations and
large-area limitations. Plasma etching uniformity across
meter-wide panels can also be problematic. But because
linewidths are several micrometers, and thin ﬁlms fairly
thin, wet etching is suitable for most etching steps.
Polyimide foil
(n+) a-Si:H
Cr
100 nm
~50 nm
~200 nm
~400 nm
500 nm
Undoped
a-Si:H
SiNx
Figure 26.18
Bottom gate silicon TFT on polyimide. Re-
produced from Gleskova et al. (2001) by permission of The
Electrochemical Society
The TFT of Figure 26.18 is a prototypical bottom gate
device. Its specialty is the use of polyimide foil as a sub-
strate, otherwise it is identical to TFTs made on glass
plates for displays. The maximum processing temperature
has been limited to 150 ◦C due to the polymer substrate.
Another bottom gate TFT for displays will be presented
in Figure 37.4.
26.7.2 Polymer TFTs
Polymers can serve all the roles needed in MOSFETs. Ad-
ditionally, polymer TFT fabrication involves a number of
new technologies, including ink jetting (Chapter 23) and
micromolding (Chapter 18), but also traditional methods
like spin coating, PECVD, sputtering and evaporation.
We will describe four different polymer TFTs: the ﬁrst
one is made on a polymer substrate with non-standard
materials and is transparent. The second one is made of
standard materials except for a pentacene polymer active
channel. The third one uses gold for metallization but
is otherwise fully polymeric. The fourth one is an all-
polymer TFT with a polymer substrate, polymer active
channel, polymer conductors, polymer gate dielectric and
polymer passivation.
Transparent and ﬂexible transistors can be made if
transparent conductors are used on transparent polymer
foil. Figure 26.19 shows a top gate TFT on PET ﬁlm.
The source, drain and gate are all made of ITO (Indium-
doped Tin Oxide) and the channel of a-IGZO (amorphous
Indium Gallium Zinc Oxide). Yttrium oxide is used as a
gate dielectric.
The organic semiconductor pentacene for the channel
is shown in Figure 26.20. Evaporation of pentacene is
performed under 5 × 10−7 mbar pressure and 0.1 nm/s
deposition rate. Lift-off is used to form a pentacene
pattern. Tantalum pentoxide, Ta2O5, has been used as the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 330]
342
Introduction to Microfabrication
ITO transparent conductors
Y2O3
dielectric
a-IGZO
channel
PET foil
Figure 26.19
Transparent top gate TFT on PET foil.
Adapted from Hosono (2007)
Pentacene evaporation
Ta2O5 sputtering
Figure 26.20
Bottom gate TFT with pentacene active
channel and Ta2O5 passivation. Evaporated pentacene cov-
ers a narrower area than sputtered tantalum pentoxide. Re-
drawn after Goettling et al. (2008)
passivation, patterned using the same lift-off resist as the
pentacene channel.
The polymer transistor of Figure 26.21 has polyimide
in two different roles, as ﬁnal substrate and as gate
dielectric, with pentacene as the channel and parylene
as the passivation. Silicon is used as a carrier during
processing only.
It is important, as in all thin-ﬁlm deposition methods,
to consider the underlying layer surface structure because
the crystallinity of the deposited ﬁlm depends on the un-
derlying material. Oxygen plasma treatment of polyimide
improves the crystallinity of pentacene, and the crystalline
channel material has higher charge carrier mobilities than
amorphous ones.
The all-polymer TFT shown in Figure 26.22 differs not
only in materials, but also in its fabrication: everything is
done in wet solutions, and no vacuum processing is used.
Three photomasks are used, with a minimum linewidth of
2 μm. Polyimide ﬁlm is used as a substrate. Metals have
been replaced by conductive polyaniline (PANI) polymer.
The bottom PANI (200 nm thick) is a conductor
and serves as S/D. The remaining parts of PANI are
converted to an insulator by DUV exposure, with a
 
pentacene
polyimide
Au
Au
Au
polyimide
parylene
Figure 26.21
Bottom gate TFT on polyimide substrate.
Spin-coated polyimide as gate dielectric, pentacene as ac-
tive channel material and parylene as passivation. Metal-
lization of Cr/Au. Adapted from Feili et al. (2006)
G
S 
D
PTV semiconductor
PVP dielectric
PANI
polyimide
PANI
Figure 26.22
All-polymer top gate transistor. S, D, G are
conductive PANI, the other PANI layers are insulating. Re-
drawn after Matters et al. (1999)
difference in resistivity of 11 orders of magnitude. The
active channel is made of semiconducting polymer PTV
(polythienylenevinylene) and its thickness is 50 nm. The
gate dielectric is made of PVP (polyvinylphenol), and
is 250 nm thick, and again applied by spin coating. A
second layer of PANI serves as the gate, and part of it
is UV processed to become an insulator, just like the
bottom PANI.
In this practically room temperature process thermal is-
sues are not critical but understanding polymer solubilities
in solvents is of paramount importance. PTV solvent must
be chosen not to dissolve the PANI layer. PTV itself is
insoluble in most solvents, which makes it easy to choose
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 331]
MOS Transistor Fabrication
343
solvent for PVP. PVP, again, is highly crosslinked and not
soluble, so the second PANI layer spinning is easy. The
top gate has an additional role: it blocks UV radiation and
thus protects the PTV semiconductor from environmental
degradation.
Contact hole technology is completely unorthodox:
holes are pierced mechanically, and the top PANI
makes contact with the bottom PANI. Circuits with
300 transistors have been fabricated, with a maximum
operating frequency of 200 Hz. So polymer transistors
have to ﬁnd completely new markets because they will
never compete with silicon ICs.
26.7.3 Carbon nanotube FETs
Carbon nanotube (CNT) transistors will not be limited by
carrier mobility; in fact CNTs beat silicon, by a factor
of 10. This is true for individual tubes that have been
individually selected and contacted, but in a fashion not
worthy of production. The alternative approach uses ran-
dom CNT networks. These show mobilities similar to
polysilicon, in the range of 50 cm2/V-s. CNT growth is
still an art, and results from different research groups dif-
fer widely. CNT transistors on polymer substrates offer
ﬂexibility and transparency and in this respect they com-
pete with polymer TFTs. A schematic CNT-FET is shown
in Figure 26.23.
Both silicon wafers and polymer sheets are used as sub-
strates. Deposition methods for CNTs include wet meth-
ods like dielectrophoresis, spraying and spinning, as well
as high-temperature CVD methods. Aerosol deposition
enables deposition directly from a CVD reactor to poly-
mer substrates, and many other combination methods are
used: high-temperature deposition and transfer bonding
or stamping to a polymer substrate. A variety of surface
functionalization techniques have been tried to attach the
p++ silicon wafer
Pt electrode
CNT
SiO2
Figure 26.23
Bottom gate CNT transistor
tubes to the substrates. Gate dielectrics include traditional
thermal and CVD oxides, anodized alumina, ALD oxides
Al2O3 and TiO2, SAMs and parylene among others. Gate
oxide thicknesses have ranged from 2 to 900 nm. Contact
metallizations are usually made by noble metals, namely
gold, palladium and platinum. Passivation layers include
PECVD nitride, ALD alumina and polymers among oth-
ers. These devices are in the active research phase and no
commercial launches have yet been made.
26.8 Integrated Circuits
Transistors are at the core of ICs, and MOS transistors
are the most common ones. Enormous R&D effort over
the last 50 years has resulted in magniﬁcent strides in
MOSFET performance, with operating frequencies rising
from kilohertz to gigahertz and size shrinking from 30 μm
to 30 nm. Consequently MOS transistors have conquered
new application areas where they were initially thought
unusable, for example high-frequency operation. Bipolar
transistors, the topic of the next chapter, still offer some
advantages over MOSFETs, especially in combining high-
speed, low-noise and high-current-carrying capability.
Both MOSFETs and bipolars are just part of the story:
transistors have to be wired together to create circuits.
This used to be a minor ﬁnishing step in early ICs, but
today the 10 levels of metallization that connect the bil-
lion transistors need in fact more process steps than the
transistors themselves. A polymer TFT with 1000 transis-
tor circuits is to be considered as advanced, and research
is still centered on transistors, not on circuits.
26.9 Exercises
1. Where in CMOS could you ﬁnd the following sheet
resistances:
0.05 ohm/sq
0.5 ohm/sq
5 ohm/sq
50 ohm/sq
500 ohm/sq
5000 ohm/sq?
2. Silicon dioxide forms readily during Ta2O5 deposi-
tion because oxygen is present in all oxide deposi-
tion processes. What is the effective capacitance of
SiO2/Ta2O5 composite? (ε = 25 for Ta2O5, ε = 4 for
SiO2.)
3. Equivalent oxide thicknesses (EOTs) of 1.9, 2.3 and
3.1 nm have been measured for HfO2 ﬁlms 2, 4 and
8 nm thick, respectively. What is the interfacial SiO2
thickness when the dielectric constant of HfO2 is 20?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 332]
344
Introduction to Microfabrication
4. Gate oxide thickness in 1 μm CMOS is 20 nm. On
S/D areas it is thinned during gate poly plasma etch-
ing, but regrown during poly oxidation. Calculate the
oxide thickness under the following assumptions:
(a) poly etch rate 250 nm/min
(b) poly thickness 250 nm
(c) Si:SiO2 etch selectivity 20:1
(d) overetch time 20 s
(e) reoxidation at 900 ◦C for 10 min (dry).
5. Design fabrication processes for the DMOSFET and
UMOSFET shown below.
n+ substrate
n-epi
drain
polygate
p
n
source
n+ substrate
n-epi
drain
p
n
source
poly-
gate
Adapted from Baliga (2001)
6. Compare the area of CMOS inverters made by two
different lithography tools with a different mix of ca-
pabilities: (a) 4 μm resolution and 1 μm alignment;
(b) 4 μm resolution and 2 μm alignment.
7. Compare minimum CMOS inverter area for:
(a) a non-self-aligned Al gate
(b) a self-aligned polysilicon gate
keeping all other factors identical.
8. Design a fabrication process for the top gate TFT
shown below. Maximum process temperature is
350 ◦C.
200 nm
200 nm
75 nm
160 nm
480 nm
200 µm
AI
SiO2
µc-Si n+
Polysilicon
Insulaton layer:
Steel substrate
Spin-on glass + SiO2
Reproduced from Wu et al. (1999) by permission of
AIP
9. Design a fabrication process for the MOS-controlled
thyristor of Figure 14.6.
Simulator exercises:
10. Ion implantation of boron at 40 keV with a dose of
1013 cm−2 is done for CMOS p-well formation. The
wafers are 4 ohm-cm phosphorus doped. The well
depth (= position of pn junction) is designed to be
5 μm. What diffusion times/temperatures should be
used?
11. CMOS S/D implantation is made with arsenic
(50 keV, 5 × 1015 cm−2). The designed junction depth
is 0.4 μm. Find the implant activation conditions
when 40 nm of dry oxide forms during activation.
12. Shallow junctions are needed for advanced CMOS.
Compare B-implanted p+/n and As-implanted n+/p
shallow junctions (5 × 1015 cm−2 dose) when the
substrate doping level is 5 × 1017 cm−3.
13. Check your simulator for sheet resistances, junction
depths and ﬁlm thicknesses of the 5 μm CMOS pro-
cess. Make sure to select a proper cross-section for
your 1D simulation.
References and Related Reading
Appenzeller, J. (2008) Carbon nanotubes for high-performance
electronics – progress
and
prospect,
Proc.
IEEE,
96,
201–211.
Baliga, J. (2001) The future of power semiconductor device
technology, Proc. IEEE, 89, 822–832.
Brunco, D.P. et al. (2008) Germanium MOSFET devices:
advances in materials understanding, process development
and electrical performance, J. Electrochem. Soc., 155,
H552–H561.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 333]
MOS Transistor Fabrication
345
Burghard, M., H. Klauk and K. Kern (2009) Carbon-based
ﬁeld-effect transistors for nanoelectronics, Adv. Mater., 21,
2586–2600.
Chabinyc, M.L. et al. (2005) Printing methods and mate-
rials for large-area electronic devices, Proc. IEEE, 93,
1491–1499.
Chesboro, D.G. et al. (1995) Overview of gate linewidth con-
trol in the manufacture of CMOS logic chips, IBM J. Res.
Dev., 39, 189.
DiBenedetto, S.A. et al. (2009) Molecular self-assembled
monolayers and multilayers for organic and unconventional
inorganic thin-ﬁlm transistor applications, Adv. Mater., 21,
1407–1433.
Feili, D. et al. (2006) Flexible organic ﬁeld effect transistors
for biomedical microimplants using polyimide and parylene
C as substrate and insulator layers, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
16, 1555–1561.
Flexible electronics (2005), Proc. IEEE, 93, August, special
issue.
Gleskova,
H.
et al.
(2001)
150 ◦C
amorphous
silicon
thin-ﬁlm transistor technology for polyimide substrates, J.
Electrochem. Soc., 148, G370.
Goettling, S., B. Diehm and N. Fruehauf (2008) Active ma-
trix OTFT display with anodized gate dielectric, J. Display
Technol., 4, 300–303.
Gottlob, H.D.B. et al. (2006) Scalable gate ﬁrst process for
silicon on insulator metal oxide semiconductor ﬁeld effect
transistors with epitaxial high-kdielectrics, J. Vac. Sci. Tech-
nol., B24, 710–714.
Hattori, T. (ed.) (1998) Ultraclean Surface Processing of Sil-
icon Wafers, Springer.
Hori, T. and T. Sugano (eds) (1997) Gate Dielectrics and
MOS ULSIs: Principles, Technologies and Applications,
Springer.
Hosono, H. (2007) Recent progress in transparent oxide
semiconductors: materials and device application, Thin
Solid Films, 515, 6000–6014.
Huff, H.R. and D.C. Gilmer (eds) (2004) High Dielectric Con-
stant Materials: VLSI MOSFET Application, Springer.
Kahng, D. (1976) A historical perspective on the development
of MOS transistors and related devices, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, 23, 655.
Kukli, K. et al. (2007) Atomic layer deposition of ZrO2 and
HfO2 on deep trenched and planar silicon, Microelectron.
Eng., 84, 2010–2013.
Leising, G. et al. (2006) Nanoimprinted devices for integrated
organic electronics, Microelectron. Eng., 83, 831–838.
Liu, R. (1996) Metallization, in C.Y. Chang and S.M. Sze (eds),
ULSI Technology, McGraw-Hill.
Locquet, J.P. et al. (2006) High-Kdielectrics for the gate stack,
J. Appl. Phys., 100, 051610.
Matters, M. et al. (1999) Organic ﬁeld effect transistors and
all-polymer integrated circuits, Opt. Mater., 12, 189–197.
Nicollian, E.H. and J.R. Brews (2002) MOS Physics and Tech-
nology, Wiley.
Parent, D. et al. (2005) Improvements to a microelectronic
design and fabrication course, IEEE Trans. Educ., 48,
497–502.
Plummer, J.D., M.D. Deal and P.B. Grifﬁn (2000) Silicon
VLSI Technology, Prentice Hall.
Polymer electronics (2009) Proc. IEEE, 97, October, special
issue.
Quirk, M. and J. Serda (2000) Semiconductor Manufacturing
Technology, Prentice Hall.
Stinson, M. and C.M. Osburn (1991) Effects of ion implan-
tation on deep-submicrometer, drain-engineered MOSFET
technologies, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 38, 487.
Wolf, S. (1990) Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Vol. 2,
Process Integration, Lattice Press.
Wolf, S. (1995) Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Vol. 3,
The Submicron MOSFET, Lattice Press.
Wu, M. et al. (1999) High electron mobility polycrystalline sil-
icon thin-ﬁlm transistors on steel-foil substrates, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 75, 2244.
Zavodchikova, M.Y. et al. (2009) Carbon nanotube thin ﬁlm
transistors based on aerosol methods, Nanotechnology, 20,
085201.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 334]
27
Bipolar Transistors
Both transistors and integrated circuits were initially made
by bipolar technologies. The MOS transistor was con-
ceived and patented in the 1920s, well before the bipolar
transistor (1947), but the MOS transistor was not real-
ized until 1960. Bipolar transistors gradually lost their
competitiveness to MOS in the 1960s, but they are still
used in many applications where special combinations of
high speed, low noise and high current-carrying capability
are needed.
Bipolar
transistors
are
traditionally fabricated
on
<111>. Early epitaxial growth techniques made use of
miscut <111> wafers (Figure 4.10) in order to nucleate
silicon better. There is no fundamental reason why
bipolars could not be fabricated on <100>, and, in fact,
BiCMOS circuits which have both bipolar and MOS
transistors are fabricated on <100> wafers. This is done
to optimize the quality of MOS gate oxide: its quality is
better on <100> -orientated silicon. This has to do with
the arrangement of atoms on the silicon surface, and the
resulting Si–O bonds and their spatial restrictions.
Bipolar transistors are vertical devices, that is currents
are transported perpendicularly to the wafer surface,
whereas
MOS
transistors
are
lateral
devices
with
currents parallel to the wafer surface. The standard
buried collector (SBC) bipolar transistor is shown in
Figure 27.1. It exempliﬁes the importance of epitaxy and
diffusions in bipolar fabrication.
27.1 Fabrication Process of SBC
Bipolar Transistor
Bipolar transistor fabrication was already touched upon
in Chapter 14 where the UV photodiode process was de-
scribed (Figure 14.3). A more detailed outline of the SBC
process is given below. Before that a short excursion to
discuss epitaxy on processed wafers is undertaken.
guard ring
emitter
base
guard ring
collector
contact
p-substrate
n+ buried layer (sub-collector)
n+
p+
p+
p
n
n-epi
Figure 27.1
Standard buried collector (SBC) bipolar tran-
sistor: n-epitaxial layer on p-substrate (note that diffusions
would really be much wider laterally
Buried layers are formed by either ion implantation or
thermal diffusion. Oxide acts as a mask for thermal
diffusion, but oxide is involved in the implanted process
as well: during implant annealing a thin thermal oxide
is grown to prevent dopant outdiffusion. Before epitaxy
this oxide has to be removed. As a consequence, a step is
formed on the wafer surface, and this can cause a pattern
shift and distortion in the growing epitaxial layers (it can
also cause growth defects if oxide removal is incomplete,
or if implant damage is not fully annealed). When the
epitaxial ﬁlm growth from the edges of a pattern are in
the same direction, patterns shift laterally. Structures can
experience a shift in one direction and distortion in the
direction orthogonal to the shift. In the extreme case the
epitaxial layer “planarizes” patterns in what is known
as washout. Alignment problems will be encountered in
all cases.
Buried layers are sources of dopants, and autodoping
from buried layers must be considered. An isolated heav-
ily doped region can dope areas many millimeters away
in the downstream direction of the epitaxial gas ﬂow.
When buried layers are tightly and uniformly spaced,
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 335]
348
Introduction to Microfabrication
n+ buried layer (sub-collector)
n+ buried layer (sub-collector)
n+ buried layer (sub-collector)
p+ guard  n+ contact
ring
p+ guard
p-substrate
(a)
(b)
(c)
p-substrate
p-substrate
n-epi
n-epilayer
(d)
p-substrate
p-base
n+ buried layer (sub-collector)
n+
p+
p+
(e)
p-substrate
p
n
n+ buried layer (sub-collector)
n+
p+
p+
Figure 27.2
(a) Mask 1: buried layer formation by antimony ion implantation. (b) Growth of epitaxial phosphorus-
doped n-type layer. (c) Masks 2 and 3: p+ guard ring and n+ subcollector contact diffusions: lateral spreading of
diffusion is approximately equal to epilayer thickness. (d) Mask 4: ion implantation for base. (e) Mask 5: ion implantation
for emitter
autodoping non-uniformity is reduced, but the change in
doping level must be accounted for. Buried layers are
heavily doped because their role is to minimize collector
resistance. Heavy doping will change the lattice constant
slightly, and there is a danger of misﬁt dislocations. Epi-
taxial growth procedures (to be discussed in Chapter 34),
the gases used and the epitaxial equipment result in dif-
ferent degrees of shift, distortion and autodoping.
There are many bipolar technologies, but we will dis-
cuss a technology known as SBC bipolar which has been
widely used for decades, and even though current bipolars
do not immediately look like it, they share many of the
SBC basic features.
The starting wafer is a lightly doped p-type wafer
(Figure 27.2). Photomask 1 deﬁnes the area of the buried
collector. This buried layer (subcollector) is doped to
high concentration either by ion implantation or by fur-
nace diffusion. If implantation is done, an annealing step
must be done to remove damage and recover a perfect
silicon surface for epitaxy. Antimony is often used as the
buried layer dopant because of its low vapor pressure and
consequently low evaporative losses during the subsequ-
ent epitaxial growth step.
Wafer cleaning after the buried collector is crucially
important for the success of epitaxy. A lightly doped n-
type layer is deposited on the wafer. Phosphine (PH3) gas
dopes the epilayer n-type during growth. It is addition-
ally doped by outdiffusion from the buried layer (recall
Figure 6.9).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 336]
Bipolar Transistors
349
Table 27.1
Bipolar transistors, three generations/technologies. Adapted from Muller and
Kamins (1986)
Layers (dopants)
Amplifying
Switching
Switching
junction isolated
junction isolated
oxide isolated
Substrate (B)
Resistivity (ohm-cm)
10
10
5
Orientation
(111)
(111)
(111)
Buried layer (Sb/As)
Rs (ohm/sq)
20
20
30
Updiffusion (μm)
2.5
1.4
0.3
Epitaxial ﬁlm (P)
Thickness (μm)
10
3
1.2
Resistivity (ohm-cm)
1
0.3–0.8
0.3–0.8
Base (B)
Rs (ohm/sq)
100
200
600
Diffusion depth (μm)
3.25
1.3
0.5
Emitter (P/As)
Rs (ohm/sq)
5
12
30
Diffusion depth (μm)
2.5
0.8
0.25
Photomask 2 deﬁnes the guard rings which isolate
neighboring collectors by reverse-biased pn junctions.
Guard rings are formed by boron ion implantation or
diffusion. Photomask 3 deﬁnes n+ contact diffusion
(known as plug or sinker). Phosphorus is implanted.
Implantation depths are about 200 nm only, whereas the
epitaxial layer thickness can be anything up to 10 μm.
Both p- and n-type dopants are driven to design depth by
a thermal diffusion step, at very high temperatures, up
to 1200 ◦C. Deep diffusions must be done early in the
process because they require the highest thermal load.
A lot of the silicon area is used for device isolation in
SBC: the sideways diffusion distance of the p+ guard
ring is equal to the epitaxial layer thickness because
diffusion is an isotropic process. The buried collector will
experience updiffusion: a micrometer or two depending
on the exact conditions during these diffusions.
Photomask 4 deﬁnes base areas. Ion implantation is
used to introduce the dopants onto the wafer because it
offers better control of doping concentration. It is crucial
to anneal implant damage away quickly so that base width
is controlled by thermal diffusion, not transient enhanced
diffusion. It is customary to add to the process an extra
step which will ensure a shallow, high doping area for
good electrical contact to the p-base.
The emitter is deﬁned by photomask 5. Emitter implan-
tation and anneal are critical for device speed. Base transit
time depends on base width, which is determined by both
the base and emitter diffusions (transistor speed depends
on capacitive charging as well, not just on base transit
time). Oxides which have served as diffusion masks are
etched away and new thermal oxide is grown. The re-
maining process steps for contacts holes and metallization
are identical to those in MOS fabrication, Figures 26.8
and 26.9.
Contacts to diffusions are deﬁned by using mask 6. Ox-
ide etching is performed either by BHF or by plasma. Af-
ter photoresist stripping and cleaning, aluminum is sput-
tered to provide electrical connections. Lithography step 7
deﬁnes aluminum wire patterns. After aluminum etching
and photoresist stripping, a PECVD oxide and/or nitride
passivation layer is deposited. The last mask (8) deﬁnes
bonding pad openings in the passivation layer. Then, the
wafer is ready for testing.
27.2 Advanced Bipolar Structures
Bipolar transistor scaling is not as straightforward as in
the case of MOS and the number of transistors per chip
is not the main driving force for bipolar technologies,
but rather performance. Two different aspects of bipolar
scaling will be discussed brieﬂy: vertical scaling, which
concentrates on base and emitter structures; and lateral
scaling, which is related to isolation between transistors.
Vertical scaling is related to transistor speed via base
transit time: a thin base equals faster operation. If the ther-
mal budget can be reduced, less diffusion will take place,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 337]
350
Introduction to Microfabrication
enabling base scaling to the 100 nm range, as opposed to
micrometers in SBC transistors.
Lateral scaling is related to transistor speed too,
because advanced isolation structures eliminate junction
capacitances and allow faster switching. Trench isolation
is used in advanced bipolars, as in MOS, but in bipolar
technology the trenches need to be deeper, therefore the
technology is dubbed DTI, for deep trench isolation.
27.2.1 Polyemitter bipolar transistor
Base width is the difference of two diffusion depths:
both base and emitter diffusion must be considered. A
general strategy is to eliminate high-temperature steps.
Using polysilicon as an emitter, less silicon is consumed
in making the emitter. Dopants diffuse out of the heavily
doped polysilicon emitter and reach just the very top layer
of single crystal silicon, ensuring electrical continuity
between the polysilicon and single crystal silicon. This
approach has a number of beneﬁts: the single crystal
silicon emitter will not be implanted, therefore defects
from implantation, and transient enhanced diffusion, are
eliminated. Elimination of implant annealing reduces
the high-temperature steps and unwanted base diffusion.
The polyemitter also eliminates the danger of aluminum
spiking: if the emitter is very thin, aluminum might
spike through it, destroying the device (recall Figure
7.9). Polysilicon 200 nm thick, for example, between
the aluminum and emitter/base junction, eliminates the
aluminum spiking problem.
27.2.2 Self-aligned polyemitter bipolar transistor
Bipolar
transistor
fabrication
can
utilize
the
same
self-alignment principles as CMOS. One of the many
self-aligned polysilicon emitter processes is presented in
Figure 27.3. It employs self-alignment to the maximum,
with three implants self-aligned to each other.
The thick (600 nm) recessed LOCOS isolation oxide is
made ﬁrst. A thin pad oxide (10 nm) is grown, followed
by 75 nm LPCVD nitride. After nitride etching, a second
LOCOS oxide is grown, this time 200 nm thick. The LO-
COS nitride is not removed after ﬁeld oxidation. Instead,
polysilicon spacers are formed on nitride by conformal
LPCVD polysilicon deposition and anisotropic etching
in chlorine plasma. Boron implantation is carried out to
form a heavily doped external base (p++), with energy
high enough to penetrate the 200 nm thick LOCOS oxide.
Polysilicon spacers are etched away, with a high selectiv-
ity against oxide and nitride. Another boron implantation
forms a link (p+) between the external and intrinsic base.
The p+ and p++ areas are self-aligned to each other like
the source/drain and source/drain extension in a LDD
MOS. Nitride is etched away in CF4 plasma, selectively
against oxide. The oxide beneath the nitride protects sin-
gle crystal silicon from being etched by ﬂuorine. Oxide is
then removed selectively against silicon in HF. The oxide
has, of course, also a role as a stress-relief layer in the
LOCOS structure. The third boron implantation forms the
shallow active base. Because it is done last, it experiences
the least thermal load and consequently least diffusion.
LPCVD polysilicon is deposited for the emitter. It is
heavily phosphorus doped by ion implantation. The an-
neal drives phosphorus dopants from the n+ polysilicon
emitter into single crystalline silicon. The emitter reaches
into the single crystal silicon only to a depth of a few
tens of nanometers. Metallization of this transistor is left
as exercise.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Nitride
p++
p++
n
B
Nitride
p++
p++
n
B
p+
p+
p++
n
p
B
p+
p++
p+
n+–Poly
n
p
p++
p+
p++
n+
p+
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
Figure 27.3
Self-aligned single poly bipolar transistor with n+ polyemitter and base with p++/p+/p areas. Reproduced
from Chen et al. (1988) by permission of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 338]
Bipolar Transistors
351
27.2.3 Self-aligned double poly bipolar transistor
Phosphorus-doped polysilicon can act as a diffusion sou-
rce for the emitter, and correspondingly boron-doped poly
can act as a doping source for the p-base. This double poly
process offers self-alignment as well, but differently from
the previous example. The process ﬂow is shown below
and the resulting device in Figure 27.4.
Process ﬂow for self-aligned double poly
bipolar transistor
Process step
Comments
Base poly deposition
Boron-doped LPCVD
poly, 200 nm
CVD oxide deposition
Thickness 200 nm
Lithography
Non-critical alignment
Etching of CVD
oxide/poly stack
Need to change etch
chemistry
Base link diffusion (p+)
Doped poly acts as solid
source
Boron implantation
Intrinsic base doping
Intrinsic base diffusion
Damage anneal and
activation
CVD oxide 2 deposition
Conformal
Oxide spacer etching
Anisotropic, selective
against silicon
Emitter poly deposition
In situ phosphorus doping
Emitter outdiffusion
Single crystal silicon
doped
emitter poly
n-substrate
p+ link base
base poly
oxide
oxide spacer
n-emitter
intrinsic base
Figure 27.4
Double poly self-aligned bipolar transistor:
link base and emitter in single crystal silicon are doped by
the p+ and n+ polysilicon layers, respectively
The link base doping level is independent of intrinsic
base doping. The former can now be doped to mini-
mize resistance. The link base has to be in electrical
contact with the intrinsic base, and lateral diffusion is
the desired effect. CVD oxide is needed on top of base
poly because it will insulate the base link poly and emit-
ter poly later on. Etching a double layer stack of oxide
(with ﬂuorine) and poly (with chlorine) adds complex-
ity. Etching base poly leads to some loss of underlying
single crystal silicon, because there is no etch selectiv-
ity between the polysilicon and single crystal silicon. But
the intrinsic base has not yet been made, so no harm
done. The intrinsic base implant dose, energy and an-
nealing are optimized irrespective of link base properties.
The thickness of the CVD oxide spacer determines the
lateral distance between the link base and intrinsic base.
This can be made very small because no lithography is
involved. Spacer etching must be highly selective against
silicon, because the intrinsic base has now been done,
and if silicon is consumed in spacer etching, the intrin-
sic base will be thinned. Emitter poly is doped in situ
in order to reduce the thermal budget: the poly LPCVD
temperature is about 600 ◦C, compared to about 950 ◦C
for poly doping by thermal diffusion or implantation an-
nealing. The emitter will be automatically aligned to the
base, too.
27.3 Lateral Isolation
In SBC bipolar devices are isolated from each other by
guard ring diffusions (Figure 27.1). The diffusion depth
has to be equal to the epilayer thickness, and guard rings
take up a lot of area. The LOCOS isolation shown in
Figure 27.3 becomes possible when epilayer thicknesses
become similar to thermal oxide thicknesses (a microm-
eter). Oxide isolation improves not only area usage
but also transistor speed because sidewall capacitances
are minimized.
Trench isolation, which is even more area efﬁcient
than LOCOS, is used for high-performance bipolars. In
bipolar technology deep trenches of 5 μm are typical, and
the technology is called DTI, for deep trench isolation.
CMOS trench isolation (trenches about 0.3 μm deep;
Figure 26.12) are aptly called STI, for shallow trench
isolation. Area usage for isolation becomes independent
of epilayer thickness, limited only by lithography and
trench etching. Trench ﬁlling (Figure 11.10) is usually
done in two steps: a thin liner is grown/deposited
ﬁrst, followed by the ﬁlling material. For instance,
thermal oxidation forms the liner, and TEOS or undoped
polysilicon is used to ﬁll the trench. One variant of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 339]
352
Introduction to Microfabrication
Polysilicon-filled trench
SIC = Selectively Ion-implanted Collector
n+ buried layer
1 µm
n+
Poly
plug
SIC
Oxide
Oxide
Nitride
As-implanted
poly
B-doped
poly
Tungsten
plug
B
B
1st AI wire
E
C
Figure 27.5
Deep trench isolation (DTI) bipolar. Repro-
duced from Ugajin (1995) by permission of IEEE
many trench isolated bipolar transistors is shown in
Figure 27.5. It makes use of four polysilicon layers: for
trench ﬁlling, link base doping, the emitter and buried
layer contact plugs. Some of these poly layers can be
used as resistors in analog devices.
27.4 BiCMOS Technology
BiCMOS tries to combine the best of both bipolar and
CMOS: high speed, low noise and high current-carrying
capacity of the former with the integration density and
low power consumption of the latter. BiCMOS has been
approached from both directions: taking a full-blooded
bipolar process and adding CMOS to it, or taking CMOS
as a starting point and adding process modules to create
bipolar transistors. The latter approach is more prevalent
but often fails to take advantage of the bipolars’ best fea-
tures. Unfortunately, the cost would rise too much if all
features of both processes were combined; some perfor-
mance tradeoff has to be accepted.
In the BiCMOS shown in Figure 27.6 an n+ doping step
is used to form both NMOS source/drain areas and bipolar
emitters and collector contacts; similarly, a p+ doping step
creates both PMOS S/D and bipolar base contacts. Only
the p-base diffusion step is needed in addition to standard
CMOS steps. Elimination of the buried layer and epitaxy
lead to an increase in collector resistance and lower op-
erating frequency for bipolars, but the fabrication process
is greatly simpliﬁed.
Heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs) involve SiGe
epitaxy to create a heterojunction of Si–SiGe. BiCMOS
can take advantage of HBT structure too, and in the pro-
cess ﬂow the HBT BiCMOS process is based on an analog
CMOS process with resistors, capacitors and inductors.
Four photomasks are added to the CMOS process to create
bipolar elements: buried collector doping, emitter window
opening, emitter poly patterning and base poly pattern-
ing. Changing the germanium content in SiGe affects the
band gap, and thus offers possibilities for tailoring bipo-
lar transistor performance. Epitaxy of SiGe is demanding
because it must be carried out at low temperature, and
in situ wafer cleaning is essential for its success. The re-
sulting BiCMOS is shown in Figure 27.7 and the dopant
depth proﬁle in Figure 27.8.
N+
P+
P+
NPN bipolar
N+
emitter
P+ base
contact
N+ collector
contact
N+
NMOS
PMOS
N-well
P-EPI
P-base
N-well (collector)
P+ substrate
Figure 27.6
Simple BiCMOS technology: triple diffused-type bipolar transistor added to a CMOS process with minimal
extra steps: only p-base diffusion mask is added to CMOS process ﬂow. Reproduced from Alvarez (1989) by permission
of Kluwer
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 340]
Bipolar Transistors
353
NPN
NMOs
PMOs
P-sub
P-well
N-well
STI
Gate poly
Silicide
Silicide
Silicide
STI
STI
STI
Gate poly
Base poly Emitter poly
SiGe base
N-well (for bipolar)
N+
N+
P+
P+
Figure 27.7
CMOS process with SiGe HBTs added. Reproduced from Sato et al. (2003), copyright 2003, by permission
of IEEE
Process ﬂow for MOS-based SiGe HBT
BiCMOS
MOS
SiGe HBT
flow
additional modules
STI
wells
gate oxide
collector I/I
(mask #1)
gate poly
capacitor bottom
LDD I/I
NMOS S/D I/I
RTA
poly
window (#2)
SiGe epitaxy
emitter poly (#3)
base poly (#4)
PMOS S/D I/I
RTA
salicidation
metallization +MIM
As an alternative, BiCMOS process ﬂow that uses a
bipolar process as a starting point and adds CMOS steps
in between is also shown.
Process ﬂow for bipolar-based BiCMOS
n+ buried collector
n-epitaxy
STI
collector plug
DTI
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
bipolar collector
and isolation module
module
n- and p-well I/I
gate poly
S/D I/I
LDD low-dose I/I
⎫
⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎭
CMOS front-end
module
resistor poly
base poly
emitter window
SIC
emitter poly
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
bipolar
base/emitter
module
Ti-salicide
contact and W-plug
M1
MIM capacitor
M2
M3
M4
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
metallization
module
Bipolar, CMOS and metallization modules are kept
unchanged as far as possible, and brought together to
create BiCMOS.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 341]
354
Introduction to Microfabrication
0
200
400
P
2.5
0
5.0
7.5
10
As
Germanium (%)
Dopant Concentration (cm−3)
As
n+ emitter
n− collector
Xj (eb) = 35 nm
Wb (met) = 90 nm
p-SiGebase
poly
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
Ge
B
Depth (nm)
600
800
Figure 27.8
SiGe HBT doping proﬁle under the emitter
measured by SIMS. Reproduced from Cressler (2005b),
copyright 2005, by permission of IEEE
27.5 Cost of Integration
As a rule of thumb, the cost is directly related to the
number of photolithography steps. Evolution of a 13 pho-
tomask, 1 μm digital CMOS process into a 1 μm BiCMOS
process can be done in several ways. In its simplest form
only a base implant photomask is added. If true bipo-
lar performance is needed, a buried layer and epitaxy are
needed and the collector is made separately from the n-
well. If analog elements like resistors are required, the
mask count still increases, but this is true for both CMOS
and bipolars alike. With these additions the mask count
rises by 20–50%, and the cost similarly.
When transistors are ready, they have to be wired
together to create circuits. This is true for CMOS, bipolar
and other technologies. That will be the topic of the next
chapter. In the BiCMOS process of Figure 27.9 four
levels of metal are used, plus an additional polysilicon
layer for resistors and an extra dielectric ﬁlm for
metal–insulator–metal capacitors.
27.6 Exercises
1. SBC is pictured below. Calculate the minimum tran-
sistor area under the following assumptions:
• Minimum lithographic linewidth L is 3 μm, and it is
the width of E, C and B.
• Emitter is square; base length is 2× width, and col-
lector length is 3× width.
• Epilayer thickness is 5 μm.
• Buried layer updiffusion is 1 μm.
• Base diffusion depth is 1.5 μm.
• Emitter diffusion depth is 0.5 μm.
Figure 27.9
BiCMOS:
high-resistivity
SOI
substrate,
0.25 μm NMOS and 0.3 μm PMOS, SiGe bipolars, polysil-
icon resistors, and MIM capacitors realized using metal 1
and metal 2. Reproduced from Washio (2003), copyright
2003, by permission of IEEE
E
B
C
2. What will be the minimum transistor area if the p+
guard ring isolation of a SBC transistor is replaced by
deep trench isolation?
3. What is the area of the collector diffusion isolation
(CDI) transistor shown below when the same baseline
process as described above is used?
n+
E
B
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 342]
Bipolar Transistors
355
4. Perform front-end simulations to obtain the sheet resis-
tances and diffusion depths of switching of the junction
isolated transistor described in Table 26.1.
5. Design metallization process steps for the polyemit-
ter transistor. This is the same device as shown in
Figure 27.3.
Refractory metal
n+−Poly
SiO2
p++
p++
p+
p+
n+
p
Base metal
n
Reproduced from Chen et al. (1988) by permission
of IEEE
6. Analyze the main fabrication steps of the bipolar
transistor shown below.
W
CVD-SiO2
CVD-SiO2
Link base
Intrinsic base
BF2
Poly-Si
Locos
In situ boron-doped poly- Si
Emitter
In situ phosphorus-doped poly-Si
Reproduced from Onai et al. (1997) by permission
of IEEE
References and Related Reading
Alvarez, A.R. (ed.) (1989) BiCMOS Technology, Kluwer.
Chen, T.-C. et al. (1988) An advanced bipolar transistor with
self-aligned ion-implanted base and W/poly emitter, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, 35, 1322.
Cressler, J.D. (ed.) (2005a) Silicon Heterostructure Hand-
book: Materials, Fabrication, Devices, Circuits and Ap-
plications of SiGe and Si Strained-Layer Epitaxy, CRC
Press
Cressler, J.D. (2005b) On the potential of SiGe HBTs for ex-
treme environment electronics, Proc. IEEE, 93, 1559–1582.
Lane, W.S. and G.T. Wrixon (1989) The design of thin-ﬁlm
polysilicon resistors for analog integrated circuits, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, 36, 738.
Muller, R.S. and T.I. Kamins (1986) Device Electronics for
Integrated Circuits, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Onai, T. et al. (1997) 12ps ECL using low-base-resistance
Si bipolar transistor by self-aligned metal/IDP technology,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 44, 2207–2212, ﬁg. 2.
Reisch, M. (2003) High-Frequency Bipolar Transistors,
Springer.
Sato, F. et al. (2003) A 0.18 μm RF SiGe BiCMOS technology
with collector-epi-free double-poly self-aligned HBTs, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, 50, 669.
Ugajin, M. (1995) Very-high ft and fmax silicon bipolar tran-
sistors using ultra-high performance super self-aligned pro-
cess technology for low energy and ultra-high-speed LSI’s,
IEDM’95, p. 735.
Washio, K. (2003) SiGe HBT and BiCMOS technologies for
optical transmission and wireless communication systems,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 5, 656.
Wolf, S. (1990) Processing for the VLSI Era, Vol. 2, Process
Integration, Lattice Press.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 343]
28
Multilevel Metallization
Multiple levels of metallization offer possibilities for
circuit designers to route signals over transistors, and thus
to reduce the area needed for wiring. We will ﬁrst discuss
multilevel
metallization
for
submicron
technologies
(0.8, 0.5, 0.35 and 0.25 μm) based on aluminum wiring
with tungsten via plugs (Figure 28.1). The intermetal
M5
V4
M4
V3
V2
V1
M2
M1
M0
PC
CA
M3
Figure 28.1
Cross-sectional view of six-level metal struc-
ture (M0 is metal zero). Reproduced from Koburger et al.
(1995) by permission of IBM
dielectric is oxide, and it is planarized by CMP. We will
then delve into copper metallization which emerged in
the late 1990s. There CMP is used too, but this time to
polish copper. While transistors get speedier the smaller
they are, metallization behaves differently: RC time de-
lays increase with downscaling because thinner dielectrics
increase capacitance and narrower and thinner wires have
higher resistances.
28.1 Two-Level Metallization
Two-level metallizations are extensions of one-level met-
allizations, with additional dielectric and metal ﬁlms and
only minor conceptual differences. The process continues
after ﬁrst metal as follows:
Process ﬂow for two-level metallization
Intermetal dielectric deposition
PECVD oxide
Planarization
Spin-on-glass
with etchback
Via hole lithography and etching
CHF3 plasma
oxide etch
Second metal deposition
TiW/Al
sputtering
Second metal lithography and
etching
Cl2-based plasma
etching
Passivation
PECVD nitride
Bonding pad patterning (litho
and etch)
CF4 plasma etch
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 344]
358
Introduction to Microfabrication
Contact hole etching of oxide against silicon demands
a highly selective etch process because both oxide and
silicon are etched by ﬂuorine. Contacts between metal
levels (known as via holes) are easier from an etching
point of view: ﬂuorine-based oxide etching will stop auto-
matically once aluminum is reached. Because there is
metal on the wafer, cleaning solutions after via etching
are limited. The second-metal step coverage in the via
hole is often critical. Fortunately, via holes are larger
than contact holes, and aspect ratios are therefore smaller.
There are a number of practical aspects in two-level
metal processes which demand attention. Each additional
(PE)CVD step adds to thermal loads, ﬁlm stresses and
plasma damage. Aluminum lines experience thermal
expansion and are under compressive stresses. These
stresses are relaxed by hillocks: protrusions of aluminum
sticking out. Hillocks can sometimes be micrometers high.
Two-level metallization cannot be extended to three
levels because the topography of the wafer becomes more
pronounced after each level, and the gap ﬁlling capabil-
ity of (PE)CVD dielectric deposition as well as sputtering
step coverage in via holes will reach their limits. Pla-
narization helps, but it is no panacea: the surface may
become ﬂat, which eliminates optical lithography depth-
of-focus problems, but, as shown below in Figure 28.2,
it creates problems in via hole etching and sputtering be-
cause holes will be of different depth.
All devices need metallization, and logic circuits usu-
ally require the most complex routing, while memories
sufﬁce with three levels of metal. Even superconducting
devices require multiple levels of metallization if they are
complex logic circuits (Figure 28.3).
28.1.1 Spin-coated inorganic ﬁlms
Spin-on-glasses (SOGs) are silicon-containing polymers
which can be spun and then cured to produce a silicon
dioxide-like glassy material (they are sometimes known
as SODs, for spin-on dielectrics, which includes polymers,
too). Numerous commercial formulations for SOGs exist,
adjusted for molecular weight, viscosity and ﬁnal ﬁlm
properties for speciﬁc applications. Two basic types of
SOGs are the organic and inorganic. The inorganic SOGs
are silicate based and the organics are siloxane based.
Upon curing the reaction at about 400 ◦C silicate SOGs
turn into an oxide-like material which is thermally stable
and does not absorb water accordingly. They are, how-
ever, subject to volume shrinkage during curing, leading
to high stresses (∼400 MPa). This limits silicate SOGs to
thin layers, about 100–200 nm. Multiple coating/curing
cycles can be used to build up thickness, at the cost of
quite an increase in the number of process steps. Adding
phosphorus to SOG introduces changes similar to the
phosphorus alloying of CVD oxide ﬁlms. The resulting
ﬁlms are softer and exhibit less shrinkage, and are bet-
ter in ﬁlling gaps. However, water absorption increases,
which results in less stable ﬁlms. The gap-ﬁlling capabil-
ity of SOGs is related to viscosity: low viscosity equals
good gap ﬁll, but, unfortunately, it is correlated with high
shrinkage, too.
Organic SOGs based on siloxane (Figure 28.4) do not
result in pure SiO2-like material, but contain carbon even
after curing. By tailoring the carbon content, the material
properties can be modiﬁed for lower stress (∼150 MPa)
and consequently thicker ﬁlms. Siloxane ﬁlms are, how-
ever, polymer-like in their thermal stability, and 400 ◦C
is a practical upper limit.
Planarized
oxide
Active area
Poly-Si
Poly-Si
Interlevel
Interlevel
M1
M1
M1
M1
M1
M1
7000 Å
3000 Å
8000 Å
4000 Å
9000 Å
13000 Å
Field oxide
N+ OR P+
Figure 28.2
Variable via depth results from planarization. Reproduced from Brown (1986) by permission of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 345]
Multilevel Metallization
359
Wire 2
Wire 3
Wire 1
Wire 2
Ground Plane
Josephson Junction
Legend:
Nb
SiO2
Nb2O5
Junction Anodization
MoNx5W/sq. Resistor
Mo/ Al 0.15W/sq. Resistor
Silicon Wafer
Figure 28.3
Multilevel metallization of a superconducting IC. Reproduced from Abelson and Kerber (2004), copyright
2004, by permission of IEEE
CH3
Si
HO
CH3
CH3
Si
O
CH3
x
CH3
Si
O
CH3
O
Si
O
CH3
O
Si
CH3
O
OH
Si
H3C
CH3
O
Si
OC2H5
CH3
X    100
~~
Figure 28.4
Structure of siloxane
28.2 Planarized Multilevel
Metallization
True multilevel metallization starts at three levels of
metal. Historically this occurred in the late 1980s when
submicron CMOS technologies were introduced. In
0.25 μm technology up to six levels of metal are used in
ASICs and logic chips, three levels in memory chips. In
the 45 nm technology generation there can be 10 levels
of metal.
A fully planar structure can be created when contact and
via holes are ﬁlled by CVD tungsten, and excess tungsten
is removed, by etchback or by CMP (Figure 16.1). The
number of metal levels can be increased simply by re-
peating the process over and over again because all levels
are planar, Figure 28.1.
Back-end process integration differs from that of
front-end in the sense that the thermal budget concept
has a very different meaning. Whereas the front-end
thermal budget is about the temperature–diffusion rela-
tionship, the back-end thermal budget is about the
temperature–stress relation. For n-level metallization
there will be 2n steps at 300–400 ◦C (for each layer
CVD tungsten and PECVD oxide steps), with room
temperature
steps
(etching,
spin
coating,
CMP)
in
between. Stress, strain, adhesion, hillocks, voids and
cracks have to be understood.
28.2.1 Contact/via plug
In order to get planarized metallization, CVD W-plug ﬁll
has been adopted. Because CVD-W has excellent step
coverage, the via hole will be completely ﬁlled. In order
to improve adhesion, a Ti/TiN adhesion layer is deposited
before tungsten. Excess metal is etched or polished away,
leaving a planar surface. The second metal (Ti/TiN/Al) is
then sputtered (Figure 28.5).
The SEM micrograph of Figure 28.6 shows the structure
of a planarized multilevel metallization scheme. The top
aluminum wiring levels are very planar. Tungsten has been
used for local interconnects (in the length scale ∼10 μm).
All dielectric layers have been etched away to reveal the
metallization for analysis (e.g., for failure analysis).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 346]
360
Introduction to Microfabrication
1st Al 
2nd Al 
W
Ti/TiN
ox
Figure 28.5
Aluminum bottom metal with Ti/TiN/W
contact
plug
after
etchback
(left)
and
with
second
Ti/TiN/aluminum metal layer (right)
Figure 28.6
Multilevel metallization with all dielectric
layers etched away. TiSi2/poly gates, tungsten plugs and
local wires, Al global wires. Reproduced from Mann et al.
(1995) by permission of IBM
When vias can be stacked on top of each other in a mul-
tilevel metallization scheme, a lot of area can be saved,
and freedom of wire routing increases. In Figure 28.6
tungsten plugs can be seen on top of each other. The top-
level plugs are somewhat larger than the bottom plugs,
ensuring overlap. Misalignment is still there, but because
the surfaces are planar, it does not lead to topography
build-up.
28.3 Copper Metallization
All ICs used aluminum for metallization till 1997, and
most still do, but copper was introduced into high-
performance applications from the 0.25 μm generation
on. Copper resistivity is clearly smaller than that of
aluminum, 1.8 vs. 3 mohm-cm, and like aluminum, it
is an exceptional material that thin ﬁlm resistivity can
be very close to bulk value. However, copper has many
drawbacks and limitations. It diffuses rapidly in both
silicon and silicon dioxide, and new barrier materials
have to be invented. Copper cannot be plasma etched,
so it has to be patterned by polishing (CMP). Copper is
an impurity that is harmful for silicon transistors, so the
whole process line has to be designed to prevent copper
from reaching silicon. This means that lithography,
etching,
CVD,
etc.,
are
duplicated
for
fabricating
front-end and back-end.
Whereas aluminum deposition is always by sputtering
and tungsten is by CVD, there are a number of copper
deposition methods available: namely, electroless, elec-
troplating, CVD and sputtering. Sputtering is ruled out
because of poor step coverage and inability to ﬁll holes,
but it can still be used to deposit a thin seed layer for
electrodeposition. Both CVD and electrodeposition meth-
ods can ﬁll the high aspect ratios encountered in deep
submicron devices.
To eliminate copper diffusion into oxide, one solution
is to use non-oxide dielectrics, like nitride or polymers,
but this is not without its problems. Nitride dielectric con-
stant is fairly high (εr ∼7) and polymers are not stable
enough. As a compromise, oxide dielectric layers with ni-
tride or carbide (SiC) barriers are used. These layers have
an advantage in that they act as etch and polish stop lay-
ers. The general issues of copper metallization are shown
in Figure 28.7, and cross-sectional electron microscope
views of a copper-ﬁlled via plug are shown in Figure 28.8.
Metallic barriers can be used to separate copper from
the dielectric. Much studied choices include TiN, W:N,
W:N:C, TaN and TaSiN. Metallic barriers are thin: for
90 nm technology the barriers need to be below 10 nm.
The resistivities of the barrier and plug are critical in the
100 nm range because the full beneﬁt of low-resistivity
copper cannot be realized if a high-resistivity barrier re-
duces the effective resistivity of the plug. Barrier de-
position is by for example ALD, which has excellent
conformality. Seed layer deposition requirements are not
as strict: thickness uniformity is not mandatory, only ﬁlm
continuity. With more and more layers and materials, the
number of materials interfaces is going up, and all these
interfaces must be characterized for stability, reactions,
diffusion, stresses, etc.
Polyimide is a very stable polymer and has been tried as
the intermetal dielectric in copper metallization. Copper
is clad in tantalum barriers and polyimide is protected by
nitride etch stop layers as shown in Figure 28.9. Copper
is completely clad by either tantalum or nitride and never
in contact with the polyimide. Contact to silicon is still
made by Ti/TiN/W plug, to prevent the danger of silicon
contamination.
CMP selectivity between copper and tantalum is very
high, which means that removal of tantalum leads to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 347]
Multilevel Metallization
361
General:
• low variation
• low particle generation
• large process window 
Barrier:
• t < 10 nm thick
•  r < 500 µW-cm
• Cl conc. < 2%
• unif. < 2%
• step coverage
   <90%
• rate > 3 nm/min 
Low-k:
• CMP compatible
• Tdepo < 400 °C
• adhesion on etch
  stopper
Copper seed
• t > 2 nm
• unif. < 2%
• step coverage
  ~100%
• rate > 10 nm/min
• growth and adhesion
  on etch stopper
Etch stopper:
• growth and adhesion
   on dielectric
• growth and adhesion
   on barrier
Figure 28.7
Copper–low-k metallization schematic for 90 nm technology. Adapted from Smith et al. (2002)
Figure 28.8
Copper via ﬁlling: left, with ALD TiN barrier; right, with ALD W:N:C barrier. Reproduced from Smith
et al. (2002), copyright 2002, by permission of Elsevier
long overpolish times (cf. long overetch times). CMP
non-idealities, dishing and erosion have to be analyzed.
Dishing is strongly linewidth dependent but rather
insensitive to pattern density, whereas oxide erosion is
very strongly pattern density dependent and only mildly
linewidth dependent, as shown in Figure 28.10. CMP
dishing and erosion in the 20 nm range are targeted for
100 nm technologies.
28.4 Dual Damascene Metallization
Damascene metallization relies on etching via plugs in
oxide, ﬁlling those plugs with copper, with CMP for re-
moval of excess metal. In dual damascene this idea is
developed further. First, very thick oxide is deposited.
Then, two lithography and two etching steps deﬁne vias
and wires. Copper is then deposited and ﬁlls both the via
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 348]
362
Introduction to Microfabrication
Polyimide
Polyimide
ROX
Substrate
POLY
Oxide
n+
n+
CVD W
Cu
Cu
Ta
Si3N4
Si3N4
Si3N4
Figure 28.9
Cu/polyimide multilevel metallization with
Ta barriers, W plugs and silicon nitride polish stop layers.
Reproduced from Small and Pearson (1990) by permission
of IBM
600
500
400
300
200
100
0 0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Line width 
Line width 
Amount of dishing (nm)
(a)
300
200
100
0
Pattern density (%)
Pattern density (%)
(b)
Amount of erosion (nm)
2 µm
5 µm
10 µm
20 µm
50 µm
100 µm
5 µm
20 µm
50 µm
100 µm
200 µm
Figure 28.10
Dishing of copper and erosion of oxide.
Source: Steigerwald J. M., et al, Chemical–Mechanical Pla-
narization of Microelectronic Materials, © Wiley, 1997.
This material is used by permission of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
holes and the wires. CMP ﬁnishes the process as usual.
This sequence is shown in Figure 28.11.
Dual damascene introduces novel process integration
features. The thick dielectric consists of multiple layers:
namely, barriers/etch stops and the actual thicker ﬁlms
which ensure electrical insulation. It is possible to make
the vias and trenches in four different ways, as shown in
Figure 28.12:
1. Full via ﬁrst (etching through the thick dielectric).
2. Partial via ﬁrst (etching halfway).
3. Wire ﬁrst (etching halfway).
4. Partial wire ﬁrst (etching a hard mask only).
Full via ﬁrst (Figure 28.12a) is problematic because a
very deep via hole of high aspect ratio is produced in the
ﬁrst step, making second photoresist spinning difﬁcult.
Additionally, the bottom hard mask needs to tolerate two
etch steps: it is exposed at the end of the via etch and all
the time during the trench (wire) etch. One solution is to
protect the bottom of a via with undeveloped resist during
the second etch step.
In partial via ﬁrst (Figure 28.12b) via holes are etched
till mid etch stop layer in the ﬁrst step. Metal trench
etching is easier than in the full via ﬁrst approach. Mis-
alignment can cause a grave error in this structure: if the
wire trench is misaligned so much that the via is par-
tially photoresist covered, the area of metal contact will
be small and erratic.
The metal wire ﬁrst (Figure 28.12c) approach does not
need a top hard mask. Wires are etched down to the mid-
dle hard mask. The second lithography has to be done in a
recess, and lithography depth of focus may pose problems.
The partial metal wire ﬁrst (Figure 28.12d) approach
needs a top hard mask. In the ﬁrst step the top hard mask
is etched and resist is then stripped. The next lithography
step (for the via) can now be done on a practically planar
surface (this approach is used in DRIE MEMS regularly,
see Figure 21.17). After etching the top dielectric layer
with a resist mask, the resist is stripped, and the wire
trench and bottom half of the via are etched using
hard mask only. Misalignment in the via lithography
step can cause problems similar to “partial via ﬁrst”
described above.
28.5 Low-k Dielectrics
Dielectric constant (ε or k) can be reduced by modifying
oxides or by switching to other materials. With SiO2-
based dielectrics (with εr ≈4) there is an evolutionary
development down to about εr ≈2.7. The ﬁrst approach
is to deposit ﬂuorine-doped oxide by CVD. This will lead
to εr ≈3.6. Carbon doping with CH3 groups in silicon
dioxide, designated as SiOC:H, can bring the dielectric
constant down to about 2.7. The composition of SiOC:H
ﬁlms is typically 20–25 at. % Si, 30–40% O, 15% C and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 349]
Multilevel Metallization
363
Figure 28.11
Dual damascene metallization: left, two lithography and two etching steps deﬁne vias and wires in oxide;
middle, vias and wire trenches ﬁlled by metal in one deposition step; right, metal polishing yields a planar surface.
Courtesy Jorma Koskinen
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 28.12
Four possible dual damascene processes
with etch stop layers: (a) full via ﬁrst; (b) partial via ﬁrst;
(c) wire ﬁrst; (d) partial wire ﬁrst
20–40% H. These ﬁlms are well-known dense inorganic
materials, compatible with existing CVD tools, processes
and metrology.
Siloxanes and silsesquioxanes are common materials
from spin-on planarization. Methyl silsesquioxane (MSQ)
is attractive dielectric ﬁlm because its very low dielectric
constant of εr ≈2.6. In SOD planarization the spin ﬁlm
is most often etched away, but it can used as a permanent
part of the device. This leads to the whole new charac-
terization of siloxanes. For instance, during subsequent
sputtering steps outgassing from SODs can poison the
metal, leading to contact problems.
Switching to polymers is a discontinuous shift: it
requires a lot of work in materials science, process
technology, metrology, process integration, equipment
and reliability. For instance, adhesion and interface
stability with metals need to be assessed and etching
and polishing processes have to be developed. Sufﬁcient
mechanical strength of low-k ﬁlms is essential for suc-
cessful CMP. Fluoropolymers, aromatic hydrocarbons,
poly(arylene ethers), parylene and PTFE offer dielectric
constants down to εr ≈2.
Porous inorganic materials, with εr ≈2 are known as
ULKs, for ultralow k. Pores can be made by controlled
evaporation, nanophase separation or drying. Aerogels
and xerogels are dried silica, with over 90% air in them.
They promise further improvements in ε.
The ultimate dielectric is air (or vacuum) with εr ≈1.
There are some practical problems with air, however: the
mechanical strength is not very good, thermal conduc-
tivity is poor and long-term stability is questionable. In
spite of these drawbacks, gas-ﬁlled and vacuum dielectric
structures have been demonstrated.
A wide repertoire of measurements are needed to char-
acterize novel candidate materials (Table 28.1). PECVD
boron nitride was measured for some 15 properties (Table
7.2). New polymeric low-k materials need to be evaluated
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 350]
364
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 28.1
Characterization needs for new dielectrics
Parameter
Comment
CMP rate
Young’s modulus 1–10 GPa, high polish rates
Tg/Td
Glass transition/decomposition temperatures (about 450 ◦C)
Plasma resistance
Organic materials etched in oxygen plasma
Cleaning resistance
Photoresist removers and solvents
Shrinkage
Volume changes upon heat treatment as solvents evaporate
Adhesion
Scotch tape test is the ﬁrst hurdle
Outgassing
Even cured ﬁlms may release gases into sputtering vacuum
Porosity
Tightly controlled for reproducible ε
Pore size
Pores that are too big behave like pinholes
Shelf life
Decomposition during storage not unlike photoresists
Viscosity
Film thickness depends on viscosity (and spin speed)
Impurities
The (alkali) metals have to be measured
CTE
Thermal expansion of polymers highly variable
Loss tangent
Electrical losses at high frequencies must be understood
for 15 more parameters before they can be accepted in
manufacturing.
Modulated photoreﬂectance methods, already in use
in implant dose monitoring, are useful for multilayer
analysis when time-resolved mode is employed. A short
laser pulse heats the sample, which then expands locally,
giving off sound waves. Optical reﬂectivity changes due
to propagating sound waves are measured on the wafer
surface. Time-resolved measurements can distinguish
between
reﬂections
from
various
interfaces
in
the
sample, enabling multilayer measurement of both metals
and dielectrics.
CMP of soft and porous materials with Young’s
moduli in the 1–10 GPa range is difﬁcult because these
materials are mechanically weak. They are also subject to
peeling by shear forces, especially when multiple layers
of materials are present (and there can be tens of layers
in a multilevel structure). Polymeric abrasives have been
tried as replacements for silica and alumina for soft
material polishing. Cleaning remains a major problem for
low-k materials, after CMP cleaning, after etch cleaning
and photoresist strip. Many wet chemical cleaning
solutions are out of the questions because they penetrate
pores and cause swelling. Measurements of pore size and
porosity are needed for the reproducibility of ultralow-k
materials.
Various
methods
are
being
developed;
candidates include gas phase, optical, X-ray, positron and
neutron methods.
When new materials are introduced, they are evaluated
in several phases. Initial tests are carried out on planar
wafers using blanket ﬁlms. Basic physical and chemi-
cal characteristics are measured: namely, dielectric con-
stant, shrinkage, moisture absorption, uniformity of de-
position, blanket etching and polishing. Simple one-level
test structures are then applied to check patterning issues
(etch, strip) and interface stability under various process
steps (metallization, CMP, etch). Multilevel test structures
include electrical tests and more complex interaction tests
like etch and polish stop, adhesion during CMP, etc.
While thermal oxide serves as a reference material
when CVD oxides are evaluated, PECVD oxides serve as
references when low-k materials are developed. Leakage
current between neighboring lines, interline capacitance,
breakdown ﬁeld between copper lines, metal continuity,
metal bridging, line resistance uniformity, etc., are all
compared to oxide reference processes.
28.6 Metallization Scaling
In CMOS front-end scaling, the vertical parameters of
junction depth xj and oxide thickness tox are scaled to
smaller and smaller values, leading to improved tran-
sistor performance. In the back-end, however, scaling is
mostly detrimental. If metal lines are made thinner, the
resistivity increases and linewidth scaling works in the
same direction. If the dielectric thickness is scaled down,
the capacitance between metal layers increases, leading
to increased RC time delays. At 1 μm linewidths tran-
sistor delays are more signiﬁcant than wiring delays, but
the situation changes somewhere around 0.2 μm technol-
ogy, and below 100 nm wiring delays clearly dominate
transistor delays.
A simple model for back-end interconnect wire scaling
is shown in Figure 28.13 and the RC time delays are
described by
τ = RCL2
C = εWL
T
R = ρL
HW
(28.1)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 351]
Multilevel Metallization
365
L
H
T
W
Metal
Dielectric
Figure 28.13
Wire geometry for simple RC time delay
model
where L is line length and resistance R and capacitance
C are per unit length.
Scaled local connection lengths are given by L/n (n >
1) because smaller devices are closer to each other. Long-
distance connections do not scale, however, because chips
are not getting any smaller; quite the contrary, in fact,
because more and more functions are being crammed on
a chip. In our simple model we will assume constant line
length, L. Scaled capacitance and resistance are given by
C′ = ε(W/n)L
T/n
= C
(28.2)
R′ =
ρL
(H/N)(W/N) = n2R
(28.3)
RC time delay τ ′ is then given by
τ ′ = n2RC
(28.4)
Because scaling factor n is larger than unity, time delays
are increasing. When linewidths are scaled down, ﬁlm
thicknesses are scaled down, in order to keep aspect ratios
about the same, which is not an unreasonable assumption
since very tall but narrow metal lines would be difﬁcult
to make. And because chip sizes (L) are increasing, time
delays are bound to increase. Historical scaling trends are
listed in Table 28.2.
In order to battle RC time delay, aluminum (ρ ≈3
μohm-cm) has been replaced by copper (ρ ≈1.8 μohm-
cm), and silicon dioxide dielectrics (εr ≈4) have been
replaced by low-k dielectrics (1 < εr < 4).
In the era of 5 μm CMOS the front-end contributed
most of the process steps and most of the cost of process-
ing. The two levels of metal were a small ﬁnishing touch.
Today the back-end dominates both the number of steps
and costs. The number of metal levels (including passive
devices) is up to 12, and it is expected to increase to 14
by 2020.
Table 28.2
Back-end scaling trends
CMOS generation 0.35 μm 0.25 μm 0.18 μm 0.13 μm
Min. metal
linewidth (μm)
0.4
0.3
0.22
0.15
Min. space (μm)
0.6
0.45
0.33
0.25
Metal thickness
(μm)
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.4
Dielectric
thickness (μm)
1
0.84
0.70
0.6
Metal wire width and thickness increase for the upper
levels. While ﬁrst metal level M1 is very narrow and thin,
the successively higher levels of metal have more relaxed
design rules. Aspect ratios of metal lines do not change
appreciably: roughly 2:1 aspect ratios are common, and
this will not change in the foreseeable future.
One limitation becoming more acute is resistivity.
Ohm’s law is no longer valid for small dimensions,
below a few hundred nanometers. Resistivity increases
rapidly below 100 nm (Figure 28.14). Copper is an
exceptional metal because its thin-ﬁlm resistivity is close
to bulk copper resistivity, but at small dimensions grain
boundary and sidewall scattering start to dominate, and
50 nm copper lines exhibit a resistivity of 3 μohm-cm,
well above 1.8 μohm-cm bulk resistivity.
side
wall
grain boundary
bulk resistivity
Linewidth (nm)
10
100
1000
Resistivity [µW cm]
5
4
3
2
1
0
Figure 28.14
Copper
resistivity
as
a
function
of
linewidth.
Courtesy
of
The
Semiconductor
Industry
Association. The International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors,
2007
Edition.
International
SEMAT-
ECH:Austin, TX, 2007
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 352]
366
Introduction to Microfabrication
28.7 Exercises
1. If a via plug of 2:1 aspect ratio in 0.25 μm technology
has a resistance of 0.4 ohms, is it made of tungsten
or copper?
2. What is copper via resistance in 0.1 μm technology?
Plot via resistance as a function of different tantalum
nitride barrier thicknesses.
3. What is the breakdown ﬁeld requirement for low-k
dielectrics?
4. What is the effective dielectric constant of a ni-
tride/BCB/nitride (20/500/20nm) stack when ε = 7
(nitride) and ε = 2.5 (BCB).
5. What is the etch or polish selectivity needed in a low-
k approach that uses nitride etch/polish stop layers
20 nm thick on 500 nm low-k material?
6. Dual damascene with etch stop layers can be done
in four ways (Figure 28.11). How do these schemes
differ with respect to alignment?
7. What etching processes were used to prepare the sam-
ple for the SEM micrograph in Figure 28.5? What
selectivities and other criteria are required of those
etching processes?
8. In order to reduce substrate coupling, inductor coils
should have low dielectric constant material under-
neath. In the pictured device air gaps are left in the
structure. Explain the fabrication process!
Reproduced from Farcy et al. (2008) by permission of Elsevier
References and Related Reading
Abelson, L.A. and G.L. Kerber (2004) Superconducting inte-
grated circuit fabrication technology, Proc. IEEE, 92, 1517.
Anand, M.B. et al. (1997) Use of gas as low-k interlayer di-
electric in LSI’s: demonstration of feasibility, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, 44, 1965.
Borst, C.L., W.N. Gill and R.J. Gutmann (2002) Chemical-
Mechanical
Polishing
of
Low
Dielectric
Constant
Polymers
and
Organosilicate
Glasses:
Fundamental
Mechanisms
and
Application
to
IC
Interconnect
Technology, Springer.
Brillouet, M. (2006) Challenges in advanced metallization
schemes, Microelectron. Eng., 83, 2036–2041.
Brown, D. (1986) Trends in advanced process technology,
Proc. IEEE, 74, 1678 (special issue on integrated circuit
technologies of the future).
Chen, W.-C. et al. (1999) Chemical mechanical polishing of
low-dielectric constant polymers: hydrogen silsesquioxane
and methyl silsesquioxane, J. Electrochem. Soc., 146,
3004.
Davis, J.A. et al. (2001) Interconnect limits on gigascale inte-
gration (GSI) in the 21st century, Proc. IEEE, 89, March,
305 (special issue on limits of semiconductor technology).
Elers, K.-E. et al. (2002) Diffusion barrier deposition on a cop-
per surface by atomic layer deposition, Chem. Vapor Depos.,
8, 149–153.
Farcy, A. et al. (2008) Integration of high-performance RF pas-
sive modules (MIM capacitors and inductors) in advanced
BEOL, Microelectron. Eng., 85, 1940–1946.
Furuya, A. et al. (2005) Ta penetration into template-type
porous low-k material during atomic layer deposition of
TaN, J. Appl. Phys., 98, 094902.
Helneder, H. et al. (2001) Comparison of copper damascene
and aluminum RIE metallization in BICMOS technology,
Microelectron. Eng., 55, 257–268.
Ho, P.S., W.W. Lee and J. Leu (2002) Low Dielectric Con-
stant Materials for IC applications, Springer.
Hsu, H.-H. et al. (2001) Electroless copper deposition for
ultralarge-scale
integration,
J. Electrochem. Soc.,
148,
C47.
Ishikawa, K. et al. (2008) Advanced method for monitoring
copper interconnect process, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf .,
21, 578–584.
ITRS 2007: The International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors, 2007 Edition. International SEMATECH:
Austin, TX, 2007. http://www.itrs.net/
Ivanov, I.P., I. Sen and P. Keswick (2006) Electrical conductiv-
ity of high aspect ratio trenches in chemical-vapor deposition
W technology, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B24, 523–533.
Koburger, C.W. et al. (1995) A half-micron CMOS logic gen-
eration, IBM J. Res. Dev., 39, 215.
Kriz, J. et al. (2008) Overview of dual damascene integration
schemes in Cu BEOL integration, Microelectron. Eng., 85,
2128–2132.
Laurila, T. et al. (2000) Failure mechanism of Ta diffusion
barrier between Cu and Si, J. Appl. Phys., 88, 3377.
Maex, K. et al. (2003) Low dielectric constant materials for
microelectronics, J. Appl. Phys., 93, 8793–8841.
Mann, R.W. et al. (1995) Silicides and local interconnections
for high performance VLSI applications, IBM J. Res. Dev.,
39, 403.
Rao,
G.K.
(1993)
Multilevel
Interconnect
Technology,
McGraw-Hill.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 353]
Multilevel Metallization
367
Satta, A. et al. (2002) Enhancement of ALCVD TiN growth on
Si–O–C and a-SiC:H ﬁlms by O -based plasma treatments,
Microelectron. Eng., 60, 59–69.
Small, M.B. and D.J. Pearson (1990) On-chip wiring for VLSI,
IBM J. Res. Dev., 34, 858.
Smith, S. et al. (2002) Physical and electrical characterization
of ALCVD TiN and WNxCy used as a copper diffusion bar-
rier in dual damascene backend structures, Microelectron.
Eng., 64, 247–253.
Steigerwald, J.M., S.P. Murarka, and R.J. Gutman (1997)
Chemical Mechanical Planarization of Microelectronic
Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wrschka, P. et al. (2000) Chemical mechanical planarization
of copper damascene structures, J. Electrochem. Soc., 147,
706.
Zantye, P.B., A. Kumar and A.K. Sikder (2004) Chemical
mechanical planarization for microelectronics applications,
Mater. Sci. Eng., R45, 89–220.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 354]
29
Surface Micromachining
Isotropic etching leads to undercutting of structures. This
is generally considered a drawback of isotropic etching,
but surface micromachining takes advantage of undercut-
ting. Undercutting releases bridges, cantilevers and mem-
branes that can be used as resonators, switches, movable
mirrors, variable capacitors and in many other roles.
Instead of etching the substrate wafer to release struc-
tures, it is customary to use two thin ﬁlms: an underlying
sacriﬁcial ﬁlm and upper structural ﬁlm. By etching the
underlying ﬁlm away, the structural ﬁlm is released. The
air gap formed by etching away the sacriﬁcial ﬁlm can
serve as the dielectric in a capacitive pressure sensor, as
an isolator in a RF switch and as a tunable optical path
in an interferometer. The sacriﬁcial ﬁlm has to fulﬁll two
major requirements: it has to tolerate the deposition pro-
cess of the structural ﬁlm; and selective etch process for
the two materials must exist. The structural ﬁlm has be
mechanically stiff enough and reasonably stress free, oth-
erwise it will bend, buckle or curl up when released. After
released structures have been made, wafer processing be-
comes very difﬁcult. Wet processes should be eliminated
because liquid drying may lead to structure sticking dur-
ing drying. Particles may also get stuck under released
structures, preventing movements. Therefore wafer dic-
ing, which uses water for cooling and generates silicon
dust, is sometimes done before the release etch.
Note
The z-scale has been grossly exaggerated in the ﬁgures
below to show the thin ﬁlms more clearly; typical thin-
ﬁlm thicknesses in surface micromachining are in the
micrometer range.
29.1 Single Structural Layer Devices
The simplest devices consist of two ﬁlms only, one sac-
riﬁcial, one structural. Such structures are ready-made in
SOI wafers: the device silicon plays the role of structural
layer and the buried oxide serves as the sacriﬁcial layer.
The extra beneﬁt, in addition to simplicity, is that the ex-
cellent mechanical properties of single crystalline silicon,
for example low stress, are available.
In the single axis piezoresistive accelerometer shown
in Figure 29.1, doping of the SOI device layer is chosen
to suit piezoresistor speciﬁcations. When the proof mass
bends, the narrow piezoresistor between P1 and the proof
mass will stretch (and its resistance increases) and the
piezoresistor between P4 and the proof mass will be com-
pressed (and its resistance decreases). In order to eliminate
Reference resistors
Suspension beam
Piezoresistors
Proof mass
P1
P3
P4
P2
Release holes
Overrange stops
a
Figure 29.1
Piezoresistive accelerometer: cross sectional
and top views of DRIE etched SOI device. Buried oxide
etching for release. Reproduced from Eklund and Shkel
(2007) by permission of IOP
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 355]
370
Introduction to Microfabrication
IMPLANTED
PIEZO-
RESISTOR
10 µm
GOLD µ-
HEATER
MICRO HEATER
SILICON WAFER
10 µm
PIEZO-
RESISTOR
Figure 29.2
Thermally excited 10 MHz dome resonator,
top view and cross-sectional view. Reproduced from
Reichenbach et al. (2006), copyright 2006, by permission
of IEEE
out-of-plane movement, the SOI device layer should be
thicker than the piezoresistors are wide, but this condi-
tion is easily fulﬁlled by moderate linewidths (e.g., 3 μm)
and a suitable SOI device layer (e.g., 15 μm). In its sim-
plest implementation, this device can be fabricated in a
single lithography step, followed by device silicon DRIE
and isotropic HF etching of the buried oxide (BOX). In a
more realistic device, bonding pads should be metallized
for more reliable contacts, but in a research phase wire
bonding can be done directly to silicon.
A structure similar to SOI can be made by CVD oxide
and LPCVD polysilicon. Some mechanical properties are
lost, but some degrees of freedom bought. Figure 29.2
shows a thermally excited dome resonator. Polysilicon
membrane is excited by a gold microheater, and deﬂection
of the polysilicon membrane is detected by a piezoresistor.
The process ﬂow is as follows.
Process ﬂow for dome resonator
• Silicon wafer (no special requirements)
• CVD oxide deposition (phosphorus doped)
• LPCVD polysilicon deposition (undoped)
• Lithography for piezoresistor
• Ion implantation for piezoresistor
• Photoresist stripping and wafer cleaning
• Annealing for implant activation
• Lithography for gold heater
• Cr/Au deposition and lift-off
• HF isotropic oxide etching
Thermal oxidation could be done after piezoresistor
implantation, to insulate the gold heater from the piezore-
sistor, but undoped polysilicon is practically an insulator.
Both gold and silicon resistors tolerate the HF release etch
well and no protection is needed. The mechanical proper-
ties of polysilicon are important because poly is an active
mechanical material subject to 10 MHz vibrations.
After undercut etching, photoresist spinning is no
longer possible, because it would spread and stick
uncontrollably under the released layer. Therefore all
lithographic steps must be performed before release
etching. It is possible to use peeling masks (Figure
21.17) which are made ready but used only later on. In
the optical grating shown in Figure 29.3 submicrometer
features are made ﬁrst: RIE of silicon is done to create
a submicrometer grating, 500 nm deep, followed by
aluminum metallization and aluminum patterning. SOI
device layer (15 μm thick) lithography and etching
then follow. It would be impossible to etch structures
15 μm deep ﬁrst and then coat them with thin resist
that would allow lithography of submicron features. In
this device the SOI device layer etching is performed
using the aluminum as an etch mask, and ﬁnally BOX
isotropic release etching in HF vapor, because aluminum
fixed gratings
movable
gratings
Figure 29.3
Optical spectrometer in SOI. Adapted from
Sagberg et al. (2007)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 356]
Surface Micromachining
371
is attacked by HF solutions. Underetching time is critical
because it has to release the movable grating elements,
but it must not release the ﬁxed elements.
29.2 Materials for Surface
Micromachining
The sacriﬁcial layer has to tolerate the deposition process
of the structural layer, and it has to be removable selec-
tively with respect to the structural layer. Table 29.1 lists
some commonly used pairs of structural and sacriﬁcial
layers. Silicon surface micromechanics utilizes LPCVD
polysilicon as a structural layer, and oxides, especially
CVD-PSG, as sacriﬁcial layers. LPCVD nitride can be
used as an additional structural or insulating layer.
Polysilicon, silicon dioxide and nitride, and sputtered
metals are limited to a few micrometers in thickness. This
is too small for many applications. Thick polysilicon can
be used, but this material is not just thicker polysilicon:
it is deposited differently compared to LPCVD “thin”
polysilicon. Thick poly (“epi-poly,” “poly-SOI”) is de-
posited in an epitaxial reactor, with deposition rates of
1–5 μm/min vs. 10 nm/min for LPCVD poly. Therefore
thicknesses of 10–50 μm are possible, similar to SOI de-
vice layer thicknesses. But because deposition is on an
amorphous oxide, the resulting ﬁlm will not be epitaxial
(single crystalline). Electroplated metals and resists can
also be applied in layers tens of micrometers thick.
Free-standing mechanical structures can be made of
metals. Both sputtering (for Al) and electroplating (for
Cu, Ni, Au) are used for structural layer deposition, and
photoresist and many metals can be used as the sacriﬁcial
layers, for example all non-noble metals can be selec-
tively etched underneath gold. Etch selectivity between
resist and metal is practically inﬁnite, but large struc-
tures are always difﬁcult to release because the sacriﬁcial
Table 29.1
Materials for surface micromachining
Structural
Sacriﬁcial
Sacriﬁcial etch(es)
ﬁlm
ﬁlm(s)
Polysilicon
CVD oxide
HF, HF vapor
Silicon nitride
Oxide; Al
HF; NaOH, H3PO4
Nickel
Cu; resist
HCl; oxygen plasma
Aluminum
Resist
Oxygen plasma
Gold
Cu; resist
HCl; oxygen plasma
Copper
Resist
Oxygen plasma
Parylene
Resist
Acetone, other solvents
SU-8
Cu; Al
HCl; NaOH, H3PO4
Diamond
Cu
HCl
etching relies on lateral diffusion in a restricted space.
Free-standing spans of metals are smaller than those of
poly and nitride structures.
If silicon dioxide is used as a sacriﬁcial material, the
removal etch has to be HF based. This limits the metals
that can be used for device metallization. A ﬁrst approach
is to use metals that survive HF etching: gold, nickel and
molybdenum are candidates. Second, different HF-based
solutions are different in selectivity relative to aluminum,
as shown in Table 29.2. Third, the metal can be protected
by a thin ﬁlm or photoresist. The fourth approach is to
deposit metal after release etching, but a shadow mask
or dry ﬁlm resist lift-off has to be used because resist
spinning cannot be done. Sacriﬁcial etching is preferably
the last process step because the released structures may
bend, resonate, stick, break or otherwise be damaged in
further processing steps.
There are many choices for sacriﬁcial oxides. Thermal
oxide, SiO2, is seldom used, because it is the densest
and has the lowest etch rate. Various deposited oxides
etch much faster, even by a factor of 20, as shown in
Table 29.2. Phosphorus-doped silicon glass (PSG) is a
common choice. There is also the choice of HF solution:
while 49% HF (highest standard concentration) has the
highest oxide etch rate, it also attacks other materials,
and therefore rate is not the only selection criterium.
Many combinations of materials have been used
in making clamped–clamped beams (also known as
microbridges). A prototypical RF switch is shown in
Figure 29.4. It is made by depositing metal on top
of photoresist, patterning the metal and washing the
resist away in oxygen plasma. The capacitive RF switch
consists of grounded lines and dielectric-coated RF
signal lines. When a voltage is applied between the
free-standing metal bridge and the RF signal lines, the
bridge bends down. Capacitive coupling occurs because
there is no metal-to-metal contact (RF switches with
metal-to-metal contacts will be described in section 29.4).
Table 29.2
HF-based wet etch rates (nm/min) for
selected materials at room temperature
Etchant
Material
SiO2 TEOS PSG Si3N4
Al
Mo
HF (49%)
1763
3969
4778
15
38 0.15
NH4F:HF
(7:1) (BHF)
133
107
1024
1
3 0.5
HF:H2O 1:10
48
157
922
1.5
320 0.15
Source: Kim, B.-H. et al. (1999)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 357]
372
Introduction to Microfabrication
RF
out
RF
in
membrane
hD
ha
Figure 29.4
RF switch with nickel membrane, top and
cross–sectional views: air gap ha created by photoresist
sacriﬁcial etching
When the bridge is up, the gap ha is large and capaci-
tance very small:
Coff =
1
(hD/εDA) + (ha/ε0A)
(29.1)
where hD is the thickness of the dielectric layer on the sig-
nal electrode. The signal is shunted when the nickel bridge
is pulled down. When the bridge makes contact with the
dielectric, the gap ha goes to zero, and on-capacitance is
deﬁned by dielectric thickness and permittivity. Use of
materials with a high dielectric constant is desirable, but
it is also important to maintain surface smoothness so that
the contact distance can actually be made zero: a rough
surface of the dielectric would mean that ha is non-zero
even in a contact situation.
29.3 Mechanics of Free-Standing
Films
The structural layer needs to be of sufﬁcient mech-
anical strength and proper stress state when released.
Free-standing beams and plates will bend depending
on their stress state, as shown in Figure 5.17. A series
of released beams with different lengths can act as a
stress monitor.
Tensile stresses are preferred for free-standing struc-
tures. Depending on ﬁlm mechanical properties, anything
from 10 micrometer span lengths (for electroplated gold)
to centimeters (for silicon nitride) are possible for struc-
tural layer dimensions. The length also depends on ﬁlm
thickness and stress, and on the details of release etching.
The spring constant of a clamped–clamped beam (both
ends ﬁrmly attached to an anchor, with distributed load)
is calculated from
k = 32EW
 t
L
3
(29.2)
where E is Young’s modulus, t the beam thickness, L the
beam length and W the beam width. Silicon and metals
have high elastic moduli (Young’s moduli) in the range
of 100–200 GPa, but structures with very low spring con-
stant can be made of polymers, which have values of E
of a few gigapascals only. The drawback of low spring
constants is the small restoring force, and therefore the
danger of sticking. The resonant frequency of a simple
clamped–clamped beam is given by
f = 1
2π

k
m ≈W
L2

E
ρ
(29.3)
Micromachined beams with 1–100 N/m spring con-
stant and sizes in the range of tens to hundreds of
micrometers result typically in kilohertz to megahertz
resonant frequencies.
Residual stresses can easily dominate the resonant fre-
quency. Frequency of a resonator with straight ﬂexures
(Figure 29.10) is given by Equation 29.4. Stress effect be-
come signiﬁcant especially for long, narrow beams. Stress
control is one of the key issues in surface micromachining.
It involves materials selection, deposition process opti-
mization, annealing effects, geometrical design of released
structures, and the release process.
f = 1
2π

4EtW3
ML3
+ 24σrtW
5ML
(29.4)
where M is shuttle mass and σr is the residual stress in
the thin ﬁlm. With thin ﬁlm stresses easily in 100 MPa
range, their effects can be drastic.
Compressively stressed clamped–clamped beams will
remain straight for a while when stress is applied, but
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 358]
Surface Micromachining
373
after a critical stress the beam will buckle. This critical
stress, σcr, is given by
σcr =
π2Et2
3L2(1 −ν)
(29.5)
where ν is the Poisson ratio of beam materials, and t the
thickness and L the length of the beam. Stubbier beams
tolerate more stresses, but then again, the actuation force
has to stronger. If the beam is electrically conductive,
and it is used as a thermal actuator, Equation 29.5 can
be used to evaluate how high temperature (or how large
thermal expansion) can be tolerated before critical stress
is achieved.
29.4 Cantilever Structures
Cantilevers are very common structures. They are used
in force sensors (including AFMs) and in many chemi-
cal and biological sensors where the added mass on the
cantilever is detected either as a deﬂection or resonant
frequency change. Two different techniques for surface
micromachined cantilevers are depicted in Figure 29.5,
Single mask process
Two mask process
mask #2 
mask #1
mask
Figure 29.5
Polysilicon cantilevers with CVD oxide sac-
riﬁcial layer: single mask process depends on timed etching
while two-mask process is insensitive to oxide etch time
showing the timed etching of sacriﬁcial underlayer vs. a
two lithography step process that is insensitive to under-
etch time.
The single mask process of Figure 29.5 depends on
timed etching: too much overetching would eliminate the
anchor altogether and detach the cantilever from the sub-
strate. Cantilever and anchor dimensions are closely re-
lated: the etch undercut must be long enough to release
the cantilever, but short enough for the anchor to remain.
In the two-mask process the structural layer is attached
to the substrate, and etch timing becomes irrelevant
because the structure acts as its own anchor. Extended
overetching does not destroy the structure, but poor etch
selectivity between the layers may change the dimensions
of the structural layer.
These free-standing structural layers serve many me-
chanical, electromechanical, thermal, ﬂuidic and optical
functions as mechanical resonators, mirrors, thermal iso-
lation valves, cantilever sensors, RF switches, etc. Move-
ment of the released structure can be either in the plane
of the wafer, or out of the plane. Etching sacriﬁcial layers
is also useful for creating static structures, like channels
and nozzles in microﬂuidics.
Additional lithography and etching steps can be used
to make more complex cantilevers. For instance, a ni-
tride cantilever with a rigid paddle at the end is shown in
Figure 29.6. Even though the cantilever bends, the paddle
will remain ﬂat. This design is used in the biosensor of
Figure 20.26 to improve the laser reﬂection signal.
The simple cantilever is not a device, but it can be trans-
formed into a practical in-line RF switch (Figure 29.7).
Its fabrication process is given below.
Process ﬂow for gold switch
• Cr/Au anchors and pull-down electrode patterning
(20/250 nm thick)
• Cu and Au sputtering (1000 nm/500 nm)
• Au lithography and wet etching
• Cu lithography and wet etching
• Thick-resist lithography for Au electroplating
• Au electroplating (8 μm thick)
• Resist removal
• Cu release etching
Because gold is sputtered right after copper in the
same vacuum, no adhesion layer is needed. Gold wet
etching in aqua regia is difﬁcult, especially when it
comes to resist adhesion, but 500 nm is difﬁcult to
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 359]
374
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 29.6
Cantilever
sensor
stiffening
by
a
ﬁlled
groove. Reproduced from Yue et al. (2004) by permission
of IEEE
Pull-Down
Electrode
Cantilever
30 kv
10 n
30 nm
Contact
Areas
Anchor
Pull-Down
Electrode
Cantilever
1 µm
0.5 µm
Anchor
Figure 29.7
Gold cantilever switch (with copper sacriﬁ-
cial layer). Reproduced from Rebeiz and Muldavin (2001),
copyright 2001, by permission of IEEE
pattern by lift-off too. There are many wet etch solutions
for isotropic copper etching.
The spring constant of this design is larger than
100 N/m for a cantilever 75 μm long and 30 μm wide.
The gap between the two gold contacts is 500 nm, and
30 V is needed to actuate the switch.
Thin-ﬁlm stresses should be minimized, otherwise the
gap between switch contacts, for instance, would become
indeterminate. In an ingenious curl switch design stresses
are in fact taken advantage of. The switch consists of
an aluminum top electrode sandwiched between two
PECVD oxide layers (Figure 29.8). The top oxide is
tensile stressed, and upon release etching it will result in a
sizable upward curl. Off-capacitance is very high because
Platinum
Contacts
Contact Region
Contact Region
Aluminum
Insulators
(b)
(a)
Pull-Down Electrode
Pull-Down Electrode
Figure 29.8
Curl switch: in-line (a) and capacitive (b)
versions. Reproduced from Rebeiz and Muldavin (2001),
copyright 2001, by permission of IEEE
the gap is now 10–15 μm above the bottom electrode.
And the actuation voltage is reasonable at 80 V because
the initial gap near the anchor end is still quite small.
In many cases the same functionality can be achieved
by bulk or surface micromachining. The variable capacitor
of Figure 17.2 is an aluminum membrane released by
back-side etching, but a similar device could be made by
front-side release etching. Single crystal silicon with its
excellent mechanical properties is used in RF switches,
by bonding silicon to a glass wafer (Figure 30.26).
29.5 Membranes and Bridges
Free-standing membrane structures are used in a wide
variety of microdevices. They can be used as passive
supports in thermal devices, but they can also serve as
dynamical mechanical and optical elements. A movable
membrane is the basis of pressure sensors, and bending
is sensed piezoresistively, capacitively or as thermal con-
ductance change due to surfaces moving closer to each
other (Figure 20.20).
An optical modulator (“vertically moving antireﬂec-
tion coating”) is shown in Figure 29.9. Oxide and ni-
tride are deposited, nitride is patterned, a gold electrode
is deposited and patterned, and oxide is etched away in
HF. The nitride membrane is electrostatically actuated at
1 MHz. The thickness of the nitride is λ/4n (which is
194 nm for 1550 nm telecom wavelength assuming n =
2.00 for nitride). The air gap (with n = 1) is designed
to be mλ/4 for antireﬂection action. For m = 1 the gap
becomes very small, 388 nm, and there is a danger of
the membrane touching the substrate, so for example an
m = 4 device is much easier to fabricate, corresponding
to 1.55 μm sacriﬁcial oxide thickness.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 360]
Surface Micromachining
375
A
B
oxide
silicon
air cavity
electrode
nitride
Figure 29.9
Optical modulator: nitride membrane is elec-
trostatically actuated and air cavity optical length changes.
Cross-section along line AB. Redrawn from Goossen et al.
(1994)
Because silicon is transparent in the infrared wave-
lengths, it will travel through the wafer without any actual
optical window.
In the visible wavelengths the substrate has to be
transparent. In the Fabry–P´erot interferometer of Figure
29.10, a fused silica wafer has been used. Dielectric
mirror λ/4 layers are made of TiO2/Al2O3. Required
layer thicknesses are smaller in the visible wavelengths.
ALD, with atomic layer thickness control, is a method
of choice for such ﬁlms. ALD ﬁlm quality is good also
for very thin ﬁlms, without any post treatment. The third
beneﬁt is low deposition temperature: ALD ﬁlms can be
deposited on polymers.
Movable membranes are also display devices: the gap
deﬁnes the color (as in Fabry–P´erot!) and zero gap equals
MgF2 antireflection coating
fused silica wafer
TiO2/Al2O3
mirrors
Figure 29.10
Visible light Fabry–P´erot interferometer:
ALD dielectric mirrors made of TiO2 and Al2O3. Polymer
sacriﬁcial layer deﬁnes the gap. Redrawn from Blomberg
et al. (2009)
a black pixel (such a device is quite naturally processed
on a glass wafer). Adaptive optics is based on movable,
steerable membranes (Figure 17.7) in up–down mode,
but many optical telecom switches, projection displays
and scanners utilize torsion-mode membrane mirrors
(Figure 21.12).
Electrostatic actuation is easy to implement with metal-
lic thin ﬁlms, or using the silicon substrate as the other
electrode. The force and actuation voltage are related,
however, by the nonlinear relationship
F =
εAV2
2(d −x)2
(29.6)
As the gap changes from its initial value d, the force
rapidly increases because of the (d −x)2 term. This even-
tually leads to the plates touching each other, a phe-
nomenon known as pull-in. The pull-in voltage for a mem-
brane depends on the spring constant (k), the air gap
dimension (g0) and the dielectric constant of air (ε), that is
Vpull-in =

8kg3
0
27ε
(29.7)
Gaps range from tens of nanometers to hundreds of mi-
crometers. Typical actuation voltages range from a few
volts to hundreds of volts. As a way to improve tunability,
double gap designs have been implemented. The actuation
electrode gap is large but the signal electrode gap is small.
This way the movable electrode can be moved very close
to, and even to contact with, the signal electrode without
pull-in. See Exercise 29.12.
A comb drive with interdigitated ﬁxed and movable
electrodes (Figure 21.2) is a versatile sensor and actuator.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 361]
376
Introduction to Microfabrication
The capacitance of a comb drive depends on capacitor
plate area and distance, as usual, but compared to a bulk
micromachined capacitor, we now have the freedom to in-
crease the number of comb ﬁngers to increase capacitance.
If large areas need to be released, perforations need to
be employed (Figure 29.11). Sacriﬁcial etching can then
penetrate under a large plate from multiple points. Ob-
viously, these extra holes have different consequences:
in electrostatic actuation fringing ﬁelds will cover small
perforations (hole diameter <3–4 × gap size), and there
is no loss of electrostatic force. Capacitance is, however,
reduced in the down state. Young’s modulus is reduced
and so is residual stress, even to half the original value.
Perforations affect gas damping: air can ﬂow through the
perforations, while in the case of a continuous membrane
the only escape route is over the edges. Perforated mem-
branes can therefore have higher operating frequencies.
Anchor
Flexure (length L,
width W, thickness t )
Sense
comb
Suspended
shuttle (mass M  )
Drive
comb
Figure 29.11
Comb drive with suspended shuttle mass.
Plate release has been aided by using perforations in the
plate. Reproduced from Bustillo et al. (1998) by permission
of IEEE
Sideways movements can be realized also by thermal
actuation. The microrelay shown in Figure 29.12 is made
with a polysilicon structural layer, oxide sacriﬁcial layer
process, with a few modiﬁcations. Current is run through
the polysilicon V-shaped actuator beam, which expands,
moves laterally and makes contact with the signal elec-
trodes. In order to eliminate electrical contact from the
electrically heated actuator to the signal line, a silicon
nitride insulator block is made before poly deposition.
This also reduces thermal conduction from the hot actua-
tor beam. The sacriﬁcial oxide is etched in two steps: ﬁrst
a small recess is etched to ensure discontinuity of gold;
and after gold evaporation, the resist is removed and all
remaining oxide is etched by HF. Infrared microscopy
can be used to monitor underetching because silicon is
transparent in the infrared.
29.6 Stiction
The release etch process looks like a simple isotropic etch
but it has many difﬁculties not associated with isotropic
patterning etching. Etch time control is difﬁcult because
etch front propagation under the structural layer cannot
often be observed. The etch process is diffusion limited
in nature and slows down in long and narrow release gaps.
A serious limitation for the wet chemical release
etch process comes from stiction (from “sticking +
friction”): during drying the capillary force strength
exceeds the spring force of the released structures, and
the free-standing cantilever makes contact with the
substrate and adheres. Equation 29.8 gives the critical
length for a cantilever to stick:
Lcrit =
4

3
4
Et3g2
γ × cos φ
(29.8)
where t is cantilever thickness and g the gap, γ the liquid
surface tension and φ the contact angle. For a silicon
beam (E = 160 GPa) of 1 μm thickness and 1 μm gap,
using water (γ = 72 mJ/m2) for rinsing, this critical length
comes to approximately 40 μm.
Stiction prevention has many alternative approaches,
as hinted by Equation 29.8. One is to use thicker
beams, but LPCVD polysilicon thicknesses are limited
to a micrometer or two. Polysilicon and SOI beams
can be made thicker. The gap could be increased, but
the actuation voltage then becomes larger. It is also
difﬁcult to increase the gap when oxide is used as a
sacriﬁcial layer because its thickness is also limited to
a few micrometers. Contact angle modiﬁcation can be
done by silane SAMs or ﬂuoropolymers. This strategy
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 362]
Surface Micromachining
377
Electrothermal
Actuator
SiN
Isolation
Signal
Lines
Contact
Head
Au
(d)
Poly-Si
(c)
SiN
SiO2
(b)
SiN
(a)
Figure 29.12
Sideways thermal actuator/microrelay. Reproduced from Wang et al. (2001), copyright 2001, by permission
of IEEE
works best for in-use stiction prevention, once drying
has been successful. Replacing water is one way to
go. The elimination of capillary forces by going to dry
release is yet another approach. And traditional drying
can be replaced by other methods. As a ﬁfth element,
microstructures can be designed stiffer.
29.6.1 Stiffer structures
Using shorter beams, thicker beams or making non-ﬂat
beams, U-shaped (or T- or H-shaped), helps because they
are stiffer. This requires an additional lithography step,
but this has to be balanced against the efforts needed in
other stiction prevention schemes.
29.6.2 Alternative liquids
Water has an exceptionally large surface tension, which
leads to strong capillary forces. Changing water to iso-
propanol or some other low-surface-tension liquid will
reduce stiction. The same strategy works for porous ma-
terials: in order not to collapse the thin pore walls, surface
tension must be reduced.
29.6.3 Dry release
If silicon (single crystalline or thin ﬁlm) is used as the
sacriﬁcial material, isotropic SF6 plasma and XeF2 are
suitable. If oxide is used, anhydrous HF vapor can be
used, but its etch rate is lower than with aqueous HF.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 363]
378
Introduction to Microfabrication
Solid
Liquid
(SD)
(C)
(I)
(ND)
(F)
(T)
(FD)
Gas
Temperature
Pressure
Figure 29.13
Thermodynamics of drying: I, initial stage;
F, ﬁnal stage; N, normal drying; FD, freeze drying; SD,
supercritical drying. Reproduced from Bellet and Canham
(1998) by permission of Wiley-VCH
If photoresist is used as the sacriﬁcial material, oxygen
plasma can be used for removal.
29.6.4 Alternative drying
Sublimation or critical point drying both sidestep the liq-
uid drying step. In sublimation, rinsing water is replaced
by tert-butanol, which has a subzero freezing point. The
wafer is then frozen and heated under reduced pressure
in a regime where solid tert-butanol turns to vapor di-
rectly (sublimation). This is known as freeze drying (FD)
(Figure 29.13). In critical point drying CO2 (b.p. 31 ◦C) is
used. At the critical point the phase balance can be cho-
sen to favor solid–vapor transformation over solid–liquid
transformation by using pressure as the parameter. This
is shown below as route SD (for supercritical drying).
Normal drying is indicated as ND.
29.6.5 Surface microstructures
Because stiction depends on surface smoothness (on the
microscale) and ﬂatness (on the macroscale), just like
wafer bonding, corrugated or otherwise patterned surfaces
can prevent stiction, Figure 29.14. This approach requires
extra process steps that need to be integrated into the
process ﬂow. Sometimes existing process steps can be uti-
lized by making minor mask changes to create protrusions
or other extensions.
Avoiding stiction during the fabrication process is one
thing; avoiding stiction during device operation is another.
RF switches operate by making contact between two
surfaces. Both metal-to-dielectric contacts (Figure 29.4)
and metal-to-metal contacts (Figure 29.6) are used. Some
switches conduct sizable currents in contact, which may
lead to the welding together of two metals.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 29.14
Three-mask process for cantilever: (a) mask
1, dimples in oxide; (b) mask 2, anchor in oxide; (c) struc-
tural poly deposition and mask 3, poly pattern; (d) sacriﬁcial
oxide layer etching
Hydrophobic (HB) surfaces that result from HF treat-
ment are less prone to stiction than hydrophilic (HL) ones,
as suggested by Figure 22.9: the bond strength of the HL
surface is much higher than that of HB surfaces. This
is also clear from Equation 29.8: the cos φ term is very
small when the contact angle is high, making Lcrit longer.
Stiction prevention is important also when static struc-
tures are made: if the capillary force is too large compared
to the mechanical strength of the structure, the mechani-
cal structure will collapse. Microﬂuidic channels must be
designed with this in mind. Figure 29.15 presents two al-
ternative ways for the fabrication of microﬂuidic channels
with electrodes. In the traditional surface micromachining
approach the sacriﬁcial layer is etched away from the ends
of the channel. Thus time increases as the square of the
length of the channel. In the micromolding approach the
shape of the channel is etched into silicon and coated with
parylene. A carrier wafer with electrodes is bonded over
the channel replica, and the carrier wafer is removed. No
stiction can happen because no liquids are present.
29.7 Multiple Layer Structures
Many materials with different properties create function-
alities, but every new material interface is a potential
problem:
adhesion,
thermal
expansion
mismatch,
chemical reactions, etc. Working with single material is
therefore beneﬁcial, but not many materials offer enough
functionalities.
Figure 29.16 shows a microfabricated acoustic crystal.
The active layer consists of tungsten scatterers embed-
ded in a silicon dioxide matrix. The large difference in
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 364]
Surface Micromachining
379
Au electrode
Parylene
Silicon
PR
(f)
(e)
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
(f)
(e)
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Conventional Method
Parylene Micromolding
Flat substrate (stainless steel sheet)
Figure 29.15
Surface micromachining with sacriﬁcial layers vs. parylene molding for fabrication of a microchannel
with electrodes. Reproduced from Noh et al. (2004), copyright 2004, by permission of Elsevier
silicon
oxide
aluminum
tungsten
Ti/TiN/Al
AlN
Figure 29.16
Acoustic band gap (ABG) crystal. Tungsten
scatterers embedded in oxide, with polysilicon as sacriﬁcial
layer. Redrawn after Olsson et al. (2008)
sound velocity and density between the materials is essen-
tial. The piezoelectric aluminum nitride couplers on the
sides are used for feeding acoustic energy into and out of
the device. Polysilicon is chosen as the sacriﬁcial layer
and SF6 isotropic plasma for dry release. This means that
tungsten must be protected because it is readily etched by
ﬂuorine. Aluminum caps protect the tungsten at the top
and bottom, and the sidewalls are covered by oxide. CMP
is used after CVD-W in order to achieve a planar surface.
Two structural layer processes offer similar device and
fabrication beneﬁts also in metal micromechanics. Elec-
troplating processes are basically room temperature pro-
cesses and a wide variety of materials, including poly-
mers, can be used. A simple process for free-standing
metal structures is shown in Figure 29.17, and 3D cop-
per coils and an air-isolated nickel-core transformer are
shown in Figure 29.18.
29.8 Rotating Structures
Adding more layers enables rotating structures to be
made. A center-pin process utilizes two structural and
two sacriﬁcial layers (Figure 29.19). Now, because of
mechanical constraints, poly 1 becomes the movable
element and poly 2 serves as the ﬁxed element which
bounds the rotating element made of poly 1. The
ﬁrst sacriﬁcial layer deﬁnes the gap to the substrate,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 365]
380
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 29.17
Electroplated free-standing structure: left, ﬁrst resist patterning and seed metal deposition, followed by
second, thick-resist patterning; middle, electroplating; right, stripping of second resist, seed metal etching and stripping
of the ﬁrst resist
Ni bridge
Ni core
Cu bottom
Cu bottom
Cu bridge
KA2415
30.3KV
500x
A 980313
KA2411
30.3KV
100 µ
12Ax
980312
50 µ
Figure 29.18
SEM micrographs of 3D metal electroplated structures. Reproduced from Yoon et al. (1998) by permission
of Institute of Pure and Applied Physics
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Bushing mold
Rotor
Bushing
Bearing anchor
Bearing
Figure 29.19
Cross-sectional schematics demonstrating the center-pin bearing process: (a) after patterning of the bushing
mold in the ﬁrst sacriﬁcial layer; (b) after deposition and patterning of poly 1; (c) after deposition of the second sacriﬁcial
layer and anchor region deﬁnition; (d) deposition and patterning of poly 2, followed by oxide release etching. Courtesy
Mehran Mehregany
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 366]
Surface Micromachining
381
Figure 29.20
Mechanical gears made in multiple layer polysilicon process. Courtesy Sandia National Laboratories
Bearing clearance
Bearing clearance
Figure 29.21
Cross-sectional schematics demonstrating
two types of center-pin bearings that may result after re-
lease: (a) self-aligned; and (b) non-self-aligned. Courtesy
Mehran Mehregany
and the second sacriﬁcial layer determines the spacing
between the poly layers.
Surface
micromachining
with
polysilicon
can
be
extended into multiple layers, as was already shown
in Figure 16.9. Mechanical gears made in a multilevel
polysilicon process are shown in Figure 29.20.
The concept of self-alignment is useful in released
structures as well. The center-pin and rotor can be made
in a self-aligned manner (Figure 29.21). It depends on the
relative thickness of the structural and sacriﬁcial layers.
The poly 2 pin can be made to limit the movements of the
poly 1 rotor in the lateral direction. In the opposite case
the rotor can wobble because the center-pin is too high.
29.9 Hinged Structures
Structures that pop up from the plane of the wafer can be
made by various different methods. Mechanical hinges
can be made in a two structural layer process, or with
polymeric hinges in a one-layer process. Such structures
have applications for example as large stroke movable
mirrors and as legs for microrobots.
In the polymeric hinge process a polyimide hinge con-
nects a ﬁxed plate and a movable plate. The movable plate
can be actuated by for example thermal expansion of the
polymer. In the poly staple process two layers of poly are
used. The ﬁrst poly forms the mirror plate, and the second
poly forms a staple which allows the ﬁrst poly to move but
constrains its movement (Figure 29.22). Actuation can be
accomplished by for example a comb drive which pushes
up the movable mirror (Figure 29.23).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 367]
382
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 29.22
Two-poly staple hinge. Adapted from Pister
et al. (1992) by Jorma Koskinen
In order to position the movable mirrors at proper
angles, latches are designed into the mirrors. When
the desired movement is performed, the polysilicon
elements latch to each other, ﬁxing the structure at the
desired position, for example 45◦or perfectly vertical
(Figure 29.24).
Figure 29.23
Comb-drive actuator–gear system lifts up a
hinged mirror. Courtesy Sandia National Laboratories
Stop
Undriven
hinge
Driven
hinge
Latch #1
L
Lp
Latch #2
Figure 29.24
Pop-up mirrors with latches. Reproduced from Syms et al. (2001), copyright 2001, by permission of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 368]
Surface Micromachining
383
29.10 CMOS Wafers as Substrates
Because all the functionality of surface micromachined
structures is in the deposited thin ﬁlms, any types of
wafers can be used as substrates. CMOS wafers can
therefore be used as substrates with some limitations,
money and thermal budget being the foremost. But in
devices where integration of drive or readout electronics
is essential, like many array devices, the CMOS wafer is
an obvious choice for a starting material. Figure 29.25
shows a micromirror array fabrication process. Each
mirror has its own driving transistor underneath.
Process ﬂow for micromirror array
• CMP planarization
• CVD oxide mirror stoppers
• Sacriﬁcial photoresist
• Lithography for support posts
• Mirror metal deposition
• Mirror patterning
• Sacriﬁcial resist removal
Integrated sensors beneﬁt from the ampliﬁcation of
weak signals locally next to the sensor and only then are
they transferred for further signal processing. Infrared
pixel arrays are especially well suited for this as are
many other imaging and display devices, like ﬁngerprint
sensors and Braille actuators. Monolithic integration
of MEMS with electronics will be discussed further in
Chapter 39.
29.11 Exercises
1. What etch selectivity is needed to release a silicon
nitride plate 1 μm thick and 50 μm wide by sacriﬁcial
oxide etching (49% HF, rate 2 μm/min), if the plate
thickness variation due to etching has to be smaller
than the nitride deposition non-uniformity of 3%?
2. Develop a fabrication process for the RF switch of
Figure 29.4.
3. What
is
the
ratio
of
on-capacitance
and
off-
capacitance of the switch in Figure 29.4, assuming
100 nm oxide dielectric and 4 μm air gap.
4. Calculate the thicknesses and etch depths required to
make a self-aligned rotor of Figure 29.21.
5. Develop a fabrication process for the polysilicon
hinged mirror structure shown in Figure 29.22.
Planarization
oxide
metal (eletrodes)
substrate (containing
CMOS circuitry)
stoppers
to prevent short-cuts
between mirror
and electrodes
holes for support posts
sacrificial layer
(photoresist)
mirror metal
mirror
support post
metal
counter
electrode
mirror
electrode
address
electrode
photoresist
oxide
silicon
Uaddress
finished device
with one deflected
mirror
Figure 29.25
Micromirror array on CMOS wafer, and de-
tail of a single mirror. Reproduced from Ljungblad et al.
(2001) by permission of Elsevier
6. Design a fabrication process for the curl switch of
Figure 29.8.
7. How many photomasks are needed to fabricate the
copper–nickel coils of Figure 29.18?
8. What is the effect of patterning process toler-
ances
to
comb-drive
resonant
frequency
when
W = t = 2 μm?
9. Analyze the comb-drive resonant frequency shift due
to residual stresses.
10. How can you fabricate the capacitive microphone
shown below? The aluminum membrane mask is also
shown.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 369]
384
Introduction to Microfabrication
aluminum membrane
p-Si
n-diffusion
oxide
Adapted from Ganji and Majlis (2009)
11. Explain step by step the fabrication of the bolometer
shown below.
oxide opening hole
NbN bridge
oxide opening hole
Al
Al
aluminum
Si
NbN bridge
oxide
air cavity 
12. If the following condition holds, the suspended elec-
trode shown below can be brought into contact with
the signal electrode:
d3 ⩽d2
2 + d1
2εr
where εr refers to the dielectric constant of the
material covering the actuation electrodes and d1,
d2 and d3 are the three dielectric thicknesses (d1 is
solid material, d2 and d3 are air). Calculate some
realistic dimensions for this condition to take place.
d1
d3
d2
actuation electrodes
signal
electrode
suspended electrode
Redrawn after Nieminen et al. (2002)
13. The micromirror shown below is made in a six-mask
process on a completed CMOS wafer. Detail the pro-
cess steps.
Mirror
Hinge
Metal-3
CMOS
substrate
CMP oxide
Yoke
Hinge
support post
Mirror support post
Reproduced from van Kessel et al. (1998) by permission of IEEE
References and Related Reading
Bellet, D. and L. Canham (1998) Controlled drying, Adv.
Mater., 10, 487.
Blomberg, M., H. Kattelus and A. Miranto (2009) Electrically
tunable surface micromachined Fabry-Perot interferometer
for visible light, Proceedings of Eurosensors 2009, p. 191.
B¨uhler,
J.,
F.-P.
Steiner
and H.
Baltes
(1997)
Silicon
dioxide sacriﬁcial layer etching in surface micromachining,
J. Micromech. Microeng., 7, R1–R13.
Bustillo, J. et al. (1998) Surface micromachining for micro-
electromechanical systems, Proc. IEEE, 86, 1559.
Eklund, E.J. and A.M. Shkel (2007) Single-mask fabrication
of high-G piezoresistive accelerometers with extended tem-
perature range, J. Micromech. Microeng., 17, 730–736.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 370]
Surface Micromachining
385
Ganji, B.A. and B.Y. Majlis (2009) Design and fabrication
of a new MEMS capacitive microphone using a perforated
aluminum diaphragm, Sens. Actuators, A149, 29–37.
Goossen, K.W., J.A. Walker and S.C. Amey (1994) Silicon
modulator based on mechanically-active anti-reﬂection layer
with 1 Mbit/sec capability for ﬁber-in-the-loop applications,
IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 6, 1119–1121.
Huang, I.-Y. et al. (2009) Development of a wide-tuning range
and high Q variable capacitor using metal-based surface mi-
cromachining process, Sens. Actuators, A149, 193–200.
Kim, B.-H. et al. (1999) MEMS fabrication of high aspect ra-
tio track-following microactuator for hard disk drive using
silicon on insulator, Proceedings of MEMS 1999, p. 53.
Ljungblad, U. et al. (2001) New laser pattern generator for
DUV using a spatial light modulator, Microelectron. Eng.,
57–58, 23–29.
L¨ochel, B. et al. (1996) Ultraviolet depth lithography and gal-
vanoforming for micromachining, J. Electrochem. Soc., 143,
237.
Malek, C.K. and V. Saile (2004) Applications of LIGA technol-
ogy to precision manufacturing of high-aspect-ratio micro-
components and -systems: a review, Microelectron. J ., 35,
131–143.
Nieminen, H. et al. (2002) Microelectromechanical capacitors
for RF applications, J. Micromech. Microeng., 12, 177–186.
Noh, H.-S., Y. Huang and P.J. Hesketh (2004) Parylene mi-
cromolding, a rapid and low-cost fabrication method for
parylene microchannel, Sens. Actuators, B102, 78–85.
Olsson, R.H. et al. (2008) Microfabricated VHF acoustic crys-
tals and waveguides, Sens. Actuators, A145–146, 87–93.
Pister, K. et al. (1992) Microfabricated hinges, Sens. Actuators,
A33, 249.
Rebeiz, G.M. and J.B. Muldavin (2001) RF MEMS switches
and switch circuits, IEEE Microw. Mag., December, 59.
Reichenbach, R.B. et al. (2006) RF MEMS oscillator with in-
tegrated resistive transduction, IEEE Electron Device Lett.,
27, 805–807.
Roy, S. et al. (2002) Fabrication and characterization of poly-
crystalline SiC resonators, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 49,
2323.
Sagberg, H. et al. (2007) Two-state optical ﬁlter based on
micromechanical diffractive elements, Proceedings of IEEE
Optical MEMS and Nanophotonics, 2007, pp. 167–168.
Soh, M.T.K. et al. (2005) Evaluation of plasma deposited sil-
icon nitride thin ﬁlms for microsystems technology, J. Mi-
croelectromech. Syst., 14, 971–977.
Syms, R.R.A. et al. (2001) Improving yield, accuracy and com-
plexity in surface tension self-assembled MOEMS, Sens.
Actuators, A88, 273.
van Kessel, P.F. et al. (1998) A MEMS-based projection dis-
play, Proc. IEEE, 86, 1687.
Wang, Y. et al. (2001) A low-voltage lateral MEMS switch
with high RF performance, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 13,
902–911.
Yoon, J.-B. et al. (1998) Monolithic fabrication of electroplated
solenoid inductors using three-dimensional photolithography
of a thick photoresist, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 37, 7081.
Yue, M. et al. (2004) A 2-D microcantilever array for mul-
tiplexed biomolecular analysis, J. Microelectromech. Syst.,
13, 290–299.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 371]
30
MEMS Process Integration
MEMS devices come in a bewildering variety, in regard
to structures, materials and functions. Whereas all CMOS
technologies are close relatives, MEMS devices are made
with a multitude of closely related, distantly related and
unrelated technologies. Pressure sensor operation can be
based on piezoresistive, capacitive, thermal conductance
or resonance mechanisms, and while the ﬁrst three
share some structural features and fabrication steps, the
fourth bears more resemblance to gyroscopes and RF
oscillators. Accelerometers are made of single crystal
silicon, of bulk, epitaxial and SOI type, of polycrystalline
silicon and of electroplated metals. Electrospray emitters
have been realized in silicon, glass, quartz, SU-8,
PDMS, PMMA and many other polymers. Microneedles
have been made in both out-of-plane and in-plane
conﬁgurations,
from
single
crystal
and
polysilicon,
silicon dioxide, metals, polymers. Micromirrors are most
often made of silicon, but also of metals or metallized
nitride membranes. Mirrors come in in-plane (horizontal)
and out-of-plane (vertical) versions too.
Bulk and SOI MEMS structures have high aspect
ratios and highly complex 3D shapes resulting from
etching and wafer bonding. These put new requirements
on
subsequent
lithography,
doping
and
thin-ﬁlm
steps,
and
introduce
novel
metrology requirements.
MEMS devices with through-wafer holes pose process
limitations: for instance, in spinning a vacuum chuck
holds the wafer, and DRIE reactors use backside helium
cooling. Through-wafer structures require double-sided
processing and even without through-holes, there is often
a need to align structures on the two sides of the wafer.
Double-sided alignment is also mandatory for structured
wafer bonding.
MEMS devices are not solid state devices: they have
free-standing, moving, rotating and vibrating structures,
like the grids of old-fashioned vacuum tubes. These mov-
ing structures create challenges for the subsequent pro-
cessing and packaging steps. Capillary forces in drying,
silicon dust and vibrations during dicing, or stresses in en-
capsulation may damage delicate mechanical structures.
Closed cavities can sometimes be handled without prob-
lems, but high temperatures and changing pressures dur-
ing fabrication can cause some design limitations, espe-
cially when the cavity roof is a thin diaphragm. Despite
this seeming variety, there are many generic structures,
design principles and widely used techniques for realizing
them. These are the topics of this chapter.
30.1 Silicon Microbridges
A simple device like a silicon microbridge can be made
in numerous different ways, depending on wafer choice,
bulk <100>, <110>, <111> wafers, or from epitaxial
or SOI material. Both DRIE and wet etching can be used
and many process variations are possible with different
combinations of front-side and back-side processing (two
examples in Figure 30.1). Table 30.1 lists nine different
processes that can be used to make single crystal silicon
microbridges (clamped–clamped beams), but this list is
(a)
(b)
Figure 30.1
Silicon microbridges: (a) front-side KOH
deﬁnition and timed back-side KOH release; (b) front-
side bridge deﬁnition by p++ diffusion and front-side
KOH release
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 372]
388
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 30.1
Single crystal silicon bridges
Material
Bridge deﬁnition
Bridge release
Figure
Bulk <100>
Front-side KOH
Back-side KOH
30.1
p++ <100>
Front-side p++ doping
Front-side KOH
30.1
<111>
Front-side DRIE twice
Front-side KOH
20.34
Bulk <100>
Front-side DRIE
Front isotropic plasma
21.13
Bulk <100>
Front-side doping
Porous silicon etching
23.26
SOI
Front-side DRIE
Handle wafer isotropic
21.14
SOI
Front-side DRIE
BOX etching in HF
29.1
SOI
Front-side DRIE
Notching effect
21.28
Cavity SOI
Front-side DRIE
None required
30.18
by no means exhaustive! The ﬁnal structure will be the
same to a ﬁrst approximation, but there are many details
that differ, for example range of bridge thickness, degree
of gap control underneath the bridge, silicon doping level,
single-sided vs. double-sided lithography, etc. These will
be brieﬂy analyzed below.
The simple silicon bridge of Figure 30.1a suffers from
many shortcomings: timed etching is used to deﬁne bridge
thickness, and double-sided lithography is needed, even
though the alignment is non-critical as the back-side open-
ing can be made large. Both DRIE and KOH versions can
be done with similar ease (but with different sidewall an-
gle) and bridge doping can be varied over a large range.
The <110> version is done similarly.
In the p++ etch stop version (Figure 30.1b) the bridge
dimensions are determined mainly by the boron doping
proﬁle, but also by etch selectivity between lightly doped
and highly doped silicon. This can be maximized by suit-
able selection of wet etchant, its concentration and tem-
perature (Table 20.2), but there will be some loss of the
p++ material and the sidewall will be rough. The thickness
of the p++ layer is limited if diffusion is used to dope the
top silicon. If epitaxy is used, then any thickness can be
made, but a DRIE step is needed to etch through the p++
layer. In front-side release it is also mandatory to align
the bridges tilted relative to the wafer ﬂat, not along the
main axes of the crystal, to effectuate undercutting (see
Figure 20.9). Bridge width and required underetching time
are correlated, and the gap underneath the bridge is deter-
mined by the etching time, so it is related to bridge width.
In the <111> bridge it is also mandatory to carefully
align the bridges to crystal planes, and to use DRIE in
the ﬁrst step because <111> silicon cannot be etched by
KOH. The process is described in Figure. Bridge thick-
ness, gap and doping level can be freely chosen: the ﬁrst
DRIE step deﬁnes the bridge thickness and the second
DRIE step deﬁnes the gap underneath the bridge. Side-
walls need oxide or nitride protection, and an additional
RIE of oxide or nitride is required. Bridge width is not
Figure 30.2
Microbridges by p++ etch stop and SOI.
SEM micrographs courtesy Kestas Grigoras and Lauri
Sainiemi, Aalto University
related to gap, but excessive undercut takes place in some
crystal orientations, wasting area (Figure 20.34).
Combined anisotropic DRIE and isotropic RIE (Figure
21.13) can be used to make narrow and thick bridges only:
because the isotropic release etch step eats underneath the
bridge, wide bridges will have diminished thickness and
rather poor thickness control because the undercut etch
rate is not controllable to any great accuracy.
The gap of a SOI bridge is limited by the fact that BOX
thicknesses are at most a few micrometers. Such small
gaps are prone to stiction and dry HF-vapor release is
often employed. Because BOX etching extends laterally,
some area may become non-usable because the silicon
is undercut. The gap can be increased without a limit if
additional steps are taken to etch through BOX and the
handle wafer is etched (Figure 30.2).
In yet another variant, the SOI handle wafer is wet
etched to increase the gap. Isotropic 1:3:8 etchant (Section
11.12 on silicon etching) is selective between highly and
lightly doped silicon, with the highly doped silicon etched
faster. If the SOI device layer is lightly doped, and the
handle highly doped, isotropic wet etch can be done with-
out any protection of device layer bridges. This same etch
is utilized in piezoresistor fabrication (see Figure 30.7).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 373]
MEMS Process Integration
389
SOI device layer etching against BOX leads to notching
(see Figure 21.28). If narrow bridges are made, notchings
will meet under the beam and released bridges result. The
underside of this bridge is not ﬂat, just like that of the
bridge in Figure 21.13 but for a different reason: notching
is different from isotropy. Generally, however, notching
must be avoided in order to have proper control of beam
shape and dimensions.
Simple devices like microbridges have many other
applications in addition to resonators: they can function
as mechanical actuators, switches, infrared light sources,
microreactors for chemical synthesis, and as thermal
detectors for explosive vapors, to name but a few.
Cantilevers for AFM and chemical sensors are fabricated
using exactly the same techniques as microbridges, but
there are some additional ways of making cantilevers
because the cantilever geometry offers more undercutting
possibilities than clamped–clamped bridges.
30.2 Double-Sided Processing
In single side polished (SSP) wafers the backside is rough,
with micrometer peak-to-valley heights. Only very coarse
structures can be processed on such surface, and thick
resist has to be used to avoid excessive resist thinning
over topography. The same argument applies to thin ﬁlms:
for instance thick electroplated copper and thick poly are
rough and not suitable for ﬁne line lithography. Both
sides of double side polished (DSP) wafers are mirror
polished to sub-nanometer RMS roughness. However, the
side which was polished last is of better quality than the
other side, and DSP wafers are therefore not fully sym-
metric. This has implications especially to bonding which
is critically dependent on surface quality.
Total thickness variation (TTV) is critical in MEMS
through-wafer etched structures. If beams or diaphragms
10 μm thick need to be fabricated, 5 μm TTV results in
totally unacceptable thickness control. MEMS wafer TTV
values of 1 μm are typical, and 0.5 μm can be speciﬁed
for demanding applications.
30.2.1 Double-sided lithography
Double-sided lithography comes with three degrees of
difﬁculty:
• arrays without alignment
• non-critical alignment
• critical alignment.
Regular array structures on the wafer back side without
alignment with the front can be seen in the solar cell of
Figure 1.14. In non-critical alignment the major function
of the device is determined by structures on one side only,
and coarse auxiliary structures are made on the other side,
as in the p++ etch stop deﬁned nozzle of Figure 20.7.
Critical alignment involves device functions that are
highly dependent on the accuracy of pattern position, for
example symmetric resonating mass (see Figure 30.4) or
positioning piezoresistors to the point of maximum de-
ﬂection of a pressure sensor diaphragm, which will be
discussed presently (Figure 30.7).
Double-sided lithography is done on one side at a time:
the resist application on top, alignment and exposure on
top, development, rinsing and drying. Then, depending on
device structure, either etching of the front side is done,
or back-side lithography is performed.
Back-side lithography involves the application of
back-side resist, which means that the front side of the
wafer is placed in vacuum contact with the spinner
chuck. The front side must be protected. Photoresist is
often used but it cannot be used for patterning after being
vacuum chucked.
The alignment mechanism in double-sided lithography
relies on image processing. An image of the mask
alignment marks is stored, and the wafer is then inserted
between the mask and the alignment microscope, so the
alignment marks on the wafer are aligned with the stored
mask alignment marks (Figure 30.3). Alignment accuracy
is about 1 μm at best, and usually a few microns.
A seismic mass beam is made by double-sided lithog-
raphy and anisotropic wet etching (Figure 30.4a). Due
to misalignment, the resulting structure is asymmetric
(Figure 30.4b), and beam length is ill-deﬁned. Because
deﬂection of a beam depends on length cubed, even small
changes can result in large deviations. But even if align-
ment is perfect, the beam length is not necessarily correct
(Figure 30.4c): mask undercut can make the beam longer.
This undercut can come from switching from KOH to
TMAH, their (100):(111) selectivities being about 200:1
and 30:1. Defects in silicon wafers can also affect crystal
plane selectivity, as do impurities in etchants.
30.2.2 Etching
Wet etching (and wafer cleaning) in a tank takes place on
both sides simultaneously. It may be useful to etch from
both sides, either for symmetry reasons, or for doubling
the apparent etch rate. If the etching depth is shallow,
it is not necessary to protect the back side, but if deep
etching is done on the front side, the back side needs
to be protected. Single wafer plasma etching clears ﬁlm
on the front and leaves the back side ﬁlm intact, but if
wet etching is preferred (e.g., because of surface quality
considerations) the back side must be protected.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 374]
390
Introduction to Microfabrication
Mask
Wafer
Chuc k
BSA splitfield
microscope
Focusing and storage of
mask alignment marks
Mask
alignment
mark
Wafer
alignment
mark
Focusing of substrate alignment marks
Alignment
Figure 30.3
Double-sided alignment. Courtesy Suss Microtech GmbH
Protection by spin-coated polymers is a quick and easy
method. Photoresist is suitable for many applications, like
mask oxide etching in BHF, but aggressive etchants like
KOH require either inorganic ﬁlms (oxide, nitride) or
more stable polymers. Blue tape common in wafer dicing
can also be used as a protective layer, but removal of the
tape can be difﬁcult if fragile free-standing structures are
present on the wafer.
A single wafer holder which exposes only one side of
the wafer to the liquid is a universal solution. In electro-
chemical etching or deposition this holder also provides
the necessary electrical contacts to the wafer. However,
wafer front-side area is wasted by the clamp, and single
wafer processing is more expensive than batch processing.
With the holder the top side processing and materials can
be selected from a device operation point of view, and no
extra protective coatings are needed during processing.
30.2.3 Patterning of 3D structures
Because photoresist spinning on deep trenches and holes
is difﬁcult, or even impossible, depending on the through-
hole topology, other patterning approaches must be used.
Laminated dry resists can sometimes be used to overcome
trenches (Figure 9.8). There is no problem with resist
ﬂowing, because the resist is dry. However, dry resists
are limited in resolution: aspect ratios are roughly 1:1,
and with 20–50 μm as the typical dry resist thickness, it
is clear that it is best suited for non-critical lithography
only. Spray coating of resist works for wet-etched deep
structures with 54.7◦angles, though exposure focus depth
is another issue.
Sharp corners resulting from DRIE are difﬁcult to coat,
even by spray coating. Other solutions to patterning over
severe topography have already been introduced: peel-
ing masks (nested masks) are the standard approach in
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 375]
MEMS Process Integration
391
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 30.4
Alignment of seismic mass beam: (a) perfect
alignment; (b) misalignment; (c) mask undercut
both wet etching (Figure 20.4) and DRIE (Figure 21.17).
Lithography is carried out twice on a planar surface, be-
fore any deep etching.
Shadow masks (Figure 23.17) enable metallization
of wafers with severe topography or even wafers with
through holes. However, pattern size control over severe
topography may not be very good because of ﬂux
divergence. But if the shadow mask itself is a silicon
wafer patterned to match the 3D geometry already
fabricated, patterning accuracy is regained (Figure 30.5).
Figure 30.5
Conventional 2D and micromachined 3D sil-
icon shadow masks compared. Redrawn from Brugger et al.
(1999)
Figure 30.6
Double-sided etching of SOI. Reproduced
from Sanz-Velasco et al. (2006), copyright 2006, by
permission of Elsevier
The catalyst layer at the bottom of the ﬂow channel
of the microreactor in Figure 17.1 was deposited by a
3D shadow mask. A shadow mask is also useful for
patterning on membranes, especially if thin membranes
have been made. The heater and temperature sensors
of the microreactor in Figure 17.1 were also patterned
by shadow masks. One limitation is that they are best
suited when only a small percentage of area needs to
be metallized. Making shadow masks for large areas
would involve problems similar to making large-area
membranes. In Figure 30.6 asymmetric single crystal
silicon beams are made by double-sided lithography and
etching of SOI wafers. After lithography on the bottom
of the handle wafer is accomplished, anisotropic wet
etching will proceed as usual.
30.3 Membrane Structures
How many different ways are there to make membranes?
Many of the methods to make bridges have limitations
regarding width, and membrane fabrication must be able
to produce wide structures. Some of the bridge fabrica-
tion processes can be extended by perforating the mem-
brane with release holes, but then some applications may
become impossible, like pressure sensors. There are a
number of different approaches to membrane fabrication:
• back-side wet etching (as discussed in Chapter 20)
• back-side DRIE (especially with SOI)
• front-side release (perforated membranes)
• bonding over a cavity.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 376]
392
Introduction to Microfabrication
With back-side etching many membrane thicknesses can
be made, and there are many choices of materials. With
wet etching, typical membrane materials are silicon and
nitride. With dry etching, other materials can be used:
for example, aluminum oxide is extremely tolerant of
ﬂuorine plasma, and membranes of various kinds can
be made. Metallic membranes like aluminum (Figure
17.2) or gold can also be made, but the mechanical
strength of many metals is not sufﬁcient for large-area
free-standing membranes. Silicon supporting struts can
be left to stiffen the structure, as shown in Figures 20.27
and 20.31.
With front-side release, single-sided lithography suf-
ﬁces, and etching times are much shorter than with back-
side release. Again the underlying ﬁlm has to be very
selectively etched relative to the membrane. Protective
capping layers can be used (Figure 29.16). The sacriﬁcial
layer can be either silicon wafer itself or some deposited
ﬁlm. Oxides are typically limited in thickness, dry release
by HF vapor is a difﬁcult step, and stiction is a problem in
wet HF-based release. Polysilicon layers (and “epi-poly”
especially) can be made much thicker and released easily
in SF6 plasma or XeF2 dry release.
30.4 Piezoresistive Pressure Sensor
The
piezoresistive
pressure
sensor
is
one
of
the
oldest MEMS devices, dating back to the 1960s. In
piezoresistance mechanical stress causes a change in
resistance. Silicon has two major beneﬁts over metals
for
piezoresistors:
the
piezoresistance
coefﬁcient
is
larger, and it is available with both positive and negative
values, for p-type and n-type doping, respectively. Also,
silicon is compatible with high process temperatures,
unlike metals. One example of a piezoresistive pressure
sensor is shown in Figure 30.7. Many important process
integration issues can be seen in a simple piezoresistive
pressure sensor.
For square membranes stress depends on pressure and
membrane dimensions according to
σ = 1.02pa2
h2
(30.1)
where a is the membrane edge length and h its thickness.
It is mandatory to be able to control membrane thickness
accurately. While thicker layers (>50 μm) can be made
by timed etching, especially if starting wafer thickness
and TTV are tightly speciﬁed, thinner membranes ne-
cessitate some sort of etch stop structures. Diffused etch
stop layers are limited in thickness because diffusion is a
slow process and concentration falls off rapidly. Epitaxial
layers enable practically any thickness to be used. And
there is the choice between electrochemical etch stop
and using p++ SiGeB etch stop, which is slightly more
expensive but easy to integrate with standard TMAH or
KOH etching.
The change in piezoresistor resistance is given by
R
R
= π1σ1 + π2σ2
(30.2)
where the π are the longitudinal and transverse piezore-
sistance coefﬁcients, and the σ stresses. In the longitu-
dinal case electric current is in the same direction as
stress, while in the transverse case they are perpendicu-
lar. Piezoresistance coefﬁcients are different for different
crystal planes, and they depend on wafer doping type
(and level) as well (Table 30.2). Piezoresistor alignment
relative to wafer crystal axes determines the maximal
sensitivity. Polysilicon is a mixture of many crystal ori-
entations and its piezoresistance coefﬁcient will depend
on texture in the ﬁlm. As a rough guide, 30 × 10−11 Pa−1
can be used. Stresses in the megapascal range will then
result in very small resistance change.
Piezoresistive sensors are sensitive to temperature
changes because the silicon temperature coefﬁcient of re-
sistivity is fairly high, 0.0015/◦C. Resistance change due
to temperature change is easily larger than change due
to the piezoresistive effect. Integration of a temperature
sensor or some temperature compensation scheme must
be used. A diode can be used as a thermometer which
does not depend on stress.
Piezoresistors need to be placed where the maximum
deﬂection occurs. Due to misalignment, the resistor could
be placed on a solid, non-bending part of the silicon,
resulting in a null signal. But there are other ways in
which things can go wrong: wafer thickness does not af-
fect membrane thickness when etch stop is used, but the
wafer can be too thick. The pressure-sensitive membrane
is now too small, and the maximum deﬂection point is
shifted.
The simple p++ etch stop does not work for a piezore-
sistive pressure sensor for two reasons: piezoresistors
cannot be fabricated in heavily doped silicon, and the
mechanical properties of highly doped (>1018 cm−3)
diaphragms are inferior to low or moderately doped
material. In the pressure sensors of Figure 30.7, a double
layer epi-wafer has been used. This Si:Ge:B material was
described in Figure 22.6. It consists of a lightly doped
layer about 30 μm thick and a p++ layer 4 μm thick. Two
selective etches are used: KOH etching stopping on p++
and HF:HNO3:CH3COOH (1:3:8) wet etching which
etches highly doped silicon but not lightly doped silicon.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 377]
MEMS Process Integration
393
Table 30.2
Piezoresistance coefﬁcients
n-type
p-type
[100]
[110]
[111]
[100]
[110]
[111]
πl (10−11 Pa−1)
−102
−31
−7.5
6.6
72
94
πt (10−11 Pa1)
53
−18
6
−1
−66
44
Process ﬂow for piezoresistive pressure
sensor
Step
Comment
Wafer selection: p-type
silicon
n-type piezoresistors
Si:B:Ge epi and n-type
lightly doped epi
3 μm + 30 μm
Lithography and
implantation
Phosphorous doping for
piezoresistors
Resistor diffusion in dry
oxidation
Oxide grows on both
sides
LPCVD nitride
Nitride deposited on both
sides
Lithography for resistor
contacts
Minimum size 3 × 3 μm
Etching for contacts
Nitride and oxide RIE
Metal sputtering
Al 500 nm thick
Lithography and Al
etching
H3PO4 wet etching
PECVD nitride
Protects Al on front side
Photoresist spinning on
front side
Mechanical protection
Photoresist spinning on
back side
Preparing for
through-wafer etching
Lithography on back side
Membrane-to-resistor
alignment
Nitride and oxide etching
on back side
RIE for nitride, HF for
oxide
Photoresist stripping
Both sides simultaneously
KOH silicon etching
Si:B:Ge layer acts as an
etch stop
HF:HNO3:CH3COOH
isotropic etching
Etch p++ epi selectively
against n-Si
Etch nitride and oxide on
back
Reveal silicon for anodic
bonding
Anodic bonding to a
glass wafer
Glass wafer pre-drilled
Note: cleaning and resist stripping steps not listed.
sensor epi layer 
etch stop epi layer
piezoresistors
glass wafer
Figure 30.7
Piezoresistive pressure sensor
30.4.1 Microphones
Microphones are pressure sensors, too. They consist
of a rigid backplate and a movable membrane. Again,
many variants exist, both bulk micromachined and
surface micromachined. Some involve wafer bonding
for counter-electrode, others use sacriﬁcial layer etching
for air gap formation. We will present a two-wafer,
wet-etched, single crystal silicon membrane version
with wafer bonding (Figure 30.8), and a sacriﬁcial layer
version with polysilicon membrane and single crystal
silicon backplate (Figure 30.20).
Process ﬂow for bonded microphone
• Membrane (top) wafer:
– Thermal oxidation and oxide patterning
– Nitride deposition and top side nitride etch
– Membrane metallization (Cr/Au)
– KOH etch halfway
• Silicon backplate (bottom) wafer:
– Oxidation
– Peeling mask
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 378]
394
Introduction to Microfabrication
– KOH etching
– Oxidation
– Metallization (Cr/Au)
• Final processing:
– Gold–gold thermocompression bonding
– KOH etching
– Aluminum metallization through shadow mask
The top membrane wafer is metallized by Cr/Au and
etched halfway in KOH. The backplate wafer is patterned
and etched to a depth of 20 μm to deﬁne the acoustic gap.
It is a timed etch, and the gap is critical for microphone re-
sponse. Otherwise, KOH silicon etching is standard. Both
wafers are quite robust and thermocompression bonding
can be carried out without problems. Etching continues
after bonding. The only other materials present are sili-
con dioxide, silicon nitride and gold, and none of them
is etched by KOH. KOH etching will stop automatically
when the nitride membrane is reached, and it would seem
to be non-critical. However, acoustic hole size depends
Figure 30.8
Microphone: bonding, ﬁnal KOH etching,
metallization. Compare to Figure 20.19. Adapted from
Scheeper et al. (2003)
critically on etch timing: too long an overetch will rapidly
widen the holes (recall Figure 20.23). The aluminum met-
allization is done by shadow mask after completing the
process (because no resist spinning is possible on holes,
and because aluminum does not tolerate KOH etching).
Figure 20.19 presented a similar microphone process.
There, however, both wafers are processed to comple-
tion before bonding. Delicate handling of the thin silicon
nitride membrane is then mandatory in bonding.
30.5 Tilting and Bending
Through-Wafer Etched Structures
Many MEMS structures require through-wafer etching. It
is important to consider when this step should be done
because wafer mechanical strength is compromised as a
consequence, and some process options are no longer
possible. Wafer thickness variation comes into play in
many ways, as in simple nozzles, which were discussed
in Section 20.7. Piezoresistive pressure sensors similarly
showed many wafer thickness-dependent features. Some-
times using SOI wafers can eliminate thickness-related
problems, sometimes epiwafers help, and sometimes p++
etch stops can be used. Complete redesign of the devices
can of course also overcome these issues, but probably
shifts problems elsewhere in process design.
30.5.1 Mirrors
Mirrors can be thought of as membranes, in the plane of
the wafer, but the modes of operation differ: some mirrors
are for up–down parallel-plate movement without bend-
ing, and resemble pressure sensor membranes. The optical
modulator shown in Figure 29.9 relies on this mode of op-
eration. A torsionally moving mirror was shown in Figure
29.25. This mirror is a digital device: it has only two sta-
ble positions, while the angle of analog mirrors depends
on the actuation force. The actuation force required de-
pends on many factors, including the distance between
the electrodes and the mirror, as well as the stiffness of
the torsion bars.
A tilting mirror with a tilting frame was shown in
Figure 1.2. This design enables free pointing directions.
Mechanically strong, yet ﬂexible springs are needed for
such designs, and silicon is a good choice. Pop-up mir-
rors which result in 45◦or 90◦mirrors were described
in Figure 29.24, and another type of pop-up mirror will
be seen in Figure 39.2: a planar mirror with large pop-up
stroke. In addition to membrane-type horizontal mirrors,
vertical mirrors have been made. In Figure 21.3 a sliding
mirror was made by DRIE, and in Figure 21.24 DRIE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 379]
MEMS Process Integration
395
together with anisotropic wet etch smoothing were used
to ﬁnish static laser mirrors.
Micromirrors have several optical design criteria:
planarity, smoothness and reﬂectivity. Smoothness is an
atomic-scale concept and planarity is a large-area con-
cept. Reﬂectivity is maximized by using non-oxidizable
metals like gold. For mirrors planarity can be quantiﬁed
by radius of curvature (ROC) using Stoney’s formula,
Equation 5.20.
SOI device layers can provide a wide range of thick-
nesses, and 20 μm already results in large ROCs on the
order of meters. Thin mirrors are typically made of sil-
icon nitride or polysilicon. Thicknesses are limited to a
few micrometers. Planarity is not good because the mirror
bends. This can be combated by stiffening the structure
by using 3D structures instead of planar ﬁlms. An opti-
cally detected cantilever was made stiffer and more planar
by plasma-etched U-grooves ﬁlled with LPCVD nitride
(Figure 29.6).
The spring constant for ﬂexures of width w and thick-
ness t is given by Equation 29.2. The spring constant
is very sensitive to thickness variations. The SOI device
layer can be used to deﬁne torsion bar (ﬂexure) thickness.
But it would often be desirable to have a rather thick mir-
ror, for example the full thickness of the SOI device layer,
and much thinner ﬂexures. One solution is to use polysil-
icon for ﬂexures, so it is then poly deposition that deﬁnes
ﬂexure thickness, not etch thinning of bulk or SOI silicon.
Because poly ﬂexures can be very thin, spring constants
can be made small.
A single crystal silicon mirror made in the device layer
of a SOI wafer, Figure 30.9. The ﬂexure geometry is simi-
lar to those in Figure 1.2. Three KOH etch steps sculpt the
100 mm thick device layer (compare to Figure 20.21). The
mirror thickness is 14 mm and radius of curvature over
50 cm. In the third KOH etching step real-time monitor-
ing is used to accurately control the suspension thickness
Bonded
post
Glass wafer
Steering 
electrodes
Ground 
shield
Lead 
transfer
y-frame
86μm
n-Si
Au mirror
Suspension
spring
(3–4μm)
Frame
(13–14μm)
Figure 30.9
Two-axis single crystal silicon mirror made
in SOI device layer, Reproduced from Dokmeci et al.
(2004), by permission of IEEE
(3–4 mm). Next, an auxiliary Al layer is deposited and
patterned over the etched topography.
It keeps the structure together until the ﬁnal release
step. SOI wafer is then anodically bonded to a Pyrex
wafer. The SOI handle wafer is etched away. Gold mir-
ror is deposited and patterned (100 nm thick, with a 2 nm
Ti adhesion layer). A silicon DRIE etch deﬁnes the gim-
bal, ﬂexures and the mirror plate. Aluminum serves as an
etch stop which eliminates notching. Aluminum wet etch-
ing completes the process. The Al wet etchant penetrates
the cavity and careful drying is needed.
30.5.2 AFM needles and tips
AFM cantilevers need to bend and therefore they need
to be released at some point in their fabrication process.
Again, it is critical to decide when the through-wafer
step takes place. As in mirrors, it is paramount to protect
the active side of the device during back-side process-
ing. Resist coating is one option, another is to prepare
the back-side etching mask before ﬁnishing the front-side
processing, so that no lithography will be needed after
completing the front side. Another issue in front protec-
tion is KOH/TMAH compatibility: resist is not enough,
but ﬂuoropolymers may do, or PECVD nitride, or a spe-
cial holder will be needed.
A AFM needle made on a SOI wafer is described in
Figure 30.10. Cantilever and tip are fabricated in the SOI
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 30.10
AFM
cantilever–tip
fabrication.
Repro-
duced from Chui et al. (1998) by permission of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 380]
396
Introduction to Microfabrication
device layer, and BOX serves as an etch stop layer for
the back-side release etch. A similar process was shown
cursorily in Figure 20.2.
Process ﬂow for AFM cantilever–tip
• SOI wafer with device layer 5 μm thick
• Thermal oxidation
• LPCVD nitride
• Etch nitride from front side
• Lithography for the tip
• Etch oxide
• Etch silicon isotropically (+ resist strip)
• Thermal oxidation for tip sharpening
• Lithography to deﬁne the cantilever
• DRIE of device silicon (+ resist strip)
• Thermal oxidation for passivation
• Lithography for piezoresistors
• Boron implantation for resistors (+ strip)
• Lithography for contact
• Boron implantation for contacts (+ strip)
• Implant activation in RTA
• Aluminum deposition and patterning
• Polyimide protective coating on front
• Back-side nitride patterning
• Back-side TMAH anisotropic etch
• Buried oxide etching
• Polyimide plasma removal
The SOI wafer enables precise and easy control of sil-
icon cantilever thickness: this is essential for mechanical
devices in order to control cantilever resonance frequency
and stiffness. However, in this process the tip fabrication
process (etching and oxidation) introduces some uncer-
tainty into cantilever thickness. Sharp tips could of course
be fabricated by simple anisotropic wet etching (Figure
20.15), but oxidation leads to sharper tips, and the pro-
cess is better controlled by oxidation time than by etch
time (Figure 13.14).
Boron implantation (40 keV, 5 × 1014 cm−2) is used
in piezoresistor formation. In order to improve electrical
contact to the piezoresistor, an additional ion implantation
(40 keV, 5 × 1015 cm−2) is done to increase doping con-
centration in the contact, to ensure low-resistance contact
to aluminum. The passivation oxide thickness is chosen
to block the contact enhancement ion implantation. Rapid
thermal annealing (RTA, 10 s at 1000 ◦C; 0.4 μm diffusion
depth) is used to remove implantation damage.
Spin-coated polyimide is used to protect the silicon tip
and aluminum metallization during the back-side silicon
etch. Additionally, a single wafer chuck protects the front
side. This eats up area on the wafer front side and leads
to fewer chips.
The ﬁrst lithography step could be back-side nitride
etch mask opening, even though it will be used very late
in the process. This would minimize the process steps
after ﬁnishing the front-side processing.
30.6 Needles and Tips, Channels
and Nozzles
30.6.1 Ink jet nozzle
Despite all the good features of anisotropic wet etching,
through-wafer structures take up a lot of silicon area. Noz-
zles fabricated by anisotropic through-wafer wet etching
cannot be packed close to each other, and for ink jet print-
ers other nozzle geometries have been studied. One such
geometry is the top shooter shown in Figure 21.30: one
through-etched reservoir can supply ink to many nozzles
fabricated by front-side processing. Another geometry is
the side shooter, which is not limited by wafer thickness
or etch geometries. All critical dimensions of the device
are deﬁned by front-side processes, and one non-critical
through-wafer etching completes the process. One such
design is described in Figure 30.11.
Process ﬂow for ink jet
• Thermal oxidation, 1 μm thick
• Lithography 1: chip area deﬁnition
• Oxide etching
• Boron diffusion, 2 μm deep
• Lithography 2: chevron pattern, 1 μm width
• RIE of silicon, 4 μm deep
• Anisotropic
silicon
etching
to
undercut
p++
chevrons
• Thermal oxidation
• LPCVD nitride deposition for chevron roof sealing
• Etchback (or polishing) of nitride
• LPCVD polysilicon deposition
• Poly doping, 20 ohm/sq
• Lithography 3: poly heater pattern
• Polysilicon etching
• Aluminum sputtering
• Lithography 4: metal pads
• Aluminum etching
• Passivation: CVD oxide 1 μm + PECVD nitride
0.3 μm
• Lithography 5: opening of bonding pads
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 381]
MEMS Process Integration
397
• RIE of nitride and oxide
• Lithography 6: pattern for gold lift-off
• Evaporation of Cr/Au
• Lift of Cr/Au
• Lithography 7: ﬂuidic inlet deﬁnition on the back
side
• Anisotropic etching through the wafer from the back
Note: Resist stripping and cleaning steps omitted.
Conductors
Etch progress 
over time
<011>
<110>
LPCVD/thermal oxide
LPCVD nitride
LPCVD oxide
Substrate
Flow tube
p++ Si
Mask pattern
Silicon
Polysilicon
heater
Front-end ink 
reservoir
Bonding pad
Nozzle
Ink inlet 
orifice
Figure 30.11
Side-shooting ink jet. The chevron struc-
ture enables both anisotropic underetch and roof sealing.
Reproduced from Chen and Wise (1997) by permission
of IEEE
Figure 30.12
Cavity sealing by CVD: plasma-etched,
chevron-shaped access holes are closed by LPCVD nitride
deposition. Reproduced from Chen and Wise (1997) by per-
mission of IEEE
Boron-doped silicon provides mechanical strength for
the structure, compared to the nitride membrane, which
can only be about 1 μm thick vs. micrometers for the
silicon roof. The chevron patterns open fast etching silicon
crystal planes which enable undercutting on the <100>
wafer. Figure 30.12 shows what the chevrons look like
before and after sealing.
Etchback thinning of nitride is done to improve ther-
mal speed: the closer the heater resistor to the ﬂow tube,
the faster the heating. Polysilicon is heavily doped and
will serve as a heater electrode. Less resistive aluminum
cannot be used because of KOH etching. Gold on bond-
ing pads makes wire bonding easy, and gold protects the
front side during back-side anisotropic etching (areas that
are not gold covered are either nitride or oxide, which
are resistant to alkaline etchants). Through-wafer etching
is non-critical because it will stop automatically on the
bottom oxide of the ﬂow tube.
30.6.2 Microneedles
Microneedles come in two major varieties: in plane
and out of plane. In-plane needles can be very long,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 382]
398
Introduction to Microfabrication
millimeters, while the out-of-plane variety is limited to
a few hundred micrometers. Out-of-plane 2D arrays of
needles can be made easily, and in-plane needles can
be arranged in a linear array. Applications vary from
drug delivery, blood sample extraction and electrospray
to ﬂuid mixing. A number of out-of-plane microneedles
were presented in Chapter 21. An in-plane hollow needle
was also introduced (Figure 21.16).
A solid in-plane microneedle made by bulk microma-
chining and intended for biomedical electrical stimulation
studies is shown in Figure 30.13. It is fabricated in a
modiﬁed p-well CMOS process, with the needle deﬁned
by the p++ etch stop. Fabrication of similar microneedles
on SOI by DRIE is considerably simpler.
Hollow in-plane needles can be made by a number of
techniques. For example, p++ silicon as mechanical sup-
port, PSG as the sacriﬁcial layer and nitride as the roof
of the hollow channel. Similar structures can be made by
other combinations of materials. In Figure 30.14 parylene
is used as the ﬂoor, AZ photoresist as the sacriﬁcial ma-
terial deﬁning the channel and parylene as the roof. The
needle is used in electrospray ionization (ESI) in mass
spectrometry. The process ﬂow for the hollow parylene
ESI needle is given below.
Process ﬂow for hollow parylene needle
• Thermal oxidation
• Front-side protection by resist
• Back-side lithography
• Back-side oxide etching
• Back-side silicon etching
• Oxide roughening etch
• First parylene deposition
• First parylene patterning
• AZ resist application
• Lithography deﬁning channel
• Second parylene deposition
• Aluminum sputtering and patterning
• Second parylene plasma etching
• Aluminum mask removal
• Resist dissolution
• Oxide etching
Aluminum is needed as an etch mask for parylene
RIE; photoresist cannot be used because the etch selectiv-
ity between two polymers is inadequate. In order to im-
prove parylene adhesion, the oxide surface was roughened
using gaseous BrF3 etching, and then silane SAM was
applied. Channel height is quite freely chosen by chang-
ing the resist spin coating parameters, for example 3 μm
for parylene layers and 5 μm for the sacriﬁcial AZ re-
sist. For alternative narrow channel formation techniques,
see Figure 17.8 (bonding), Figure 21.15 (buried channel),
Figure 25.3c (vertical sacriﬁcial layer) and Figure 29.15
(parylene molding).
Fluidic connection to a KOH-etched hole is possible
with a capillary, but dead volumes will result from the
mismatch of macroscopic capillary and microfabricated
inlet. As a solution, a PDMS cast connector can be used
(Figure 30.15). Using exactly the same mask as for back-
side hole etching, a mould is created for PDMS casting
(see section 18.4 for PDMS casting). A dummy ﬁber is
inserted and PDMS is cured. PDMS is peeled off silicon
mould, and dummy ﬁber is removed, too. Capillary is in-
serted and the PDMS piece is inserted into ﬂuidic chip.
Because PDMS is self-adhesive, and because the shapes
are exactly matching, a tight plug is created. But is it still
reusable. If stronger bond/pressure tolerance is needed,
oxygen plasma activation of PDMS can be used, but then
bonding becomes irreversible.
dielectric
bonding
pad
conductor
recording
site
p-substrate
n-epi
p-well
p++
p++
n+
n+
p+
p+
Figure 30.13
In-plane integrated CMOS microneedle for electrophysiological measurements by Ji and Wise (1992).
Reproduced from Brand (2006), copyright 2006, by permission of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 383]
MEMS Process Integration
399
Figure 30.14
Parylene hollow needle for ESI. Redrawn
from Licklider et al. (2000)
Figure 30.15
PDMS ﬂuidic connector with exact ﬁt
into KOH etched silicon. Courtesy Ville Saarela, Aalto
University, by permission of Elsevier
30.7 Bonded Structures
Bonding serves many functions, and this section covers
those bonding applications that are performed in the mid-
dle of the process, while those that are done at the end
of process for packaging will be discussed later on in
this chapter.
A bonded microturbine was shown in Figure 1.17. The
rotor is made of the middle wafer and released after it has
been bonded to the top and bottom wafers. Narrow tethers
Incident infrared
cut-in by dicing
AI
Si
Si
grating
bonding area
thermopile
absorbing area
SiN membrane
Figure 30.16
Infrared spectrometer. Reproduced from
Kong et al. (2001), copyright 2001, by permission of
Elsevier
of silicon dioxide are etched away to enable the rotor
to move. A bonded microreactor was shown in Figure
17.1. Silicon and glass wafers were bonded to form the
microreactor, and processing continued after bonding by
deposition and patterning of heater and sensor resistors.
No wafer thinning was used in these applications.
As another example, a spectrometer is discussed here
(Figure 30.16). It relies on silicon optical properties in the
infrared: silicon is transparent above 1.1 μm wavelengths,
and a silicon wafer is suitable as a window for an IR spec-
trometer. A diffraction grating is fabricated on a window
wafer, which is bonded to a thermopile detector wafer. In
order to access bonding pads on the detector wafer, a dic-
ing saw cut-in has been made on the window wafer, and
as the last step of the process, the silicon piece above the
pads is diced away. Without the cut-in, extreme precision
would be needed in dicing, with the danger of cutting the
thermopile detector metallization.
Bonding is used in many cases for the creation of criti-
cal structures, like capacitive sensor gaps (Figure 17.2). In
capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducers (cMUTs)
bonding is essential for forming the active silicon mem-
brane of the device (there are similar devices made by
sacriﬁcial layer techniques; as you may have guessed, it
is again a question of polysilicon vs. single crystalline
silicon properties and processing). After bonding a SOI
wafer over etched cavities, the handle wafer and BOX
are etched away, leaving the device silicon layer. Alu-
minum electrodes and passivation oxide are processed on
this membrane (Figure 30.17).
The capacitive gap is deﬁned by the KOH-etched
depth. Fusion bonding was done under ambient condi-
tions, meaning that air was trapped inside the cavity.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 384]
400
Introduction to Microfabrication
oxide
Al electrode
Si membrane
ground electrode 
air cavity
Figure 30.17
Ultrasonic transducer: SOI wafer bonded
over cavity, handle wafer and BOX etched away. Alu-
minum electrode processing on SOI device layer. Adapted
from Huang et al. (2003)
During bonding oxygen reacted with silicon, which
means that the cavity pressure is below 1 atm and the
membrane is deﬂected downward (recall Figure 17.14).
This induces stress in the membrane, which has to be
accounted for when an actuation voltage is applied.
A single crystal silicon bridge is the mechanical el-
ement in a piezoelectric resonator (Figure 30.18). It is
fabricated by bonding a device wafer into a handle wafer
with cavities (cavity SOI). No notching effect will take
place when silicon etching stops at the air cavity. Another
beneﬁt is the elimination of stiction: no release etch, no
stiction. The beneﬁt of piezoelectric actuation is that gaps
along BB'
along AA' 
A
A'
B
B'
trench
cavity
Figure 30.18
Piezoelectric length–extensional bar res-
onator on cavity SOI: AlN piezoelectric and molybdenum
metallization. Adapted from Jaakkola et al. (2007)
are not critical: piezoelectric actuation is independent of
gap width and the DC bias is not needed at all. In capaci-
tive actuation 100 nm gaps would be needed for actuation
with a 10 V DC bias over the gap.
Design variables in cavity-SOI include silicon mem-
brane thickness, membrane area and gap. A very wide
range of dimensions can be made. In theory all SOI de-
vice layer dimensions are available, and membrane sizes
range from 10 micrometers to millimeters. Practical pro-
cess limitations (pressure in cavity etc.) necessitate design
rules which limit the available cavity depths and sizes and
silicon thicknesses. Note that alignment marks are etched
on the back of the handle wafer, so that top side structures
can be aligned with the cavity.
30.8 Surface Micromachining
Combined with Bulk Micromachining
The distinction between surface MEMS and bulk MEMS
is not clear cut. For example, the pneumatic bubble
pump of Figure 30.19 exhibits elements of both surface
and
bulk machining: the
structural polysilicon has
been released by HF etching of oxide, but the ﬂuidic
manifold has been etched through the wafer by KOH.
The sidewalls of the surface micromachined channel are
hydrophilic, but the bulk silicon sidewalls are coated
hydrophobic so that water from the surface channel does
not penetrate through the hole.
There is no need to have a clear demarcation between
surface and bulk micromachining: both rely on silicon and
silicon dioxide as materials and deposition and etching as
the main techniques. Layer thicknesses differ, and some-
times thick silicon wafer is best, while in other cases thin
deposited poly works best. SOI can be seen as a hybrid
between the two.
Similarly, combining anisotropic wet etching with
DRIE opens up new possibilities. The microphone of
Figure 30.20 combines acoustic holes made in a single
crystal bulk silicon wafer by DRIE and the pressure-
sensitive
membrane
made
of
LPCVD
polysilicon.
Phosphorus-doped silica glass PSG is used as a sacriﬁcial
layer. The process ﬂow for the device is given below.
Process ﬂow for sacriﬁcial layer
microphone
• LPCVD nitride deposition
• Poly deposition, doping, patterning
• Acoustic hole lithography
• Poly/nitride/<Si> DRIE, 20 μm deep
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 385]
MEMS Process Integration
401
• CVD oxide (PSG) deposition
• CVD oxide lithography and etching
• Poly membrane deposition and doping
• Lithography and etching of poly
• Metallization
• Back-side lithography and silicon DRIE
• PSG removal through the acoustic holes
The normal strengths and limitations of surface mi-
cromachining apply here: only one wafer is used, saving
money compared to two-wafer bonding (see microphones
of Figures 20.19 and 30.8). Polysilicon membrane stress
has be to controlled, but because it is done early in the pro-
cess, any kind of stress-relief anneal is applicable (Figure
25.9). Acoustic gap height is determined by CVD oxide
(PSG) deposition, which can be accurately controlled and
easily veriﬁed by measurement. However, the maximum
gap height is limited to a few micrometers (2 μm in this
case). And because the gap height is small, stiction prob-
lems must be considered. When PSG is deposited into the
acoustic holes, the surface is not planarized (Figure 5.16).
Poly deposited over PSG will then have small spikes,
which make stiction unlikely. The spikes come “free of
charge,” without any lithography step.
Figure 30.19
Bubble pump: air pressure from the KOH-
etched, SAM-coated hydrophobic manifold pushes liquids
in the hydrophilic surface channel. Adapted from Tas et al.
(2002)
Figure 30.20
Polysilicon membrane microphone, back-
plane with acoustic gaps by DRIE in single crystal silicon.
Adapted from Deh´e (2007)
Solder bump
Target die
Figure 30.21
Fabrication process for polysilicon molded
structures: <Si> DRIE, CVD oxide, poly deposition and
patterning, metallization, bonding, sacriﬁcial oxide etch-
ing. Reproduced from Horsley et al. (1998) by permission
of IEEE
Figure 30.22
Polysilicon actuator fabricated by the pro-
cess shown in Figure 30.20. Reproduced from Horsley et al.
(1998) by permission of IEEE
DRIE of silicon, oxide deposition into silicon trenches,
followed by polysilicon LPCVD, creates versatile mi-
crostructures. Metals can be deposited on poly. The basic
scheme is shown in Figure 30.21. The CVD oxide acts as
a sacriﬁcial layer. Bonding such a structure to a carrier
wafer (by eutectic or solder bonding) and etching the ox-
ide away leaves polysilicon microstructures, like the hard
disk drive read/write head actuator shown in Figure 30.22.
There is an alternative way to go as well: single crys-
tal silicon underneath the polysilicon structures is etched
away, in a fashion similar to Figure 21.14, leaving free-
standing polysilicon structures. Polysilicon beams of high
aspect ratio made this way are shown in Figure 30.23.
30.9 MEMS Packaging
Packaging provides protection to the chip and, at the
same time, connectivity to the outside world. Information,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 386]
402
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 30.23
Polysilicon beams (4 μm wide, 80 μm high)
made in <Si> DRIE, CVD oxide sacriﬁcial layer process.
Reproduced from Ayazi and Najaﬁ(2000), by permission
of IEEE
energy and matter must ﬂow in and out of the chip in
a controlled manner: for instance, the environment must
interact with the sensor, energy has to be provided to the
sensor (unless it is a so-called self-generating type like
a photodiode) and a signal must be carried out of the
package. In magnetic ﬁeld sensors or accelerometers this
is easy, because magnetic ﬁelds and gravity “penetrate”
the package.
Often a cavity with known atmosphere is needed for
proper device operation, for example a micromechanical
RF switch needs to be operated in a protected atmosphere
for stability (no water condensation) and at a known
pressure for mechanical damping. RF MEMS devices are
somewhat akin to ICs: once the package is ﬁnished, the
devices are internal to the system and only need to be
protected from the environment. In optical devices the
package must be optically transparent, but additionally,
in the case of mechanically moving mirrors, the pressure
in the cavity affects mechanical damping. The pressure
must be maintained over the lifetime of the device, for
example 10 years. In IR devices there are intriguing
possibilities because silicon is IR transparent, and the
signal can enter through the wafer back side.
In chemical sensors and ﬂuidics packaging is much
more problematic: direct contact with liquid or gas is
usually required, which means that the chip is exposed
to the outside world. The lifetime of the device has two
rather different elements: storage time and usage time.
For example, a biochip or humidity sensor may lie on
a shelf for six months and then has to function prop-
erly for an hour. Many chemical and biological chips
are disposable devices, and for good reason, but many
of them are miniaturized instruments for continuous use,
like the ﬂame ionization detector of Figure 1.10. Such de-
vices must be compatible with the ﬂuids in question, for
example no unwanted adsorption on surfaces, no residues
from analytes, no catalytic metals in contact with ﬂuids,
no leaching from bonding materials, etc.
ICs are solid state devices and their packaging is
generic and simple: both plastic and hermetic packages
are independent of chip design and technology. Wafer
dicing relies on 20 000 rpm saw blades, which might
make MEMS structures resonate; dicing saws are water
cooled, which may lead to contamination and stiction;
and silicon dust may block cavities and gaps.
The zero-level package is a structure that seals the
MEMS part from the ambient. It is preferably applied
on a wafer scale, and the packaged wafer then proceeds
to dicing and assembly. But chip-scale packaging is still
practiced in R&D. One reason is yield: if wafer-scale
packaging goes wrong, the yield might be zero; with chip-
scale packaging there are more trials and thus the chances
of success increase.
There are a number of dichotomies that must be con-
sidered in selecting a zero-level package:
• wafer bonding vs. capping by thin-ﬁlm deposition
• silicon cap wafer vs. glass cap wafer
• direct bonding vs. intermediate bonding
• electrical feedthroughs via cap wafer vs. via device
wafer
• hermetic sealing vs. non-hermetic sealing.
Bonding for packaging is limited by the fact that the ﬁn-
ished devices must not be affected. For example:
• Pre-bonding cleaning chemicals or plasmas must not
attack devices.
• Bonding must not introduce incompatible materials.
• Bonding temperature must not change device properties.
• Discharges must be prevented during anodic bonding.
• Bonding must not introduce paths for current leakage.
• Bonding must not introduce parasitic capacitances or
inductances.
The two basic approaches are capping by bonding
and capping by deposition, but they come in many
variants. One key issue is whether electrical contact is
made through the device wafer or the capping wafer.
The former is more demanding because through-wafer
structure needs to be integrated with the device. Of
course it may come naturally as a part of device
processing. Figure 30.24 shows three ways of contacting:
vias through cap and device wafer, plus a brute force
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 387]
MEMS Process Integration
403
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 30.24
Zero-level packages by bonding: (a) electrical contact through via in cap wafer; (b) electrical contact
through via device wafer; (c) electrical contact through large opening in cap wafer
method where a large cut is made in the cap wafer, to
open contact to the device wafer. Note that Figure 30.24
is highly schematic and the cap wafer can be silicon or
glass, and the vias vertical or otherwise. The electrical
contacting can be metal, polysilicon, etc.
Electrical signal wires out of the package must be
sealed in the capping process. Wiring by diffusions
in silicon have two important beneﬁts: they leave the
surface ﬂat, essential for many bonding processes; and
they tolerate any imaginable bonding temperature. On the
downside, there is the high resistance of diffused lines.
Metal bonding requires an additional isolation layer,
otherwise bonding metal would short the signal metal.
In this respect adhesive bonding and glass frit bonding
are the best: the soft polymer or glass covers the wire,
and the height difference between wire and no-wire sites
is only a fraction of the adhesive or glass-frit thickness,
having no effect on the bonding process.
Hermeticity is one major criterion for packaging. The
cavity should really be vacuum tight and hold its pressure
for years. This kind of requirement is typical for devices
which depend on resonance frequency stability for their
operation. One such SOI resonator device is shown in
Figure 30.25. It relies on anodic bonding and electrical
contacts through the capping glass wafer.
The bonding process itself produces gases and these
accumulate in the cavity. Additional gases come from
outgassing (e.g., from CVD ﬁlms or polymeric materi-
als, including adhesives and glass-frit binders). One way
to combat outgassing is to insert a getter in the cavity.
Getters are porous and highly reactive materials which
capture and hold gases. For example, titanium is effective
in capturing oxygen, by reaction to form TiO2.
The measurement of cavity pressure is no easy task be-
cause of leaks and gettering. In fact, resonant microstruc-
tures in the cavity are used as vacuum gauges: because
frequency is very sensitive to pressure, it can be used
for vacuum measurement. This, of course, depends crit-
ically on the stability of the resonator: any drift in the
Figure 30.25
SOI resonator sealed with glass cap wafer
by anodic bonding. Electrical feedthroughs in glass wafer.
Adapted from Kaajakari et al. (2006)
mechanical quality factor, surface charging or ﬁlm depo-
sition on the resonator will change the resonant frequency.
Different bonding techniques suit different demands.
In the RF switch shown in Figure 30.26, various bonding
techniques have been used. The SOI starting wafer has
been made by fusion bonding. The SOI wafer is anodi-
cally bonded to a glass wafer, and the gap (and hence the
actuation voltage) between the two is deﬁned by the SOI
device layer etched depth. Glass-frit bonding is used in
packaging. Glass-frit thickness is not well deﬁned, but its
function is to provide a hermetic package; its thickness
does not affect device operating parameters. The result-
ing switch is quite expensive, because two silicon and two
glass wafers are used. On the other hand, its reproducibil-
ity and reliability are good because the ﬂexible element
is made of single crystal silicon. Many of the surface mi-
cromachined switches discussed in Chapter 29 are very
sensitive to stresses and have poor reproducibility.
30.9.1 Capping by deposition
Capping a MEMS structure by deposition faces a number
challenges: it has to result in a mechanically robust, thick
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 388]
404
Introduction to Microfabrication
oxide
gold
glass frit
glass
<Si>
glass
glass
Figure 30.26
RF switch: ﬂexible element in SOI de-
vice layer, anodically bonded to glass wafer which holds
gold metallization. Glass cap wafer by glass-frit bonding.
Adapted from Sakata et al. (1999)
and dense enough layer to protect the moving parts and
to prevent gas and liquid diffusion, and the deposition
process and material have to be compatible with the other
process steps and structures.
In sealing ﬂow channels (Figures 21.15, 30.12) good
step coverage is mandatory to seal the channels. In encap-
sulating moving MEMS structures, care should be taken
to minimize deposition on the movable structures, and in
fact poor step coverage processes are preferred. In order
to reduce the inﬂuence of the sealing ﬁlm on the struc-
tural ﬁlms, the sealing ﬁlm should be as thin as possible.
This is often best achieved with horizontal access holes,
rather than with plasma-etched vertical holes. The two
basic access hole types are compared in Figure 30.27.
The horizontal access hole minimum dimension is deter-
mined by ﬁlm thickness, which can easily be made small,
compared to lithographically determined, plasma-etched
access holes.
An absolute pressure sensor is a simple example of a
sealed cavity: the cavity holds the reference pressure. If an
(c)
(a)
(b)
(d)
Figure 30.27
Cavity roof deposition and patterning, and
sacriﬁcial etching: (a) through vertical RIE access hole;
(b) through horizontal access hole; (c, d) sealing by
ﬁlm deposition
ultimate vacuum is needed inside the cavity, evaporation
is the deposition method of choice. Contrary to CVD, no
(potentially) harmful gases will be incorporated into the
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 30.28
Capping layer problems: (a) cracks; (b) out-
gassing; (c) collapse. Adapted from Li et al. (2009)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 389]
MEMS Process Integration
405
cavity during evaporation. Due to the directional nature
of evaporation, horizontal access holes have to be used.
If polysilicon is used for sealing, hydrogen will remain in
the cavity (Equation 5.1). Hydrogen, however, is usually
not a concern, as it can escape during annealing.
Stresses in capping layers need careful optimization. If
the capping ﬁlm is under too high a tensile stress, cracks
may develop (Figure 30.28a). Compressive stresses on
the other hand lead to collapse (buckling) if critical stress
is exceeded (Figure 30.28c). Because the temperature of
capping layer deposition has to be fairly low in order not
to affect the devices, the ﬁlm density will be rather low.
This may lead to leaks and outgassing (Figure 30.28b).
Much academic research in MEMS is about devices,
their design, fabrication and characterization. However, in
the marketplace the cost of a silicon chip is estimated to
be only 30% of the price of MEMS. Zero-level packaging
is one way to reduce costs; more generic packaging is
possible for encapsulated chips.
30.10 Microsystems
Bulk micromachining utilizes anisotropic wet etching and
DRIE for deep silicon structures. This is beneﬁcial if large
masses are needed, as in accelerometers or vibrating en-
ergy harvesters. Surface micromachining relies on thin
ﬁlms, and structure heights are 1% of those of bulk mi-
cromachined devices. Thin ﬁlms combined with isotropic
etching enable cavities and channels to be made without
bonding, eliminating the cost of a capping wafer. How-
ever, the mechanical properties of thin ﬁlms are no match
for single crystal silicon. SOI MEMS solve this: the pro-
cessing techniques are identical to surface MEMS but the
resulting material is single crystal silicon.
The very name of MEMS contains the idea that the de-
vices contain more than one function. Membrane bending
is sensed as electrical resistance change (piezoresistive
pressure sensor), electrical actuation voltage is pulling a
beam down (RF switch), radiation heats up a resistor,
which is sensed as current change (bolometer), thermal
expansion of air deﬂects a membrane (Braille actuator), an
electric ﬁeld breaks up water ﬂow into droplets (electro-
spray), thermal expansion bends a cantilever beam which
deﬂects and writes a recess into a polymer ﬁlm (AFM
thermomechanical memory).
In microﬂuidics the concept of integration is embodied
in the concept of lab-on-a-chip. It is the ﬂuidic counterpart
of an integrated circuit. The basic motivation for integra-
tion is the same: do as many operations as possible on a
chip, because for working with minute amounts of liquids
that is the way to go, as it is with weak electrical signals.
The basic operations of ﬂuidics and electronics are very
much the same. Both systems have active and passive de-
vices: transistors and pumps, diodes and valves, resistors
and constrictions, guard rings and ﬁlters, reset systems
(washing in ﬂuidics), controlled metering (charge pumps
vs. injectors), etc. A complete ﬂuidic system would for
example ﬁlter out large particles, concentrate the ﬁltrate,
separate the compounds, add ﬂuorescent label, and detect
them. Or it would run dozens of identical tests in parallel.
Today very few such truly large-scale integrated ﬂuidic
systems exist, but then again ICs of the 1960s were not
that great by today’s standards.
30.11 Exercises
1. How would you fabricate the following single crystal
silicon microbridges:
(a) very thin, lightly doped and wide bridge
(b) stubby, high aspect ratio bridge of n-type silicon
(c) extremely narrow bridge of arbitrary aspect ratio?
2. Which devices in this chapter are made on DSP
wafers?
3. If vertical-walled through-wafer structures are made,
what is the minimum grating period (line + space)
that can be realized by: (a) DRIE; (b) <110> wet
etching; (c) <100> wet etching? What is the limiting
the factor in these processes?
4. How could oxide membranes be made and what
would they be good at? What are the limitations?
5. Explain quantitatively how thick ﬁlms are needed to
close the 1 μm wide chevrons of Figure 30.12.
6. Explain step by step the fabrication process for the
RF switch of Figure 30.26.
7. Design a fabrication process for the accelerometer of
Figure 17.2b. Include metallization, too.
8. Design a fabrication process for the 3D silicon
shadow mask shown in Figure 30.5!
9. What is the number of AFM tips that could be fab-
ricated on a 1 cm2 chip by the process described in
Figure 30.10? What if DRIE were used instead of wet
etching?
10. Explain step by step the fabrication of the microphone
of Figure 30.8.
11. Analyze the fabrication process for the nanoholes
shown in Figure 13.13.
12. Design a fabrication process for the fountain pen of
Figure 24.11.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 390]
406
Introduction to Microfabrication
13. Design a fabrication process for the ﬁber optic inter-
ferometer shown below!
Stationary
Mirror
Fiber
Fiber
x
z
Silicon
nt = 3.46
dt 
dG 
dL
Oxide
Air
nL = 1
Back Etch
Moving
Mirror
(110)
(LLL)
ε
Reproduced from Lipson and Yeatman (2007), copyright 2007,
IEEE
References and Related Reading
Allen, J.J. (2005) Micro Electro Mechanical System Design,
CRC Press.
Ayazi, F. and K. Najaﬁ(2000) High aspect-ratio combined poly
and single-crystal silicon (HARPPS) MEMS technology, J.
Microelectromech. Syst., 9, 288–294.
Brand, O. (2006) Microsensor integration into systems-on-chip,
Proc. IEEE, 94, 1160–1176.
Brugger, J. et al. (1999) Self-aligned 3D shadow mask
technique
for
patterning
deeply
recessed
surfaces
of
micro-electro-mechanical systems devices, Sens. Actuators,
76, 329.
Chen, J. and K.D. Wise (1997) A high-resolution silicon mono-
lithic nozzle array for inkjet printing, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, 44, 1401.
Chui, B.W. et al. (1998) Low-stiffness silicon cantilevers with
integrated heaters and piezoresistive sensors for high density
AFM thermomechanical data storage, J. Microelectromech.
Syst., 7, 69.
Deh´e, A. (2007) Silicon microphone development and applica-
tion, Sens. Actuators, A133, 283–287.
Dokmeci, M.R. et al. (2004) Two-axis single-crystal silicon
micromirror
arrays,
J.
Microelectromech.
Syst.,
13,
1006–1017.
Esashi, M. (2008) Wafer level packaging of MEMS, J. Mi-
cromech. Microeng., 18, 073001.
Gad-el-Hak, M. (ed.) (2005) MEMS Handbook, 2nd edn,
CRC Press.
Gerlach, G. and W. D¨otzel (2008) Microsystem Technology,
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Graf, A. et al. (2007) Review of micromachined thermopiles
for infrared detection, Meas. Sci. Technol., 18, R59–R75.
Horsley, D.A. et al. (1998) Design and fabrication of an an-
gular microactuator for magnetic disk drives, J. Microelec-
tromech. Syst., 7, 141.
Huang, Y. et al. (2003) Fabricating capacitive micromachined
ultrasonic transducers with wafer-bonding technology, J. Mi-
croelectromech. Syst., 12, 128–137.
Jaakkola, A. et al. (2007) Piezotransduced single-crystal sili-
con BAW resonators, IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium 2007,
p. 1653.
Ji, J. and K.D. Wise (1992) An implantable CMOS circuit
interface for multiplexed microelectrode recording arrays,
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, 27, 433–443.
Kaajakari,
V.
(2009)
Practical
MEMS,
Small
Gear
Publishing.
Kaajakari, V. et al. (2006) Stability of wafer level vacuum en-
capsulated single-crystal silicon resonators, Sens. Actuators,
A130–131, 42–47.
Kong, S.H., D.D.L. Wijngaards and R.F. Wolffenbuttel (2001)
Infrared micro-spectrometer based on a diffraction grating,
Sens. Actuators, A92, 88–95.
Kovacs, G.T.A. (1998) Micromachined Transducers Source-
book, McGraw-Hill.
Li, Q. et al. (2009) Assessment of testing methodologies for
thin-ﬁlm vacuum MEMS packages, Microsyst. Technol., 15,
161–168.
Liang, C. and Y.-C. Tai (1999) Sealing of micromachined
cavities using chemical vapor deposition methods: charac-
terization and optimization, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 8,
135–145.
Licklider, L. et al. (2000) A micromachined chip-based elec-
trospray source for mass spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 72,
367–375.
Lipson, A. and E.M. Yeatman (2007) A 1-D photonic band gap
tunable optical ﬁlter in (110) silicon, J. Microelectromech.
Syst., 16, 521–527.
Modafe, A. et al. (2005) Embedded benzocyclobutene in sili-
con: an integrated fabrication process for electrical and ther-
mal isolation in MEMS, Microelectron. Eng., 82, 154–167.
Oh, K.W. and C.H. Ahn (2006) A review of microvalves,
J. Micromech. Microeng., 16, R13–R39.
Pham, N.G. et al. (2004) Photoresist coating methods for the
integration of novel 3-D RF microstructures, J. Microelec-
tromech. Syst., 13, 491–499.
Sakata, M. et al. (1999) Micromachined relay which utilizes
single crystal silicon electrostatic actuator, Proceedings of
IEEE MEMS 1999, pp. 21–24.
Sanz-Velasco, A. et al. (2006) Sensors and actuators based on
SOI materials, Solid-State Electron., 50, 865–876.
Saarela, V. et al. (2005) Re-usable multi-inlet PDMS ﬂuidic
connector, Sens. Actuators, B114, 552–557.
Scheeper, P.R. et al. (2003) A new measurement microphone
based on MEMS technology, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 12,
880–891.
Senturia, S. (2004) Microsystem Design, Springer.
Sparks, D., S. Massoud-Ansari and N. Najaﬁ(2005) Long-
term evaluation of hermetically glass frit sealed silicon to
Pyrex wafers with feedthroughs, J. Micromech. Microeng.,
15, 1560–1564.
Spearing, S.M. (2000) Materials issues in microelectromechan-
ical systems (MEMS), Acta Mater., 48, 179–196.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 391]
MEMS Process Integration
407
Tas, N.R. et al. (2002) Nanoﬂuidic bubble pump using sur-
face tension directed gas injection, Anal. Chem., 74,
2224–2227.
Tiggelaar, R.M. et al. (2005) Fabrication of a high-temperature
microreactor with integrated heater and sensor patterns
on an ultrathin silicon membrane, Sens. Actuators, A119,
196–205.
Venstra, W.J. et al. (2009) Photolithography on bulk microma-
chined substrates, J. Micromech. Microeng., 19, 055005.
Witvrouw, A., H.A.C. Tilmans and I. De Wolf (2004) Materials
issues in the processing, the operation and the reliability of
MEMS, Microelectron. Eng., 76, 245–257.
Yun, S.-S. et al. (2009) Fabrication of morphological defect-
free vertical electrodes using a (110) silicon-on-patterned-
insulator process for micromachined capacitive inclinome-
ters, J. Micromech. Microeng., 19, 035025.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 392]
31
Process Equipment
Microfabrication
equipment
component
technologies
differ completely: critical elements in lithography are
optics and mechanics, plasma etchers depend on RF and
vacuum technologies, and epitaxy is about temperature
and ﬂow control. The common aspects relate to process
outcomes:
uniformity
across
the
wafer,
run-to-run
reproducibility, yield, rate and throughput.
The size of microfabrication equipment tends to be in-
versely proportional to the size of structures it makes:
small tabletop instruments can pattern and etch 3 μm lines,
but tools for 100 nm technology require garage-sized be-
hemoths with multimillion-dollar price tags (Figure 31.1).
Price tags for individual tools are up to $50 million to-
day (lithography tools being the most expensive), even
though $200 000 can still buy a system suitable for aca-
demic research purposes, be it a mask aligner, a furnace
or a plasma etcher.
Microfabrication cost structures are not always obvi-
ous: the cost of diamond thin ﬁlms is similar to silicon
thin ﬁlms, because both are deposited in similar CVD
systems, and the gas cost difference of silane vs. methane
is negligible. Cost difference may arise from gas purity:
99.9999% pure gas is pricier than 99.95% pure.
Cost of ownership is a combination of capital and op-
erating costs, and yield. If the tool produces scrap, the
cost of good chips rapidly goes up. If the tool produces
excellent results but only a few wafers per hour, it is not
much of a production tool. Production monitoring mea-
surements are sometimes done inside the tool, enabling
real-time control of the process, but most often monitor-
ing is done after the fact: wafers are measured after the
completion of processing.
31.1 Batch Processing vs. Single Wafer
Processing
Microfabrication economies were earlier claimed to re-
sult from batch processing: tens of wafers with hundreds
of chips are processed simultaneously in for example a
furnace or wet etch bench. But scaling down linewidths
has put increasing demands on process control, and sin-
gle wafer tools have superseded batch equipment in many
process steps. Besides, batch equipment for large wafers
becomes prohibitively cumbersome.
Wet processing in a tank is a prototypical batch process:
a full cassette of wafers is processed simultaneously (see
Figure 11.8). Wafer cleaning and non-patterning etching
(e.g., removal of sacriﬁcial oxide by HF) are widely done
in batch-mode wet processing even in the most advanced
processes. Wet etching for patterning (e.g., H3PO4-based
aluminum etching or BHF etching of oxide) is not an
option when linewidths are below 3 μm because process
control is difﬁcult in batch wet processing: no in situ mon-
itoring is possible, and wafer-to-wafer variations are often
encountered. However, model-based control with ionic
strength and temperature measurements can be used to
improve wet etch rate control to some extent.
In batch processing both the uniformity over the batch
and the uniformity across the wafer must be observed.
Variation comes from wafer position in a batch system:
ﬂow patterns of gases and liquids over wafers depend on
wafer position, and the thermal environment may also be
position dependent. The ﬁrst and last wafer have only one
neighbor, but others are sandwiched between two wafers.
During the 3 inch era most wafer processing was batch,
and a major shift started at 100 mm wafer size. Robotic
loading/unloading is simple in single wafer systems, and
they are more amenable to fabrication automation, in-
cluding data gathering. Film thicknesses have been scaled
down with linewidths, and thinner ﬁlms require less pro-
cess time in deposition and etching, which works in favor
of single wafer processing. However, single wafer systems
hardly ever approach batch system throughputs which can
be up to 200 wafers per hour (WPH), and in PECVD
and implant applications 500 WPH. It may also well be
that at the back end of the process wafers are so expen-
sive that manufacturers do not want to risk a lot by batch
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 393]
410
Introduction to Microfabrication
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 31.1
Vertical furnace: (a) overview; (b) closeup and (c) detail of wafer boat. Courtesy Centrotherm
processing: a 200 mm wafer with 300 chips is worth thou-
sands of dollars and if a batch of 25 wafers is lost at the
end of the process, the ﬁnancial loss is considerable. It
will also take time to fabricate a replacement lot, typ-
ically three to six weeks. This can be an even greater
burden than the money lost if delivery time is used as the
criterion for choosing a chip supplier.
In single wafer processing wafer-to-wafer repeatabil-
ity is a major issue. The ﬁrst-wafer effect means that
the system has not stabilized, therefore the ﬁrst wafer
experiences for example a lower temperature or more con-
centrated chemicals. In addition to batch and single wafer
processing, various combinations are being used, as given
in Table 31.1.
Single feature processing is so slow that it is relegated
to special applications only. Throughputs of a few wafers
per hour are considered good for direct write processes.
Single chip processing is done only in lithography, using
reduction steppers and scanners.
Single wafer processing beneﬁts from easy process de-
velopment because fewer wafers are needed and batch
effects are eliminated. Robotic handling from cassette to
cassette and in situ monitoring without averaging over
the batch enable a much higher degree of process con-
trol than batch systems. There are various combination
systems, for instance high-current ion implanters load a
batch of wafers on a rotating holder, but the beam scans
one wafer at a time, and rotation of the holder takes care
of batch processing. In epitaxy single wafer and batch
tools coexist, but in plasma etching and sputtering single
wafer tools are the norm in mainstream IC production.
Table 31.1
Granularity of processing
Single feature processing
Direct writing for research and pilot production
Mask making by e-beam or laser beam
Mask repair, chip repair, chip customization
Single chip processing
Steppers and scanners
Better alignment and resolution
Single wafer processing
Easy automation
In situ monitoring
Plasma etching, sputtering, (PE) CVD,
medium-current implantation (MCI)
Batch processing
Wet cleaning, oxidation, thermal CVD (oxide, poly,
nitride)
Combinations
Load multiple wafers but process one wafer at a time
(HCI, CVD, sputter)
31.2 Process Regimes: Temperature
and Pressure
Two
major
process
parameters
are
pressure
and
temperature.
Many
microfabrication
processes
are
vacuum/low-pressure processes (CVD, RIE, sputtering,
implantation), some are room ambient processes (lithog-
raphy, wet cleaning) and high-pressure oxidation is an
exception. The temperature scale extends from 1200 ◦C
diffusions to 850 −1100 ◦C oxidation, 300–900 ◦C CVD
to room temperature processes (plasma etch, sputtering,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 394]
Process Equipment
411
102
10
10−2
10−4
10−6
10−8
10−10
atm press
Pressure (torr)
0
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
room
temp
Temperature (°C)
Gas
source
MBE
Evap
MBE
APCVD
LPCVD
poly, ox/nitr, metal
Clean
resist
ECR
RIE
MIE
PECVD
Cryo
etch
Sputt-dep
UHV/CVD
th oxid
epi
Figure 31.2
Equipment
classiﬁed
on
temperature–
pressure axes. Reproduced from Rubloff and Boronaro
(1992) by permission of IBM
implant, lithography, wet cleaning). Some etch processes
use subzero temperatures: sublimation drying in MEMS
works at about −20 ◦C, and cryogenic DRIE at −120 ◦C.
Many room temperature processes can be run at higher
temperatures for special purposes: sputtering at 450 ◦C
for improved step coverage, implantation at 800 ◦C for
SIMOX wafers, or plasma etching at elevated temperature
to reduce residues. Figure 31.2 shows major processes
on a temperature–pressure chart. High-temperature/low
pressure processes are difﬁcult because of outgassing of
adsorbed gases from vacuum components during high-
temperature operation.
Evaporation and molecular beam epitaxy require the
best vacuum (10−8–10−11 torr). Etching and PECVD put
rather modest demands on vacuum technology (1 mtorr to
1 torr). Sputtering systems require very low base vacuum
(e.g., 10−8 torr), but when argon is introduced, operating
pressures are 0.1–10 mtorr. The effects of a vacuum on
thin-ﬁlm quality will be discussed in Chapter 33.
A vacuum has many uses in microfabrication. It is
a way to keep surfaces clean: if there are not many
molecules around, very few will impinge on wafer
surfaces. The same protective effect can be achieved
by an inert gas atmosphere: a 100% nitrogen or argon
atmosphere means that reactive gases like oxygen or
water vapor are present only in residual amounts.
Vacuum quality is important for transport processes, as
will be discussed in Chapter 33. In a high vacuum atoms
Table 31.2
Methods for heating
Method
Equipment
Resistance heating
Furnace
Induction heating
Epitaxial reactor
Photon heating
Rapid thermal processing (RTP)
Conduction
Hotplates; single wafer PECVD
Convection
Resist ovens; wafer back-side
gas ﬂow
and molecules will not experience collisions and will take
direct routes. In a rough vacuum atoms and molecules will
experience many collisions before arriving at their desti-
nation, and the arrival angles will be widely distributed.
This can be detrimental or beneﬁcial, depending on
the application.
There are ﬁve main methods to heat the wafers cur-
rently in use, as listed in Table 31.2. Some prominent
examples are also shown.
The ﬁrst three methods are used in high-temperature
processes and the latter two in low-temperature processes.
Some degree of heating and/or temperature control is de-
sirable in almost all tools. In all plasma equipment there
is plasma heating (and latent heat release from condensa-
tion in deposition tools) and in ion implantation the beam
ﬂux can heat the wafer considerably.
In most tools wafers lie horizontally on a chuck (elec-
trode, susceptor) and the chuck is heated. Old hotplates
had no active control of wafer-to-chuck contact, and there
was an inevitable air mattress between the wafer and the
hotplate, but today the degree of thermal contact can be
controlled as wished (with hotplate price tags of tens
of thousands of dollars). Wafer clamping ensures inti-
mate contact and efﬁcient heat transfer. Both mechanical
clamping and electrostatic clamping (ESC) are used. In
the former, pins hold the top side of the wafer, which
limits usable wafer area, and there is the danger of con-
tamination from the clamp pins. Mechanical clamping is
widely used because it is much simpler than ESC. If no
clamping is done in RIE, the temperature can easily rise
to about 120 ◦C, the photoresist glass transition temper-
ature, in a few minutes. Steady state temperatures can
be kept below 40 ◦C indeﬁnitely by back-side cooling.
Clamping is also essential when wafers are processed in
a vertical position (in for instance ion implanters where
the long beam line can only be built horizontally) or
when wafers are processed face down (as in CMP and
in evaporation).
Heating (and cooling) can also be effectuated by ﬂuid
ﬂow. For instance, hot argon gas is employed in sputtering
systems to ramp up wafer temperatures to 400–500 ◦C, in
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 395]
412
Introduction to Microfabrication
a time scale of 10 seconds. In etchers the wafer back side
is often cooled by helium ﬂow. Some of these gases leak
into the process chamber, and the type of heating/cooling
gas has to be compatible with the process.
31.3 Cluster Tools and Integrated
Processing
In cluster tools several process chambers are connected to
each other, either serially or by means of a central transfer
chamber. Figure 31.3 shows a PVD multichamber system.
It incorporates a pre-clean module, multiple reactor mod-
ules and a cooldown module, all connected to a central
handler chamber. Multiple identical reactor modules en-
able increased throughput, or alternatively two different
processes can be run without risk of cross-contamination.
Central handler reliability is crucial for cluster operation.
A photograph of a three-chamber sputtering tool is shown
in Figure 31.4. The motivation for separate chambers in
this case has to do with contamination: reactive sputtering
of AlN has to be kept separate from aluminum deposi-
tion, otherwise the aluminum target would be poisoned
by nitrogen.
Cluster tools can be applied to any process sequence in
principle, but in practice similar processes are integrated:
similar temperature or similar vacuum or similar ambi-
ent in general. A titanium adhesion layer below platinum
is another old example of integrated processing: the tita-
nium surface is kept clean under vacuum, and platinum,
which is deposited immediately after titanium, adheres to
it well, whereas platinum would not adhere to an oxi-
dized titanium surface, which would result immediately
if a titanium wafer were taken out of a vacuum chamber
and transferred to another deposition system.
Integration of thermal oxidation with sputtering or
CMP with PECVD would be awkward, but PECVD and
plasma etching, or RTO and RTCVD, can be combined
fairly easily.
Integrated processing involves chaining process steps
into longer sequences. Process integration is also about
chaining process steps into sequences, but in a different
sense: process integration is device related, whereas in-
tegrated processing is the tool’s view of step chaining.
In integrated processing steps follow each other under
strictly controlled conditions in a vacuum, inert gas or
some other well known ambient. This principle has long
been used in silicon epitaxy: surface cleaning by HCl or
H2 gas is done in the same reactor chamber as the deposi-
tion itself, to guarantee an oxide-free surface. As shown in
Figure 31.5, conventional processing involves a number
of separate steps, with storage and cleaning steps, which
can be eliminated by integrated processing.
Integrated processing has both scientiﬁc and manufac-
turing beneﬁts. It enables a much higher degree of control
over materials, interfaces and surfaces. This helps us to
understand what is really going on in our processes. In
manufacturing it makes savings in several ways: cleaning
steps can be minimized because the wafer conditions are
known all the time; wait and storage steps are eliminated;
and cycle time is reduced.
31.4 Measuring Fabrication Processes
There are three different aspects that can be measured
in a fabrication process: tool, process and wafer. Tool
Cassette input/output ports
Rotation
Reactor
module 2
Pressure regimes:
Reactor module 10−8 torr
Central handler 10−7 torr
Cool-down/pre-clean 10−3 torr
Cassette ports 10−3 torr
Reactor
module 1
Cool-down
module
Pre-clean
module
Translation
Figure 31.3
Multichamber vacuum cluster for PVD. Reproduced from Grannemann (1994) by permission of AIP
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 396]
Process Equipment
413
Figure 31.4
Cluster tool with central handler and three chambers (two with four sputter targets and one with a single
target). Courtesy von Ardenne
Process 1
Measurement
Storage
Cleaning
Process 2
Process 1
Process 2
Measurement
Process 3
Storage
Figure 31.5
Conventional step-by-step process compared
to an integrated sequence. In integrated processing wafers
are under controlled ambient all the time
parameters like RF power, mass ﬂow, process time
or electrode temperature are easily measured. Process
measurements deal with ionic strength in a cleaning
solution, electron and ion energies in plasma, or ion
dose. In lithography exposure time is usually ﬁxed, but
of course exposure depends on UV energy, which drifts
with lamp lifetime. Indirect measurements are often
much simpler than direct measurements: for example,
vacuum chamber base pressure is a good indication of
vacuum quality, but mass spectrometry (usually called
RGA, for residual gas analysis) can actually identify
the residual atoms and molecules, for instance if the
residue is water vapor or pump oils. This is signiﬁcant
in understanding vacuum–ﬁlm interactions as well as in
troubleshooting.
Very few measurements are actually done on the wafers
during processing. This is understandable because pro-
cess chamber conditions are often harsh, for example RF
ﬁelds, corrosive gases or high temperatures. Wafer tem-
perature in RTA can be measured by pyrometry during
processing. In ultrahigh-vacuum conditions surface spec-
troscopies can be used to monitor deposition processes
in real time: reﬂection high-energy electron diffraction
(RHEED) and low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) are
routinely employed in MBE systems to check crystallinity
of the growing ﬁlm. Unfortunately, most deposition pro-
cesses are operated under conditions where such systems
cannot be used.
Measurements can be classiﬁed into four categories ac-
cording to their immediacy:
1. In situ: during wafer processing in the process cham-
ber.
2. In-line: after wafer processing inside the process tool
(e.g., exit load lock).
3. On-line: in the wafer fab by wafer fab personnel.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 397]
414
Introduction to Microfabrication
4. Ex situ: in a dedicated analytical laboratory by
expert users.
In situ resist development monitoring with an interfero-
metric end point detector can improve linewidth control
considerably. It can compensate for changes in exposure
dose, resist (de)composition, developer concentration,
temperature or resist bake drifts and shifts which could
easily result in 10% develop time differences and in
similar linewidth variation.
Plasma etching is almost always monitored in real time,
in order to determine the end point and to prevent ex-
cessive etching of the substrate or the underlying ﬁlm.
Optical emission spectroscopy (OES) is commonly used:
the intensity of some suitable excited species in the plasma
is monitored with optical systems including a wavelength-
selective detector. In ﬂuorine plasmas a signal at λ =
704 nm (from excited ﬂuorine atoms) can be used. During
etching the signal is small because there is little free ﬂuo-
rine: most of it is bound as reaction products like SiF4 or
WF6. At the etching end point the free ﬂuorine intensity
increases because it is no longer consumed by the reac-
tion. A more selective method would be to monitor the
reaction products themselves. This must be developed for
every process individually. The nitrogen signal (396 nm)
is suitable for monitoring nitride etching: there will be
a sharp drop in the nitrogen signal when all the nitride
has been etched away. OES does not, however, measure
wafers but gives average values over the reactor. Film
thickness during deposition or etching can be measured
by for example ellipsometry or interferometry, but such
systems are not commonplace.
One of the oldest applications of in situ monitoring is
the quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) in ﬁlm thickness
control during evaporation and sputtering. The QCM is
placed in the same atom ﬂux as the wafers, and there-
fore it experiences the same ﬁlm deposition. The mass
change is detected as a frequency change and converted
to ﬁlm thickness. The resonant frequency of the QCM is
determined by crystal thickness x and sound velocity vtr
given by
f = vtr
2x
(31.1)
For a quartz wafer of 500 μm thickness, with transverse
wave velocity of 3340 m/s, this translates to 3.3 MHz. The
frequency change due to thickness increase x is given
by the derivative of Equation 31.1,
f = −2f 2x
vtr
(31.2)
Taking into account the fact that the deposited ﬁlm
density differs from quartz (but neglecting its different
elastic
properties),
we
get
thickness
change
from
frequency change as
x = −vtrρquartzf
2f 2ρﬁlm
(31.3)
With an easily detectable frequency shift of 1 ppm, the
minimum thickness change that can be measured by
the QCM is a fraction of a nanometer. The temperature
sensitivity of the QCM is 0.5 ppm/◦C, which has to be
accounted for because deposition is usually accompanied
with a temperature rise.
On-line measurements constitute the bulk of measure-
ments in wafer fabrication. These include standard ﬁlm
thickness measurements
(ellipsometry, reﬂectometry),
sheet
resistance,
implant
dose
by
thermal
waves,
step height by proﬁlometry, etc. Some are performed
in seconds, like sheet resistance or ﬁlm thickness,
others require a few minutes for sample preparation or
pumpdown (SEM, AFM).
Ex situ measurements include physical, chemical
and
structural
measurements.
Transmission
electron
microscopy (with a TEM), secondary ion mass spectrom-
etry (SIMS), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Rutherford
backscattering
spectrometry
(RBS)
are
also
slow
methods, and can be bought as services from outside
contractors.
Measurement needs change over the process lifecycle:
in R&D phase measurement needs are manifold, but
requirements lax; it does not matter if information
is obtained in an hour or even the next day, but in
manufacturing the results must be obtained in seconds.
Differences relate also to measurement spot size and the
number of measurement spots, as shown in Table 31.3.
Table 31.3
Measurement needs
R&D
Pilot production
Volume manufacturing
Samples
Anything
Full wafers
Full wafers
(monitors)
(scribe line measurement)
Analysis spot
Anything
Not a concern
Test site
Measurement time
Anything
Minutes/hours
Seconds/minutes
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 398]
Process Equipment
415
Surface analytical methods are problematic because
sample transfer from process chamber to analytical
chamber takes some time and gases and vapors adsorb
on the sample surface and disguise the original surface
signal. In-line tools do exist for integrated surface
analysis, for example a RIE etch chamber connected to
an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS), but such
systems are for basic research only.
31.5 Equipment Figures of Merit
Equipment ﬁgures of merit include various aspects such
as process, capital cost, labor, consumables, etc.. Some of
the most important ones are discussed brieﬂy below.
31.5.1 Uptime/downtime
Uptime is an overall measure of equipment availability.
Uptime is reduced by both scheduled and non-scheduled
maintenance. Recalibration/test wafers required to set
the process running after a disruption can contribute
signiﬁcantly to downtime. Scheduled system cleaning
is often mandatory for deposition equipment, to prevent
ﬁlm ﬂaking from the chamber walls. This is sometimes
done after every wafer (by plasma cleaning, not by
mechanical cleaning, which would necessitate opening
the chamber), with a drastic effect on uptime but with
higher yield. Uptimes vary from almost 100% for wet
benches to 90% for furnaces and plasma etchers, 80%
for implanters and 40% for PECVD.
31.5.2 Utilization
Utilization is a measure of equipment use: actual produc-
tive hours of all available hours. General purpose tools
like lithography have high utilizations, and the more ded-
icated tools lower ones. A $10 million lithography tool
must not wait for a $1 million resist coater, but the re-
sist coater can sit idle waiting for a stepper. The rapid
thermal processor for silicide anneal is used twice during
a CMOS process, and its utilization is the lowest of all
tools, together with the dedicated wet bench for selective
metal etching.
31.5.3 Throughput
How many wafers per hour (WPH) can the system han-
dle? Single wafer tools have throughputs of for example
50–100 WPH, but batch tools can handle up to 200 WPH.
This is very much dependent on the process: if a LPCVD
polysilicon process is run at 635 ◦C the deposition rate
is four times higher than at 570 ◦C. Similarly, if ﬁlm
thickness to be deposited is doubled, deposition time is
doubled. Throughput, however, might not change much if
overheads (loading, pump down, temperature ramp, etc.)
are high relative to deposition time. In etching through-
put can be severely reduced even if ﬁlm thickness remains
unchanged, but overetch requirements change due to to-
pography (section 11.12.3 on spacers).
31.5.4 Footprint
How big is it? Cleanroom space is premium priced:
$10 000 per square meter is the price range for a class
1 (Federal Standard) cleanroom. In most cases, just the
front panel of the system is in the cleanroom, the rest
of the tool being in the service area, which has more
relaxed particle cleanliness requirements.
31.5.5 MTTF, MTBA, MTBC
How long will the equipment work before failure? Do
operators need to interfere with its operation? How often
does it have to be cleaned? These questions are oper-
ationalized by MTTF (Mean Time To Failure), MTBA
(Mean Time Between Assists) and MTBC (Mean Time
Between Cleans).
MTBC depends on the process: particle counts (on test
wafers) are checked regularly, and increased counts in-
dicate a cleaning need. But the acceptable particle count
depends on chip size, sensitivity of the particular process
step to particle contamination (subsequent steps may be
a cleaning step that effectively removes particles) or just
engineering judgment about the acceptable level of par-
ticles. Particle counts in individual process steps cannot
easily be correlated with process yield, therefore short-
loop test runs with specially designed test structures are
used to check the effects of individual process steps.
31.6 Simulation of Process Equipment
Process simulation covers length scales of a few microm-
eters in both the lateral and vertical directions. In process
equipment simulation the length scale is deﬁned by tool
size and can be up to a meter. In practice this scale
difference means that tool simulation is carried out in-
dependently of process simulation. In tool simulation 3D
geometry is the norm, but of course all symmetries in
the tool geometry are utilized to reduce the computa-
tional load.
A typical tool simulation includes temperature distribu-
tion, ﬂow patterns and plasma properties. Mass, momen-
tum, energy and charge balances are calculated. Plasma
modeling is difﬁcult because it involves so many pa-
rameters: collision cross-sections, ionization, attachment,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 399]
416
Introduction to Microfabrication
recombination, dissociation, etc. These plasma reactions
must then be combined with surface reactions (deposition
or etching). Taken together, these determine for instance
PECVD ﬁlm uniformity. For reactors operating in the
mass transport-limited regime, ﬂow patterns are of ut-
most importance. For reactors operating in the surface
reaction-limited regime, thermal design is a high priority.
31.7 Tool Lifecycles
Tool development takes a long time: from the ﬁrst
proof-of-concept tool to multiple orders for volume
manufacturing takes easily 10 years. The proof-of-
concept tool is homemade or modiﬁed equipment that
demonstrates the key features of a new process, usually
for small wafer size. For e-beam lithography it might
be a new electron column design; for a plasma etcher it
might be a new RF coupling scheme. The alpha tool is
a purpose-built system which has the new key elements
designed in from the beginning. The alpha tool is missing
productivity features like robotics and software, but is
designed for the ﬁnal wafer size. The reliability of the
alpha tool is not comparable to production tools – it
is a test bed for process research, not for production.
Alpha tools are not shipped to outsiders. The beta tool
is a fully equipped version, with essentially all the
features that will make the ﬁnal product distinct. Beta
tools are shipped to select customers who are willing
to bear part of the burden of testing new equipment in
order to beneﬁt from new technology. Beta customers
provide productivity-related data that is difﬁcult or even
impossible to acquire at the tool manufacturer: What is
uptime in production-like conditions running thousands
of
wafers?
Is
wafer
yield
comparable
to
existing
or competing designs? What are the ﬁeld servicing
requirements?
Both academic and industrial labs buy equipment
for R&D, but what will happen when a successful new
process needs to be scaled up for production? The popular
answer today is that the basic design of the process
chamber (e.g., spinner bowl geometry, sputter cathode
design, etcher gas manifold, RTA lamp conﬁguration)
is ﬁxed. Research labs buy the very basic conﬁguration,
essentially the process chamber only (obviously this
works better for some tools than others, and not at all
for optical lithography). Later on, when the process is
transferred to manufacturing, productivity features like
cassette-to-cassette automation, multiple chambers and
advanced software can be added. This reduces the risk of
new equipment purchase for the industry, and it allows
academic labs to do industrially relevant research without
the need to invest in volume manufacturing tools.
31.8 Cost of Ownership
Difﬁculties in tool performance assessment have led to the
introduction of a new ﬁgure of merit, the cost of owner-
ship (CoO), which tries to put all tools on an equal footing,
calculated over the lifetime of the tool. Equipment capi-
tal investment has very little meaning in cost calculations
if other major factors like yield and throughput are ne-
glected. CoO is an estimate of all costs associated with
a certain piece of equipment, and it can be used to com-
pare different mixes of ﬁxed and running costs. Yield, or
alternatively cost/good chip, is of paramount importance.
CoO is deﬁned as
CoO = capital cost + operating cost + yield cost
throughput × uptime
(31.4)
It thus incorporates both the purchase price, which may
sound huge, and the running costs, which include many
items that may contribute considerably over the lifetime
of the equipment. Running costs consist of a mixture
of chemicals/gases/slurries (the CMP slurries market is
bigger in dollar terms than the market for CMP equip-
ment), consumables (e.g., O-rings), power consumption
(high in epitaxy), personnel costs (very variable, depend-
ing on for example cleaning frequency), measurement
costs (high if product wafers cannot be used and sep-
arate monitor wafer are needed), calibration/monitoring
wafer costs (e.g., when the system is frequently cleaned
and must be requaliﬁed).
Consider two hypothetical RIE etchers, A and B, with
the features in Table 31.4 to see how seemingly minor
differences add up and show that purchase price is only
one consideration among many.
Table 31.4
Cost-of-ownership for RIE systems A
and B
A
B
Purchase price
1 000 000 ¤
1 500 000 ¤
Operating costs
150 000 ¤/yr
120 000 ¤/yr
5 years costs
1 750 000 ¤
2 100 000 ¤
Uptime
85%
90%
Throughput
45 WPH
55 WPH
Wafers/5 yrs
1.68 M
2.17 M
Yield
99%
99.8%
Good wafers
1.66 M
2.16 M
Cost/good wafer
1.06 ¤
0.97 ¤
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 400]
Process Equipment
417
31.9 Exercises
1. If an oxidation furnace is ramped up at 10 ◦C/min from
a stand-by temperature of 800 ◦C and ramped down
from a process temperature at 5 ◦C/min, what is the
process time (a) for 15 nm dry oxide at 900 ◦C; (b) for
300 nm wet oxide at 1000 ◦C?
2. Calculate the minimum deposition rate that can be
monitored by a QCM sensor if the wafers are heated
by the deposition process at 3 K/min.
3. What is the throughput of a sputtering system conﬁg-
ured as shown in Figure 31.3 for TiN/Al metallization?
(TiN in reactor 1, 100 nm thickness, 100 nm/min, Al
in reactor 2, 1000 nm, at 500 nm/min, pre-clean etch-
ing and cooldown 30 s each, each transfer 15 s, and
loadlock pump downtime 15 s.)
4. What is the throughput of a sputtering system con-
ﬁgured as shown in Figure 31.3 for the deposition of
300 nm aluminum in both chambers, with pre-clean
and cooldown modules used identically as preparation
chambers for reactors 1 and 2?
5. How could metallization be monitored in the exit load-
lock of a sputtering system?
6. Which methods could be used for the following mea-
surement tasks:
(a) oxide pinhole density
(b) thickness of nominally 30 nm thick titanium
(c) photoresist thickness uniformity
(d) sputtered aluminum step coverage
(e) implanted arsenic dose
(f) particle removal efﬁciency in NH4OH/H2O2 wet
cleaning
(g) Ta2O5 ﬁlm deposition
(h) ion implantation of boron into a phosphorus-doped
wafer
(i) silicon dioxide thinning in etching
(j) mask oxide undercutting in KOH etching of
<100> silicon
(k) copper electroplating
(l) photoresist sidewall angle?
7. If two PECVD systems are identical except for utiliza-
tion, what will the price of a 70% utilization tool be
relative to a 50% tool?
References and Related Reading
Barna, G.G. et al. (1994) MMST manufacturing technology –
hardware, sensors and processes, IEEE Trans. Semicond.
Manuf ., 7, 149.
Grannemann, E. (1994) Film interface control, J. Vac. Sci. Tech-
nol., B12, 2741.
Loewenstein, L. et al. (1994) First-wafer effect in remote
plasma processing: the stripping of photoresist, silicon
nitride and polysilicon, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B12, 2810.
May, G.S. and C.J. Spanos (2006) Fundamentals of Semicon-
ductor Manufacturing and Process Control, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.
Moslehi, M.M. et al. (1992) Single-wafer integrated semicon-
ductor device processing, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 39,
4–32.
Rubloff, G.W. and D.T. Boronaro (1992) Integrated processing
for microelectronics science and technology, IBM J. Res.
Dev., 36, 233.
Schuegraf,
K.
(2003)
Single-wafer
process
technology:
enabling rapid SiGe BiCMOS development, IEEE Trans.
Semicond. Manuf ., 16, 121.
Wood, S.C. (1997) Cost and cycle time performance of fabs
based on integrated single-wafer processing, IEEE Trans.
Semicond. Manuf ., 10, 98.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 401]
32
Equipment for Hot Processes
Thermal
treatments
constitute
a
major
fraction
of
front end processes. Thermal oxidation, diffusion and
implant annealing
all
call
for
temperatures
around
1000 ◦C. Batch furnaces, horizontal and vertical, with
loads of up to 200 wafers are traditional workhorses
of thermal processing. More recently single wafer rapid
thermal processors (RTP) have come on the scene,
and laser annealing has also emerged. These new
developments enable very high temperature ramp rates
and combinations of very high process temperatures with
very short process times, on the order of milliseconds
and seconds instead of hours as in traditional furnaces.
32.1 High-Temperature Equipment:
Hot Wall vs. Cold Wall
Two main varieties of high-temperature systems exist:
hot wall and cold wall. Hot wall systems remain hot
constantly. They are typically heated resistively, like hor-
izontal furnaces. In cold wall systems only the wafers are
heated, and the rest of the system stays cool, which en-
ables faster temperature ramp rates and less deposition
on the walls (because chemical reactions are exponen-
tially temperature dependent). Heating can be achieved
by inductive coils (as in epitaxy), by a susceptor/bottom
electrode that is kept at a high temperature (as in PECVD)
or by lamps (RTP). In analogy with kitchen equipment,
an oven is a hot wall system, a microwave oven is a cold
wall system. Warm wall systems do exist: system walls
are heated unintentionally by the process but they remain
at a much lower temperature than the wafers.
Large thermal masses in traditional furnaces provide
excellent temperature uniformity, but very slow tem-
perature ramp rates: 0.1 ◦C temperature uniformity and
5–10 ◦C/min ramp-up rates, and even slower cooling
rates. New vertical furnaces (Figure 31.1) have higher
ramp rates: tens of degrees per minute. In hot wall
CVD systems deposition takes place on all hot surfaces,
wafers and walls alike. Successive depositions build
up thick ﬁlms on the walls. Film cracking and ﬂaking
are especially probable when the system temperature is
ramped up or down, or when a different ﬁlm with a
different stress state or CTE is deposited on the ﬁrst one.
32.2 Furnace Processes
A horizontal oxidation furnace is shown schematically in
Figure 32.1 and photographically in Figure 32.2. Quartz
tubes sit inside resistive heater elements which ensure a
uniform temperature. Typically four gas lines feed into a
tube: oxygen (for dry oxidation), hydrogen (for wet oxida-
tion), nitrogen (for inert protection during wafer loading
and temperature ramping and cooling) and dichloroethane
(DCE, for cleaning the tube). Because the mixture of oxy-
gen and hydrogen is explosive, a burn box ensures that all
hydrogen is burned, and no potentially dangerous mixture
is formed.
Thermal
oxidation
is
shown
graphically
in
the
time–temperature graph of Figure 32.3 and the process
is detailed in Table 32.1. Wafer cleaning before all
high-temperature processes is essential, but in order also
to guarantee tube cleanliness, DCE cleaning is done
before critically important oxidations. Chlorine cleaning
could also be done but because chlorine is a corrosive
gas, its handling is more complicated than that of DCE.
The cleaning process reduces metallic contamination,
much like RCA-2 clean, which uses HCl. Alternatively,
chlorine-containing gases can be used during oxidation.
Actual oxidation time is only a fraction of total process
time, for example 30%. An optional post-oxidation anneal
(POA) has been included in the process ﬂow. It densiﬁes
the ﬁlm, but does not, to a ﬁrst approximation, affect
its thickness. POA can also be used to tailor ﬁxed oxide
charges (Qf): while the oxidation temperature is by and
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 402]
420
Introduction to Microfabrication
oxygen
hydrogen
nitrogen
HCl or
DCE
burn
box
3-zone resistive heating
Figure 32.1
Horizontal oxidation furnace
Figure 32.2
Horizontal oxidation/diffusion furnace for
150 × 150 mm silicon solar cells. Courtesy Centrotherm
Table 32.1
Gate oxidation (25 nm thick dry oxidation)
Wafer cleaning RCA-1 (NH4OH:H2O2) organic
impurity removal
Wafer cleaning RCA-2 (HCl:H2O2) metallic impurity
removal
Dip in dilute HF (1/100; 15 s) native oxide removal
Rinse and dry
Load at 800 ◦C
Boat insertion speed 25 cm/min; N2 ﬂow to ﬂush water
vapor
Ramp temperature from 800 to 950 ◦C in N2/O2
(15 min, or 10 ◦C/min)
Introduce oxygen ﬂow through mass ﬂow controller (4
slpm)
Oxidize for 35 min at 950 ◦C (target thickness 25 nm)
Shut off oxygen ﬂow; introduce nitrogen
Post-oxidation anneal (POA) in nitrogen for 20 min at
950 ◦C (densiﬁcation)
Cooldown to 800 ◦C, 40 min in nitrogen (4 ◦C/min)
Unload wafers at 800 ◦C; total process time 110 min
Ellipsometry/reﬂectometry measurement for thickness
and uniformity
800 °C
800 °C
N2
O2
N2/O2
950 °C
10 °C/min
temperature
time/minutes
gas flow
4 °C/min
POA
Figure 32.3
Temperatures and gas ﬂows during oxidation in a horizontal furnace
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 403]
Equipment for Hot Processes
421
Table 32.2
Comparison of furnace processes and RTP
Furnace
RTP
Load
Batch
Single wafer
Throughput
High
Low
Cycle time
Long
Fast
Heating
Resistive
Lamp/radiation
Temperature uniformity
Excellent
Fair to good
Temperature gradients
Small
Large
Temperature measurement
Indirect
Direct
large determined by thickness requirements, POA temper-
ature can be higher, which leads to reduced Qf density.
32.3 Rapid Thermal Processing/Rapid
Thermal Annealing
RTP (also known as RTA, for rapid thermal annealing)
systems have emerged to address the issues of thermal
budget, process time and gas phase impurity control.
Open tube furnaces are ﬂushed with nitrogen during
wafer loading, and this is usually effective in removing
residual water vapor. It is useful to have a small, con-
trolled oxygen ﬂow during ramp-up to prevent thermal
nitridation of the silicon surface and accept minor oxida-
tion instead, but of course this is not applicable for very
thin oxides.
However, even 100 ppm of residual water vapor will
change the dry oxidation rate. Double tubing is used if
better atmospheric control is required, but loadlocked
systems must be used when exacting atmospheric control
is mandatory. RTP systems are single wafer systems, and
it is easy to implement loadlock and to control the gas
phase in small volumes.
Furnace processes are slow, and the ion implantation
monitoring cycle is very slow: after implantation pho-
toresist is stripped, the wafer is cleaned and annealed
in a furnace, and then sheet resistance is measured by
a four-point probe. This easily takes 2 hours in a tra-
ditional furnace, but it can be accomplished in an hour
in a RTP system: the time at high temperature is drasti-
cally reduced, but the stripping and cleaning constitute a
sizable fraction of total time. The dominant implant mon-
itoring method today is thermal wave because it can be
done immediately after implantation, without any wafer
preparation or processing.
But rapid in RTP really means thermal budget con-
trol: RTP can be very short but at high temperature, to
minimize dopant diffusion. “Traditional” RTP annealing
times are tens of seconds, called “soak” anneals, meaning
anneal times of tens of seconds, while “spike” anneals are
Temp
1000 °C
800 °C
30 s
Time
60 s
Figure 32.4
Temperature proﬁle in rapid thermal anneal-
ing: solid curve, 1000 ◦C, 10 s anneal; dotted curve, 1100 ◦C
spike anneal (zero-time anneal)
for example a second only (Figure 32.4). This is very fast
compared to 30/60 min furnace anneals (FAs). In order
to reduce unwanted diffusion during annealing, a high-
temperature/short-time combination has been reﬁned to a
zero-time anneal (also known as a ﬂash anneal), where
times are in milliseconds.
In a silicide anneal (Section 7.10) oxygen must be
eliminated and this is easier in a single wafer tool. TiSi2
formation was the ﬁrst RTA application. Titanium is very
reactive with oxygen, and even minor residual oxygen
of 5 ppm can result in titanium oxidation instead of
silicidation.
Rapid heating is realized by three alternative meth-
ods: switching on powerful lamps, rapidly transferring the
wafer(s) into a hot zone, or, for millisecond anneal, using
lasers (either CO2 or solid state lasers). Three designs for
RTP are shown in Figure 32.5.
Tungsten halogen lamps deliver a kilowatt or two
and a bank of lamps is needed, while a single xenon
arc lamp can deliver tens of kilowatts. Ramp rates on
the order of 50–300 ◦C/s are used in RTP, a factor of
1000 higher than in horizontal furnaces. Arc lamp output
is in the visible and near infrared; the tungsten lamp
spectrum extends to 4 μm. This leads to some differences
in processes because high-energy photons can contribute
to, for example, oxidation.
Lamp geometry is important for uniform processing.
Large thermal non-uniformities, for example center-to-
edge temperature difference, may reach 100 ◦C during
ramping, which will result in detrimental crystal slips
when the elastic deformation limit is exceeded, as
discussed in connection with Equation 22.1. Cooling is
usually by natural convection and 50 ◦C/s is typical. This
cannot be much affected.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 404]
422
Introduction to Microfabrication
Lamp (s)
Reflector
Quartz window
Wafer
Quartz pins
Stainless steel
IR pyrometer
Gases out to
vacuum pump
CaF2 window
Gases in
(a)
Lamp array
Al door
Quartz liner
Water cooled
housing
Water
Optical pyrometer
Quartz wafer tray
(b)
Cooling
gas inlet
(Un)load
arm
Heater module
Heating section
Heating element
Insulation
Wafer
Transfer chamber
Gas inlet
Elevator
Servomotor
Pyrometer
Wafer support
(quartz)
Process chamber
(SiC)
(c)
Figure 32.5
RTP systems: (a) arc-lamp heated, cold-wall system; (b) tungsten-lamp heated, warm-wall system and
(c) resistively heated fast ramp, hot-wall system. Reproduced from Roozeboom, F. & Parekh, N. (1990), by permission
of AIP
The lamp’s spectrum has implications for temperature
measurement: pyrometry is a non-contact method that
can monitor wafer temperature in real time, but its
operating wavelength must not overlap with the heating
source. Pyrometry is based on the Stefan–Boltzmann law
of emitted power:
P = εσT 4
(32.1)
where
σ = 5.6697 × 10−8 W/m2-K4
is
the
Stefan–
Boltzmann constant.
Emitted power increases very rapidly as temperature
increases because of the fourth-power dependence. Emis-
sivity ε ranges from ε = 1 for an ideal black body to ε = 0
for a white body. Silicon emissivity is strongly dependent
on doping level (charge carrier density), temperature and
wafer thickness in the range up to about 600 ◦C. Above
600 ◦C silicon has a reasonably constant emissivity of
about 0.7, but minor changes in emissivity result in large
temperature errors. For example, oxide ﬁlms on silicon
act as interference ﬁlters and change the emissivity from
0.71 to 0.87 when oxide thickness increases from 0 to
400 nm. Below 600 ◦C thermocouples are employed.
Thermocouples suffer from RTP thermal cycling and
contact to silicon is not necessarily reproducible. Metallic
contamination from a thermocouple is also an issue.
In addition to annealing, RTP can be used for
oxidation (known as RTO) and for CVD (RTCVD).
Rapid
thermal
oxidation
is
not
signiﬁcantly
faster
than furnace oxidation when it comes to oxidation
rates, but from the equipment point of view it is: the
loading–ramping–oxidation–cooling
cycle
can
be
a
few minutes compared to hours in furnace processing.
Figure 32.6 shows two problems with RTO: illumination
is not uniform, but lamp geometry can be deduced from
oxide thickness data. Gas ﬂow patterns are also seen
in the thickness data: incoming gas cools down the
wafer, leading to thinner oxide near the gas inlet. Wafer
edges are cooler than the center, but this is a natural
consequence of cooling in general.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 405]
Equipment for Hot Processes
423
142
142
142
142
142
151
151
145
145
145
145
145
148
148
138
135
138
138
138
138
135
135
132
132
129
129
(a)
(b)
245251
251
262
262
268
268
268
273
279
284
279
273
268
262
257
245
251
251
257
257
251
262
245
257
257
257
Figure 32.6
Rapid thermal oxidation uniformity: (a) vertical lamp bank geometry can be seen in oxide thickness ( ˚A)
chart and (b) gas-ﬂow patterns are seen in oxide thickness: incoming gas cools the wafer near the ﬂat, and wafer edges
are cooler than the centre. Reproduced from Deaton, R. & Massoud, Z. (1992), by permission of IEEE
A
hybrid
technology
between
resistively
heated
furnaces and RTA is the fast ramp furnace. A heater,
typically made of silicon carbide, is kept at very high
temperature and the wafers are rapidly brought into its
vicinity. The massive radiation source emits at much
longer wavelengths than RTP lamps, and thermal equi-
librium is possible. This arrangement can signiﬁcantly
reduce
wafer
emissivity
variation
and
temperature
non-uniformities. Ramp rates for fast-ramping systems
are 10–100 ◦C/s, somewhat lower than in RTP.
32.4 Furnaces vs. RTP Systems
Furnaces are batch tools: even a small furnace loads 25
wafers, and large furnaces take hundreds of wafers. This
is clearly very productive in a certain sense, but it ne-
cessitates large production batches. The alternatives are
running furnaces with half-loads, or wafers have to wait
until sufﬁcient wafers are ready for the furnace.
RTP systems are single wafer tools, and cycle times are
fast, though throughputs depend on batch size: RTP excels
when small lots, for example ﬁve wafers, are processed,
but the beneﬁts compared to furnaces start to disappear
when larger batches are processed.
Some modern devices could not be made without
RTP: in ion implantation activation for shallow junctions
(Chapter 26) the minimization of diffusion necessitates
RTP. Similarly, silicide annealing is always done in RTP,
for different reasons: gas atmosphere control is superior
in RTP.
32.5 Exercises
1. What must oxygen ﬂow be in a horizontal batch fur-
nace to make sure that oxidation is not mass transfer
limited? Write out and justify the assumptions you
need in your solution.
2. If reproducibility and other uncertainties in a batch
loading furnace limit the shortest practical oxidation
time to 15 minutes, what is thinnest gate oxide that
can be grown at 1000, 950, 900 and 850 ◦C? What
are the corresponding CMOS linewidths?
3. How rapid is RTP? Calculate how short heat pulses
will result in thermal equilibrium of the whole silicon
wafer. Thermal diffusivity in silicon is 0.80 cm2/s at
room temperature and 0.1 cm2/s at 1400 ◦C.
4. What temperature error does a change in emissivity
from 0.71 to 0.87 cause in rapid thermal oxidation?
5. What power wattage does an RTP system for 300 mm
wafers need if the maximum operating temperature is
1200 ◦C?
6. Anneal time and junction depth are connected by
xj = k × (Dt)1/3. If junction depth is about 100 nm
in 0.25 μm technology, and the corresponding anneal
time is 10 s, what is the anneal time for 0.1 μm tech-
nology? What is the junction depth?
Simulator exercises:
7. Rapid thermal oxidation (RTO) data is given below.
How does RTO compare to furnace oxidation?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 406]
424
Introduction to Microfabrication
Constant time 30 s
Constant temperature
1050 ◦C
Temp.
Thickness
Time
Thickness
950◦C
44 ˚A
30 s
75 ˚A
1050◦C
75 ˚A
150 s
158 ˚A
1150◦C
145 ˚A
270 s
240 ˚A
Data from Deaton and Massoud (1992).
8. A typical implant activation anneal in a furnace is
950 ◦C/30 min, but in RTA a much higher temper-
ature and much shorter time are used. Compare the
junction depths that can be made by RTA and FA. Use
implant conditions of 20 keV boron at 1015 cm−2 into
a phosphorus-doped wafer of 1015 cm−3.
References and Related Reading
Bensahel, D. et al. (2001) Front-end, single wafer diffusion
processing for advanced 300mm fabrication line, Microelec-
tron. Eng., 56, 49.
Bratschun, A. (1999) The application of rapid thermal process-
ing technology to the manufacture of integrated circuits-an
overview, J. Electron. Mater., 28, 1328 (special issue on
RTP).
Deaton, R. and Z. Massoud (1992) Manufacturability of rapid-
thermal oxidation of silicon: oxide thickness, oxide thickness
variation and system dependency, IEEE Trans. Semicond.
Manuf ., 5, 347.
Endoh, T. et al. (2001) Inﬂuence of silicon wafer loading am-
bient on chemical composition and thickness uniformity of
sub-5nm thick oxides, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 40, 7023.
Fair, R.B. (1996) Conventional and rapid thermal processes,
in C.Y. Chang and S.M. Sze, ULSI Technology, McGraw-
Hill.
Fischer, A. et al. (2000) Slip-free processing of 300 mm
silicon batch wafers, J. Appl. Phys., 87, 1543.
Futase, T. et al. (2009) Spike annealing as second rapid thermal
annealing to prevent pure nickel silicide from decomposing
on a gate, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 22, 475–481.
Gossmann, H.-J.L. (2008) Junction formation and its device
impact through nodes: from single to coimplants, from beam
line to plasma, from single ions to clusters, and from rapid
thermal annealing to laser thermal processing, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., B26, 267–272.
Malik, I.J. et al. (2007) Analysis of low temperature RTP needs
for IC metallization, Microelectron. Eng., 84, 2729–2732.
Roozeboom, F. and N. Parekh (1990) Rapid thermal processing
systems: a review with emphasis on temperature control,
J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B8, 1249.
Saga, K. et al. (1997) Inﬂuence of silicon-wafer loading ambi-
ents in an oxidation furnace on the gate oxide degradation
due to organic contamination, Appl. Phys. Lett., 71, 3670.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 407]
33
Vacuum and Plasmas
When we talk about vacuum processes, pressures can be
anything from slightly below atmospheric pressure down
to 10−11 torr. Both the scientiﬁc motivation and the tech-
nical realization of these different vacuum regimes call
for a multitude of concepts. Pumps of different designs,
suitable for different vacuum ranges, must be employed.
Residual gases will, however, always be present, but their
effects must be understood. Plasmas in microfabrication
are always low-pressure plasmas, and therefore sputter-
ing, RIE and PECVD are discussed in this chapter. There
are many units for pressure (and ﬂow) and the reader is
referred to the conversion tables in Appendix B.
33.1 Vacuum Physics and Kinetic
Theory of Gases
The transport of ejected atoms or ions from the target to
substrate requires a vacuum to prevent collisions and ﬂux
divergence. Mean free path (MFP, λ), Equation 33.1, is
the distance traveled by atoms between collisions and is
an important measure of molecular transport:
1
λ =
√
2 × πd2n
(33.1)
where n is atom density and d the molecular diameter.
This can approximated for diatomic molecules around
300 K as λ (m) ≈5 × 10−5/P (torr) which gives λ ≈
65 nm for nitrogen (d = 0.375 nm) at room temperature
and 1 atm (760 torr) pressure, and 5 cm at 1 mtorr pressure.
The Knudsen number, Kn, relates mean free path and
reactor chamber size:
Kn = λ
L
(33.2)
where L is the characteristic dimension of the chamber.
Kn > 1 equals collisionless transport across the vacuum
vessel. This regime is the molecular ﬂow regime, and
MBE obviously operates in this regime. In the regime
Kn < 0.01 ﬂuid dynamics has to be taken into account.
Contamination from the gas phase to the surface can
be estimated from kinetic gas theory. The impingement
rate of molecules on the surface is given by
z =
P
√
2πmkT
(33.3)
where P is pressure, m mass and T absolute temperature.
If the residual gas is assumed to be nitrogen (m =
28 amu), then at 10−6 torr (1.33 × 10−4 Pa) z = 3.8 ×
1018/m2-s. A monolayer of residual gas will be absorbed
on the sample surface in a time scale given by
tmonolayer = Nsurface
δz
=

N3
volume
δz
(33.4)
where δ is the sticking probability and Nsurface the density
of surface sites. For silicon, Nvolume is 5 × 1028m−3 and
Nsurface is about 1019 m−2. Under the conditions described
above, the monolayer formation time is about 1 s under
the assumption of unity δ, which gives the shortest possi-
ble monolayer formation time. In Figure 33.1 background
pressure and sticking coefﬁcient are used to display mono-
layer formation time. For oxygen, the sticking coefﬁcient
is estimated to be about 0.1 (but it is strongly temper-
ature dependent). Residual gases are not similar in their
effects: oxygen, water vapor and hydrocarbons are much
more problematic than nitrogen, carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide or argon. The sticking coefﬁcient can be tailored
by surface preparation: for instance, HF-last treated sur-
faces are much more resistant to water adsorption than
RCA-1 treated surfaces.
Adsorbed species have a characteristic desorption time
which is exponentially dependent on activation energy,
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 408]
426
Introduction to Microfabrication
10−9
104
103
102
101
100
10−8
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
Time (s)
Background impurity pressure (Pa)
1 ML
S = 1
1 ML
S = 0.01
0.01 ML
S = 0.0001
0.01 ML
S = 0.001
0.01 ML
S = 0.1
0.01 ML
S = E-6
0.01 ML
S = 0.01
0.01 ML
S = 1
Surface passivation
Figure 33.1
Monolayer (ML) and 0.01 ML formation
times as a function of pressure and sticking coefﬁcient (S).
Surface can be passivated by for example HF treatment. Re-
produced from Grannemann (1994) by permission of AIP
according to
τ = 1
ν exp
 Ea
kT

(33.5)
The order of magnitude for frequency factor ν is
1013 s−1, which describes a simple harmonic oscillator
with frequency kT/h. Chemisorbed species have an Ea
of about 1 eV and physisorbed species 0.4 eV, which
translate roughly, at room temperature, to hours and
microseconds, respectively.
33.2 Vacuum Production
Starting from the ideal gas law, Equation 33.6, we can
get a feeling for vacuum production:
p = NkT
V
(33.6)
Vacuum production means a decrease in the number of
atoms N over time, dN/dt. We use the following deﬁni-
tions:
particle density
n ≡N/V
(in atoms/m3)
ﬂux
J ≡dN/dt
(in atoms/s)
pumping speed
S ≡−J/n
(in m3/s)
Pumping speed is also known as volumetric ﬂow rate.
The time evolution of pressure can be written as
dp
dt = dN
dt
kT
V
= −nSkT
V
(33.7)
which can be solved to yield
p = p0 exp

−St
V

(33.8)
Pressure drops exponentially over time with characteristic
time τ proportional to V/S.
Low–medium vacuum (105–0.1 Pa) can be produced
by rotary vane pumps, rotary piston pumps, Roots blow-
ers and sorption pumps, which are known collectively
as roughing pumps. High vacuum (0.1–10−4 Pa) is pro-
duced by capture pumps (cryopumps, getter pumps) and
momentum transfer pumps (turbomolecular pumps, dif-
fusion pumps). Capture pumps capture and hold all the
gas and therefore they need forepumps because of their
limited holding capacity. And they have to be regener-
ated regularly. Momentum transfer pumps, on the other
hand, require roughing pumps because they cannot start
operation at ambient pressure.
An analogy between vacuum pumping and emptying
a water bucket is the following. Initially each cup of re-
moved water will decrease the water level in the bucket
by a cupful until almost all the water is removed. After
that the remaining water lies in small cusps and irregular-
ities of the bucket, and each removed volume is less than
a full cup. Therefore pressure drop (and water-level drop)
are gradually diminished, and ﬁnally ﬂatten altogether.
In an evaporator there is just the atmospheric gas that
has to be pumped out, but in sputtering and UHV–CVD
systems we feed in process gases intentionally and must
be able to pump them out. Despite a similar base vac-
uum, the process vacuum in sputtering and UHV–CVD
is 1–10 mtorr, three orders of magnitude higher than the
base vacuum, and 10–100 Pa-l/s pumps can be used.
Crossover is the pressure where the high-vacuum
pump is connected to the chamber. For capture pumps
this is calculated from the torr–liter speciﬁcation (Pa–l/s)
by dividing by the chamber volume. Capture pumps hold
the pumped material, therefore knowledge of chamber
volume is essential. Capture pumps often bring the
pressure down faster than roughing pumps, because the
pumping speed of a mechanical roughing pump gets
worse at lower pressures.
The ultimate pressure that can be reached by a pump-
ing system is determined by pumping speed and vacuum
chamber leak rate. We need the concept of conductance to
estimate this: conductance is ﬂow divided by gas density
difference on the two sides of the vacuum system. Its unit
is thus m3/s. Conductances add like capacitors in series,
that is
1
Ctotal
= 1
C1
+ 1
C2
(33.9)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 409]
Vacuum and Plasmas
427
Maximum conductance is limited by oriﬁce opening, and
further limited by tube conductance that leads from the
oriﬁce. The number of atoms leaking in from outside is
given by
dN
dt = J = −Cn
(33.10)
For high vacuum, n ∼n (zero molecules on the high-
vacuum side). For STP conditions n = 2.4 × 1025/m3.
Identifying ﬂux J as the leak, and using the ideal gas
law, we get Equation 33.11 which relates pumping speed
and pressure:
pS = kTJleak = kTnC
(33.11)
The ultimate pressure that can be reached is then given by
pultimate = kTnC
S
(33.12)
If leak rate is 3.8 × 1015 s−1 and a 1000 l/s pump is
employed, the base pressure is about 1.6 × 10−5 Pa or
1.2 × 10−7 torr. Ultimate base pressures are produced by
cryopumps or getter pumps, with values in the range of
10−11 torr. MBE systems operate at such base pressures.
The theoretical maximum pumping speed is derived
from kinetic theory as
S = A
4 vave
vave =

8kT
πm
(33.13)
where A is inlet area and vave the molecular average
speed. This represents the case where all atoms are im-
pinging in one direction only, with no return ﬂux. Real-life
pumping speeds of diffusion pumps can be 50% of the
theoretical maximum value, but rotary pumps fare much
worse. Pumping speed is usually speciﬁed for nitrogen,
and the light gases of hydrogen and helium are especially
difﬁcult to pump.
Gases will adsorb on surfaces when energetically fa-
vorable surface sites are available. Adsorbed gases are
“surface gases” as opposed to “volume gases.” The lat-
ter are related to chamber volume; the former to chamber
wall area. This points to the importance of surface ﬁnish
in vacuum chamber manufacturing: minimum surface area
means a smooth surface with the least possible number of
sites for adsorption. Water vapor is especially difﬁcult to
remove because of its high latent heat and low desorption
rate. Heating is standard procedure to desorb adsorbed
gases. Therefore high-vacuum chamber materials and sur-
faces, valves and all other components must be compatible
with baking, which is done to outgas adsorbed species.
Bringing down the pressure is achieved by a multiple
stage vacuum system. The sputtering system may have
three levels of vacuum:
1. Vacuum cassette lock, pumped down to 0.1 torr range
by a mechanical pump.
2. Transfer chamber, pumped down to 10−5 torr by a
turbopump.
3. Process chamber, cryopumped to 10−9 torr.
If the transfer and process chambers take only one
wafer at a time, the volume to be pumped can be made
very small. In a batch deposition system, vacuum vessel
volume is easily 100 liters; the corresponding pumpdown
time is hours, and somewhat less with a loadlock.
Loadlocks come in two designs: single loadlocks,
or separate entry and exit loadlocks. The former are
used when process time is long compared to transfer
time. Loadlocks serve many purposes: they protect
the main chamber from atmospheric gases (especially
water vapor) and they also protect cleanroom personnel
from harmful or toxic gases that have been used in
the process. They can also protect the wafers from the
atmosphere: for instance, after aluminum plasma etching
chlorine residues remain on the wafer (in the resist and
on aluminum surfaces), and if the wafer is taken into
cleanroom air with 45% humidity, the chlorine will react
with water vapor to form HCl, according to
2 AlCl3 + 3 H2O ⇒Al2O3 + 6 HCl
(33.14)
Hydrogen chloride will etch aluminum locally. This
is corrosion. Exit loadlock can be equipped with a
plasma source, and photoresist can be stripped in oxygen
plasma. This results simultaneously in aluminum surface
oxidation to very passive Al2O3.
33.3 Plasma Etching
Plasma etching (RIE) has been discussed in Chapters 11
and 21 from the viewpoints of process performance and
device applications. This section emphasizes equipment
issues. Plasma generation has a major role in etching,
sputtering, ion implantation, photoresist stripping and
PECVD. The plasmas used in microfabrication are
low-temperature, low-density plasmas (about 1010 cm−3
ion density), compared to welding or fusion plasmas,
for example. In microfabrication a high-density plasma
(HDP) means an ion density in excess of 1011 cm−3.
The degree of ionization is still fairly low: at 1 mtorr
pressure, 1 atom in 10 000 is ionized.
Plasma etching has a very high number of parameters
that need to be controlled (recall Figure 21.10). This
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 410]
428
Introduction to Microfabrication
makes plasma etching difﬁcult, both experimentally and
simulation-wise. Furthermore, the machine parameters
affect plasma parameters, which together with surface
reactions determine the ﬁnal outcome: rate, selectivity
and other process responses of interest.
33.3.1 Direct plasmas
Plasma etch reactors can be classiﬁed in various ways,
and the following is just one.
The parallel-plate diode reactor with two electrodes,
one powered, one grounded, is a basic construction for
an etcher (see Figure 11.9). Wafers are placed on elec-
trodes that produce the plasma; plasma density, sheath
voltage and the ion bombardment that hits the wafers are
thus dependent on each other and cannot be controlled
independently. Despite this seemingly inconvenient state
of affairs, this arrangement is very widely used because
of its simplicity. RF generators use the industrial stan-
dard 13.56 MHz frequency to create plasmas of typically
1010 cm−3 density.
33.3.2 Remote plasmas
In remote plasmas generation and biasing are separated.
One power source is used to generate the plasma, far re-
moved from the wafer, and another power supply is used
to apply a small bias voltage to control ion bombardment.
(It is possible to have radicals only, and no ions !) In
this decoupled design very high RF power can be used to
create plasma glow far away from the wafer. Ion ombard-
ment of the wafer is not affected. Because high density of
ions (1011 −1012cm−3) and radicals equals a high active
species concentration, HDPs offer higher etch rates. DRIE
reactors use 2–10 kW ICP (Inductively Coupled Plasma)
for generation and a few watts of CCP (Capacitively Cou-
pled Power) for biasing. A cryogenic ICP DRIE reactor is
shown in Figure 33.2. Many of its features are common
to all HDP etchers, for example helium back-side cooling
and mechanical wafer clamping.
High etch rate and lower damage, easier photoresist
removal and higher selectivities favor HDP reactors.
Remote plasma reactors are often difﬁcult to scale
to large diameters because of the physical separation
between
plasma
and
wafer,
whereas
parallel-plate
reactors naturally have the plasma “aligned” to the wafer.
33.4 Sputtering
Sputtering processes for thin-ﬁlm deposition were dis-
cussed in Chapter 5, with scant regard to actual sputtering
equipment. The oldest and simplest of sputter deposition
Helium
Liquid nitrogen
DC self bias
CCP
Si wafer
Dark space
F-rich
high density
plasma glow
ICP
SF5
+
inhibitor
SF6
Turbo
SiF4
SiOxFy inhibitor
Figure 33.2
Cryogenic ICP high-density plasma etcher.
Reproduced from Jansen et al. (2009) by permission of IOP
systems is the DC diode system which consists of a nega-
tively biased plate (target cathode) which is bombarded by
argon ions at about 100 mtorr pressure (Figure 33.3a). In
order to get a high deposition rate, high sputtering power
has to be used, which leads to high-voltage operation.
This is undesirable because of damage to thin oxides.
In order to improve DC diodes, RF diode systems
were introduced. RF sputtering systems usually work
at 13.56 MHz. They can be used to deposit dielectrics,
something that is not possible with DC systems due to
charging. Electrons oscillating in the RF ﬁeld couple
energy more efﬁciently to the plasma, and higher
deposition rates are possible in RF than in DC, at the
same power levels. However, a very high voltage of
2000 V is used.
Magnetron sputtering has emerged as the main con-
ﬁguration. A magnet behind the target creates a ﬁeld
which conﬁnes electron movement, therefore ionization
is much more efﬁcient, leading to high deposition rates at
low power (5–20 kW is used, depending on target size).
Voltages in magnetron systems are, for example, 500 V
(and argon ion energies 500 eV), clearly lower than in RF
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 411]
Vacuum and Plasmas
429
−V(DC)
Insulation
Matching
network
13.56 MHz
Target
Substrates
Anode
Glow discharge
Glow discharge
Sputtering
gas
Vacuum
Sputtering
gas
Vacuum
(a)
(b)
Figure 33.3
Schematic sputtering systems: (a) DC and (b) RF. Reproduced from Ohring, M. (1992), by permission of
Academic Press
diodes. Magnetron sputtering systems work at about milli-
torr pressures (0.1–10 mtorr), with argon ﬂows of 10–100
sccm. From the impurity viewpoint, however, sputtering
systems are described by their base pressures, which are
10−7–10−9 mtorr because high-purity argon sputtering
gas (99.9999%) contributes less than background gases.
Sputtering systems have, in addition to plasma genera-
tion and vacuum subsystems, many other features: wafers
can be heated and they can be shielded by from the plasma
by shutters (especially during plasma ignition, when the
discharge is unstable), as shown in Figure 33.4. In ad-
dition to argon, other gases can be introduced, to enable
reactive sputtering. Sputtering from a titanium target in
an Ar/N2 atmosphere results in TiN, and from a Ta target
and Ar/O2 in Ta2O5. The latter is an insulator, and a RF
sputtering system would be needed if a Ta2O5 target was
used. In both cases the ﬁlm is not stoichiometric tantalum
pentoxide. An oxygen anneal after sputtering would be
needed to ﬁne-tune the stoichiometry.
33.4.1 Sputter etching and bias sputtering
If the voltages in a sputtering system are switched, and
power is applied to the wafer electrode instead of the tar-
get, the wafers will experience argon ion bombardment.
This is called sputter etching. (Sputtering systems can be
turned into true plasma etch systems by introducing re-
active gases instead of argon. The term RSE, for reactive
sputter etching, was used for early plasma etching sys-
tems.)
Leak valve
Pressure gauge
Substrate
heater
Substrate
bias
Substrate
holder
Substrate
Vacuum
chamber
Throttle
Cryopump
for H2O
−V
High vacuum pump
Sputter source
Plasma
Sputtered atom
Shutter
Inert
gas
Reactive
gas
Figure 33.4
Sputtering system. Reproduced from Parsons
(1991) by permission of Academic Press
If the wafer electrode is biased during sputtering (by a
separate power supply), wafers will experience simultane-
ous deposition and etching. This will generally densify the
ﬁlm because ion bombardment knocks out loosely bound
ﬁlm (and impurity) atoms. The geometry of structures is
important because argon ion etching depends on the an-
gle of incidence: convex corners are etched faster, and
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 412]
430
Introduction to Microfabrication
faceting occurs. Smoothing of sharp corners is beneﬁcial
for step coverage in the next deposition step, but the to-
tal deposition rates in such deposition–etch processes are
understandably slow.
33.5 Residual Gas Incorporation
into Deposited Film
Standard evaporation is done in high vacuum, but it can
be done in a gaseous atmosphere where, instead of 10−6
mbar, 10−4 mbar is used. Evaporation in a nitrogen at-
mosphere results in highly porous ﬁlms, for example gold
with a density of 3 g/cm3 has been made (bulk gold den-
sity is 19 g/cm3). Similar platinum ﬁlms have also been
made. These are used in infrared microsystems as ab-
sorbers, and are known as black gold and black platinum.
Nitrogen prohibits adatom movements by forming strong
bonds, and columnar porous ﬁlms will result. Excellent
IR absorbance is achieved, but further processing such
ﬁlms is difﬁcult because high porosity results in poor me-
chanical strength. Therefore their preparation should be
the ﬁnal, or almost ﬁnal, step in the process.
Gases in the deposition chamber will be incorporated
into the growing ﬁlm depending on their partial pressure
and chemical activity. In Equation 33.4 the monolayer
formation time was given. This time should be compared
to the deposition rate for a monolayer of ﬁlm: if impurity
monolayer formation is rapid and the deposition rate slow,
a considerable amount of residual gas will be incorporated
into the ﬁlm. Table 33.1 gives the impurity fraction in
the ﬁlm as a function of residual gas pressure. Unitary
sticking coefﬁcient is assumed, that is the values present
worst case estimates.
If the partial pressure of reactive impurities is 10−6 torr,
one monolayer per second is incorporated (∼0.1 nm/s).
Even if the deposition rate is very high at 100 nm/s, there
will be 0.1% impurity in the ﬁlm. Purities of typical start-
ing materials for PVD are 99.999%. Poor vacuum can
therefore contribute many orders of magnitude more im-
purities into ﬁlm than the target materials. Of course not
all impurities are equal: some manifest themselves much
more strikingly than others. For example, oxygen in alu-
minum will rapidly lead to aluminum oxide formation and
useless ﬁlm, but a similar concentration of argon (always
present in sputtering!) can be neglected in a ﬁrst approxi-
mation. At base pressures of 10−9 torr target purity starts
to become the limiting factor.
Deposition rates in batch systems are usually much
slower than in single wafer systems: a difference by an
order of magnitude is not unusual, therefore throughput
rather than deposition rate is often mentioned for batch
Table 33.1
Fraction of foreign atoms incorporated into
growing ﬁlm
Partial pressure
Deposition rate (nm/s)
(torr)
0.1
1
10
100
10−9
10−3
10−4
10−5
10−6
10−8
10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5
10−7
10−1
10−2
10−3
10−4
10−6
1
10−1
10−2
10−3
105
10
1
0.1
0.01
systems. But the calculations above show that ﬁlm quality
is related to deposition rate, not to throughput.
33.6 PECVD
PECVD reactors are very much like plasma etchers. From
the hardware point of view the heated electrode is the
main difference. Other aspects, like RF generators, reac-
tive gases, pumping systems, etc., are similar (Figure 5.7).
In etching HDPs offer enhanced etch rates; in PECVD
HDP means a higher deposition rate and/or improved ﬁlm
quality. The typical PECVD temperature is 300 ◦C, but
there is no fundamental lower limit to deposition tem-
perature. Processes at 100 ◦C have been demonstrated,
but ﬁlm properties are strongly temperature dependent.
Especially, the hydrogen content of the ﬁlms increases
rapidly as temperature is lowered, and the ﬁlms become
less dense.
The above discussion was about ﬁrst-order effects only:
the effects of pressure, power and reactant gas ﬂows can
be rather complex. An increase in RF power initially in-
creases deposition rate, because more reactant gases are
ionized, fragmented and available for reaction, as seen for
PECVD nitride deposition in Figure 33.5a. A further in-
crease in power leads to a leveling of the rate, however, as
more and more ion bombardment causes sputtering of the
growing ﬁlm. Decreasing pressure leads to a smaller depo-
sition rate (Figure 33.5b). Lower pressure leads to a higher
electron energy and different decomposition reactions and
a different degree of ionization of the reactants. The ef-
fect of NH3 ﬂow is quite subtle (Figure 33.5c): when more
NH3 is available, it reacts with silane to form Si(NH2)4,
while the competing reaction product Si(NH2)3 is the im-
portant precursor for ﬁlm growth. Increasing silane ﬂow
(Figure 33.5d) leads to an increased number of silicon rad-
icals, therefore the deposition rate goes up. At the same
time, the ﬁlm becomes silicon rich, reducing stress. How-
ever, the ﬁlm starts to lose some of its beneﬁcial nitride
properties, like etch resistance in KOH.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 413]
Vacuum and Plasmas
431
350
300
250
200
150
100
100
200
300
RF Power (W)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Deposition Rate (nm/min)
400
500
Stress (MPa)
600
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Stress
Deposition Rate
380
300
320
340
360
280
260
220
240
700
800
Pressure (mTorr)
Deposition Rate (nm/min)
900
1000
Stress (MPa)
1100
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
Stress
Deposition Rate
400
320
340
360
380
300
280
240
260
20
30
50
60
40
NH3 Flow Rate (sccm)
Deposition Rate (nm/min)
70
80
90
Stress (MPa)
100
110
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Stress
Deposition Rate
340
260
280
300
320
240
220
140
160
180
200
60
70
90
100
80
SiH4 Flow Rate (sccm)
Deposition Rate (nm/min)
110
120
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Stress
Deposition Rate
Figure 33.5
The effects of PECVD process parameters on deposition rate and ﬁlm stress. Reproduced from Wei et al.
(2008), copyright 2008, by permission of Elsevier
Deposition takes place not only on wafers but on reactor
walls, and on the electrodes too. It is standard procedure
to etch these deposited layers away at regular intervals,
for example after every wafer, or after a certain thickness
has been deposited, or when deposition temperature is
changed, or when material to be deposited is changed.
PECVD similarity to RIE is evidenced by the fact that
the introduction of CF4 or NF3 gas into a PECVD reactor
chamber turns it into an etch system. In situ cleaning of
the PECVD chamber can thus be accomplished easily.
NF3 gas has a nice feature in that it decomposes into
gaseous products only, whereas CF4 and SF6 are potential
sources of carbon and sulfur residues. NF3 is, however,
toxic, and hard to handle. It is also a greenhouse gas, just
like ﬂuorinated hydrocarbons.
Utilization is a measure of reactant usage. It is the ratio
of reactant atoms embodied in the thin ﬁlm to all incoming
source gas atoms. Utilization cannot even approach 100%
because the main convective ﬂow will always carry with
it some reactants, and only a fraction will diffuse through
the boundary layer and participate in ﬁlm-forming reac-
tions. Some metal–organic precursor molecules undergo
disproportionation reactions, and only 50% of source gas
atoms are available for deposition in the best case.
33.7 Residence Time
The effects of pressure and ﬂow can be deduced from
residence time τ,
τ = p
p0
V
F
273
T
(33.15)
where p0 is a reference pressure of 1 atm.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 414]
432
Introduction to Microfabrication
Residence time is the characteristic time that a molecule
spends in the reactor before being pumped away. The con-
cept is useful in analyzing all sorts of reactors because
residence time is very general. Increasing pressure leads
to increased residence time, which translates to a higher
deposition (or etching) rate: molecules have a higher prob-
ability of being incorporated into the ﬁlm if they spend
more time in the reactor. Increasing ﬂow rate will sweep
the molecules away faster, leading to a smaller τ and
lower deposition rate. There are, however, many other as-
pects to consider: higher pressure means more collisions
and less ion bombardment, which affects ﬁlm structure
and stresses, and when ﬂow rates change, the relative
proportions of ionized and excited species change, again
affecting ﬁlm growth, so optimization of plasma reactors
involves a great many variables.
33.8 Exercises
1. What is the Knudsen number in
(a) sputtering
(b) evaporation
(c) MBE
(d) RIE?
2. What is the maximum theoretical pumping speed of
a diffusion pump with a vacuum ﬂange of 10 cm di-
ameter?
3. If the water molecule sticking coefﬁcient is 0.01 and
water partial pressure is 10−4 Pa, how long will it
take to form a monolayer?
4. What must the leak rate be in a MBE system be in
order to achieve 10−11 torr base pressure?
5. In sputtering about 10–20 mW/cm2 of energy is sup-
plied to the surface (heat of condensation, kinetic
energy of sputtered particles, ion and electron bom-
bardment and ion neutralization each contribute about
2–5 mW/cm2). By how much do wafers heat up dur-
ing sputtering?
6. What would be the crossover pressure for ﬁlm purity
to become target purity dependent when a 99.9999%
pure target (6N) is used?
7. How deep into an aluminum sputtering target will
500 eV argon ions penetrate?
8. In a pulsed (Bosch) process DRIE chamber the vol-
ume is 50 liters, ﬂow rate is 200 sccm and operating
pressure is 20 mtorr. What is the shortest possible
pulsing period?
9. If 5 kW power is applied to an aluminum sputter-
ing target of 200 mm diameter, what is the maximum
possible deposition rate?
10. An XPS measurement takes 15 minutes. What is the
pressure in a XPS chamber?
References and Related Reading
Cote, D.R. et al. (1995) Low-temperature CVD processes and
dielectrics, IBM J. Res. Dev., 39, 437.
Grannemann, E. (1994) Film interface control in integrated pro-
cessing systems, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 12, 2741.
Hess, D.W. (1990) Plasma-material interactions, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., A8, 1677.
Jansen, H.V. et al. (2009) Black silicon method X: a review
on high speed and selective plasma etching of silicon with
proﬁle control: an in-depth comparison between Bosch and
cryostat DRIE processes as a roadmap to next generation
equipment, J. Micromech. Microeng., 19, 033001.
Lee, J.T.C. et al. (1996) Plasma etching process development
using in situ optical emission and ellipsometry, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., B14, 3283.
Loewenhardt, P. et al. (1999) Plasma diagnostics: use and jus-
tiﬁcation in an industrial environment, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.,
38, 4362.
Mahan, J.E. (2000) Physical Vapor Deposition of Thin Films,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Nguyen, S.V. (1999) High-density plasma chemical vapor de-
position of silicon-based dielectric ﬁlms for integrated cir-
cuits, IBM J. Res. Dev., 43 (1–2), 109 (special issue on
plasma processing).
Ohring, M. (1992) The Materials Science of Thin Films, Aca-
demic Press.
Parsons, R. (1991) Sputter deposition processes, in J.L. Vossen
and W. Kern (eds), Thin Film Processes II, Academic
Press.
Rossnagel, S.M. (1999) Sputter deposition for semiconductor
manufacturing, IBM J. Res. Dev., 43 (1–2), 163.
Somorjai, G.A. (1998) From surface materials to surface tech-
nologies, MRS Bull., May, 11.
Waits, R.K. (2001) Edison’s vacuum coating patents, J. Vac.
Sci. Technol., A19, 1666.
Wei, J. et al. (2008) A new fabrication method of low stress
PECVD SiNx layers for biomedical applications, Thin Solid
Films, 516, 5181–5188.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 415]
34
CVD and Epitaxy Equipment
Thermal CVD processes share many equipment features
with oxidation and diffusion furnace processes, whereas
PECVD is more akin to plasma etching. Epitaxial pro-
cesses to be discussed here are limited to ﬂow-type silicon
CVD epitaxy processes which share many features with
thermal CVD.
CVD reactors are classiﬁed by their operating pressure
range:
• atmospheric pressure, APCVD
• sub-atmospheric, SACVD 10–100 torr
• low-pressure, LPCVD at ∼1 torr
• ultrahigh vacuum, UHV–CVD, 10−6 torr base pressure
In UHV reactors the actual process pressures are 1–10
mtorr when gases are ﬂowing, very much like magnetron
sputtering systems. In both cases a good base vacuum (of
10−6–10−9 torr level) is mandatory for removing residual
gases from the chamber.
34.1 Deposition Rate
The two main differences between PVD and CVD reac-
tions are in ﬂuid dynamics and temperature dependence:
in PVD ﬂuid dynamics need not be considered, but CVD
processes are ﬂow processes with complex ﬂuid dynam-
ics. PVD processes are temperature insensitive as far as
ﬁlm deposition rate is concerned, but for example higher
temperature can lead to impurity desorption (higher
purity ﬁlms) or annealing (lower stress). CVD processes
are chemical processes, their rates obeying Arrhenius
behavior. Activation energy Ea can be extracted from
the Arrhenius formula when the deposition rate has been
determined at several temperatures. The magnitude of
the activation energy gives hints of possible reaction
mechanisms.
Two temperature regimes can be found for most CVD
reactions: when the temperature is low, the surface re-
action rate is slow, and an overabundance of reactants
is available. The reaction is then surface reaction lim-
ited. Surface reaction-limited processes usually result in
uniform ﬁlms with good step coverage, an obvious ad-
vantage.
When the temperature increases, the surface reaction
rate increases exponentially and above a certain temper-
ature all source gas molecules react at the surface. The
reaction is then in the mass transport-limited regime (also
known as the diffusion-limited regime) because the rate
is dependent on the supply of new species to the surface.
Fluid dynamics of the reactor then plays a major role
in deposition uniformity and rate. These two cases are
shown in Figure 34.1. The activation energy of a surface
reaction-limited process is much higher than that of mass
transport-limited process.
In PECVD low temperatures can be used: plasma
activation ensures sufﬁcient reactive species even at
low temperatures, typically at about 300 ◦C, but even
down to 100 ◦C (but temperature strongly affects ﬁlm
quality). Whereas typical activation energies for thermal
mass
transport
limited
surface
reaction
limited
slope = Ea1
slope = Ea2
log rate
high T
low T
(1/T)
Figure 34.1
Surface reaction-limited vs. mass transfer-
limited CVD reactions
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 416]
434
Introduction to Microfabrication
growth/cycle
temperature
re-evaporation
non-self limiting
condensation
low reaction rate
process
window
monolayer
Figure 34.2
Process window for ALD is usually wide in
temperature: it is limited by low reaction rate and conden-
sation at low temperatures and by not self-limiting growth
and re-evaporation of precursors at high temperatures
CVD processes are 2 eV (200 kJ/mol), PECVD activation
energies are a fraction of that, for example 0.3 eV for
amorphous silicon deposition. The PECVD deposition
rate is only weakly temperature dependent.
ALD reactions are self-limiting and ﬁlm thickness is
calculated from the number of pulses. But ALD reactors
can be operated in a continuos CVD mode, so the
equipment are related. In CVD deposition the rate is
exponentially temperature dependent according to the
Arrhenius formula, but in ALD there is a (wide) process
window where the rate is independent of temperature. For
example, the rate for SrTiO3 deposition has been mea-
sured as 0.3 ˚A/cycle from 225 to 325 ◦C. In this regime
exactly one layer of precursors is deposited. The unifor-
mity of ALD is exceptionally good, with <1% uniformi-
ties reported for both within the wafer and wafer to wafer.
This is typical of all surface reaction-controlled processes,
for example LPCVD polysilicon and silicon nitride, too.
The ALD operating temperature is limited from be-
low by two mechanisms (numbers refer to Figure 34.2):
low temperature leads to a low reaction rate (1), and
precursor condensation on the surface leads to excessive
deposition (2). The former leads to less than monolayer
deposition, the latter to non-self-limiting deposition of un-
wanted composition. The upper operating temperature is
also limited by two mechanisms: thermal decomposition
of the precursors, which results in deposition in the normal
CVD fashion (3); and a high re-evaporation rate, which
leads to less than monolayer growth (4). Under the right
conditions, highly uniform monolayer (or submonolayer)
formation is observed.
34.2 CVD Rate Modeling
CVD can be modeled with a simple model that resem-
bles the Deal–Grove model of thermal oxidation (compare
Figures 13.2 and 34.3). Flux J of reactants from the gas
boundary
layer d
convective
main flow
Cg gas phase
concentration
Cs surface
concentration
Figure 34.3
Model of gas phase deposition
ﬂow to the surface is controlled by diffusion through the
boundary layer, and ﬁlm deposition takes place at the
wafer surface. Flux from the gas phase to the surface is
given by
Jgas-to-surface = hg(Cg −Cs)
(34.1)
where hg is the gas phase transport coefﬁcient, Cg the gas
phase concentration and Cs the surface concentration of
reactants. The surface reaction rate is assumed to be di-
rectly proportional to reactant concentration, as shown by
Jsurface-reaction = ksCs
(34.2)
Under steady state conditions the ﬂuxes are equal, Jg =
Js, and concentrations are given by
Cs =
Cg
1 + (ks/hg)
(34.3)
Conversion from ﬂuxes to rate is given by R = Js/n
where n is atom density in the ﬁlm.
From Equation 34.3 we can recognize the two familiar
regimes of mass transport-limited deposition (Equation
34.4) and surface reaction-limited deposition (Equation
34.5):
Cs = hg
ks
Cg
mass transport limited, ks ≫hg
(34.4)
Cs = Cg
surface reaction limited, ks ≪kg
(34.5)
In the mass transport-limited case the reaction rate at the
surface is very high and leads to local depletion of re-
actants in the gas phase. The inadequate supply can be
due to a gas ﬂow rate that is too small, but it can also
be caused by too slow a diffusion through the boundary
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 417]
CVD and Epitaxy Equipment
435
layer. Surface reaction-limited cases are characterized by
an oversupply of reactants in the vicinity of the surface,
but the slow surface reaction cannot consume all of them.
The gas phase transport coefﬁcient, hg, can be gauged
as follows: Fick’s law (Equation 14.2) states that ﬂux
J is proportional to diffusivity D and to concentration
gradient dC/dx. If we identify dx with the boundary layer
thickness δ, and combine Equations 14.2 and 34.1, we get
the ﬂux from
Jgas-to-surface = −D
δ Cg
(34.6)
The boundary layer is the region of stagnant ﬂuid near
the wall. Boundary layer thickness δ is given by
δ =

ηL
vρ
(34.7)
where η is the viscosity, v the ﬂuid velocity, ρ the den-
sity and L the characteristic dimension of the system
(e.g., chamber diameter). The boundary layer thickness
increases along the ﬂow, and it is thinner at the inlet and
thicker at the exhaust end of the reactor.
For an atmospheric system at about 1000 ◦C the values
are D ≈10 cm2/s, L ≈100 cm, η ≈104 Poise (g/cm-s)
and ρ ≈10−4 g/cm3 (ρ ∝1/T ). We get an approximate
boundary layer thickness of 3 cm which is close to values
found in real systems, for example epitaxy reactors. The
gas phase transfer coefﬁcient is then h ≈3 cm/s.
If we lower the operating pressure by a factor of 1000,
diffusivity increases a 1000-fold, as seen from
D ∝T 3/2/P
(34.8)
However,
the
boundary
layer
thickness
increases
because
density
decreases
(and
velocity
increases),
but because of the square root dependence (Equation
34.7, 34.8), this opposing trend is about one order
of magnitude only. The diffusivity increase clearly
dominates and the ﬂux of reactants to the surface
is greatly enhanced. A reaction which was transport
limited at atmospheric pressure can be turned into a
surface reaction-controlled one by operating at reduced
pressure. This is the reason for using LPCVD for
polysilicon deposition: excellent uniformity and step
coverage are enabled by surface reaction-controlled
deposition.
In order to get a feeling for the temperature dependence
we have to compare ks and hg as a function of temper-
ature. Chemical reactions obey Arrhenius behavior with
exponential dependence, and thus surface reaction-limited
deposition is strongly temperature dependent (high Ea).
The gas phase transport coefﬁcient hg is proportional to
D which has a T 3/2 temperature dependence. This ex-
plains the shallower slope in the transport-limited regime
of Figure 34.1.
34.3 CVD Reactors
APCVD
reactors
operate
in
transport-limited mode
and ﬂow geometries are important for ﬁlm uniformity.
LPCVD
reactors
operate
in
the
surface
reaction-
controlled regime and wafers can be packed closely,
which increases system throughput. LPCVD reactors
are similar to oxidation tubes and both LPCVD and
oxidation tubes can be ﬁtted into the same furnace stack
(compare Figures 32.1 and 34.4).
Flow, temperature and pressure are the important
CVD
reactor
design
criteria.
Practically
all
CVD
processes use toxic, corrosive and ﬂammable ﬂuids like
ammonia, silane, dichlorosilane, hydrides and metal
organics. Reactor designs include double piping, inert
gas ﬂushing and venting and other safety features. Some
of the reaction byproducts are harmful to pumps and
mechanical constructions, which translates to special care
in materials selection. Environmental, safety and health
issues will be discussed in Chapter 35.
As an example of a CVD process, silicon nitride depo-
sition is shown in Table 34.1. If wafers come directly
from another furnace operation (e.g., LOCOS pad ox-
ide growth) no cleaning is required. The time limit for
a new clean can be set for example at 2 hours. Otherwise
standard cleaning is required, for example RCA-1 and
RCA-2.
CVD furnace systems are hot wall systems, meaning
that deposition also takes place on the walls. This leads
to ﬁlm build-up and ﬂaking problems. Tubes thus have a
limited lifetime and need to be replaced regularly.
Deposition leads to reactant depletion, and the rate in
the entrance zone is higher than near the exit. Increasing
boundary layer thickness towards the tube end also re-
duces deposition rate. This is compensated by increased
temperature (= increased rate of chemical reaction). Heat-
ing elements are arranged in three zones, for example T1:
747 ◦C, T2: 750 ◦C, T3: 753 ◦C for LPCVD silicon nitride.
This temperature ramp compensates for reactant depletion
along the tube.
In polysilicon LPCVD this three-zone system results in
a grain size gradient along the length of the tube. In so-
called ﬂat–poly systems the temperature is kept constant
and gas introduction is made more uniform by an elabo-
rate gas distribution system. Alternatively “poly” can be
deposited amorphously at 570 ◦C to eliminate grain size
gradients.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 418]
436
Introduction to Microfabrication
3-zone resistive heating
vacuum
pump
gas
scrubber
SiH2Cl2
NH3
pressure
sensor
N2
Figure 34.4
LPCVD nitride furnace (thermal CVD). A wafer boat for poly CVD
Table 34.1
LPCVD of silicon nitride (Si3N4)
Load the boat, ﬁll with dummy wafers to equalize load
and ﬂow patterns
Ramp temperature from 500 to 750 ◦C under nitrogen
ﬂow, 50 min (5 ◦C/min)
Pump to vacuum and perform leak check, 2 min
Introduce ammonia NH3, stabilize ﬂow at 30 sccm, for
1 min
Introduce dichlorosilane, SiH2Cl2, ﬂow 120 sccm, de-
position starts
Deposit at 300 mtorr for 25 min (4 nm/min deposition
rate)
Cool down to 700 ◦C (10 min)
Take boat out
Monitoring: ﬁlm thickness and refractive index by el-
lipsometer
34.4 CVD with Liquid Sources
Most CVD processes use simple source gases like silane
and hydrides, but there is the possibility of using liquid
precursors. A widely used liquid source for CVD is TEOS
(tetraethoxysilane) for oxide deposition. Liquid is heated
in a container to increase its vapor pressure, and then
a carrier gas, nitrogen, helium or hydrogen, is bubbled
through the liquid and the precursor vapors are carried
along by the carrier gas stream. This same method is ap-
plied also in gas phase diffusion: dopants like POCl3 are
introduced with bubbling, and wet oxidation can be done
by bubbling nitrogen carrier gas through water.
When the precursors are metal–organic compounds
(MOs), the technique is termed MOCVD, also known as
MOVPE, for metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy. It is
widely used in III–V compound semiconductor epitaxy,
with group III elements supplied as MOs, like trimethyl
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 419]
CVD and Epitaxy Equipment
437
gallium Ga(CH3)3
or triethyl aluminum Al(C2H5)3,
while group III precursors are usually hydrides, AsH3
and PH3.
MOCVD has also been studied for metal deposition.
Copper
has
been
deposited
from
precursors
like
vinyltrimethylsilane
hexaﬂuoroacetylacetonate,
VTM-
SCu(hfac), or Cu(I)-β-diketonate. Conformal deposition
is possible and ﬁlling holes of high aspect ratio has been
demonstrated. Trimethyl aluminum source gas has been
used for MOCVD of aluminum. It would be beneﬁcial to
deposit aluminum ﬁlms with copper alloying (0.5–4%),
but this complicates MOCVD even further.
The problems with MOCVD are both practical and
fundamental. The vapor pressure has to be right, the pre-
cursor must not react with other gases or materials present
in the system, and its decomposition reactions must be
reproducible. There is always the danger of carbon in-
corporation into the ﬁlm when MOs are used as source
materials. On the practical side, purity must be high, and
this is difﬁcult for complex compounds like MOs. Many
MOs are extremely reactive with oxygen, and premature
contact with oxygen will destroy the reagents.
34.5 Silicon CVD Epitaxy
Silane gases (SiHxCl4−x, x = 0–4) can all be used
for epitaxy, but the temperature regimes are different.
Growth temperature is a compromise between rate
(thickness) and thermal budget (dopant diffusion during
growth). Temperature is closely related to substrate/epi
interface steepness: a higher deposition temperature
offers a higher growth rate but at the expense of more
thermal diffusion. Autodoping from the substrate and
from the buried layers has also to be considered.
Because silicon homoepitaxy is a CVD reaction, the
same laws about mass transport and surface reaction-
limited deposition apply to it. In Figure 34.5 these two
regimes are clearly visible. Different source gases have
different useful temperature ranges but practically iden-
tical activation energies in the surface reaction-limited
regime. Most epitaxy reactors, however, operate in the
mass transport-limited regime, and gas ﬂow design in the
reactor in crucial.
Epitaxy is not necessarily a high-temperature process.
It has traditionally been so, but epitaxy as such can be car-
ried out at any temperature. In situ cleaning of the wafer
has been a factor for high temperatures: HCl or H2 gas
phase cleaning processes work better at elevated temper-
atures. Surface composition, however, is also dependent
on the preceding cleaning step, and if that can be mod-
iﬁed to reduce native oxide growth, the in situ cleaning
temperature can be lowered.
34.6 Epitaxial Reactors
Reactors can be classiﬁed according to gas ﬂow patterns
relative to wafers (Figure 34.6). The gas ﬂow can be
parallel to the wafer surface, as in barrel (or hexode)
1300 °C 1200 °C 1100 °C
1000 °C
900 °C
800 °C
700 °C
600 °C
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
T(K)
1.1
103
Growth rate (µm/min)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
SiH4
SiH2Cl2
SiHCl3
SiCl4
Figure 34.5
Epitaxial growth for different SiHxCl4−x source gases. Reproduced from Everstyen (1967) by permission
of Philips
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 420]
438
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 34.6
Barrel reactor, vertical wafers, parallel ﬂow;
pancake reactor, horizontal wafers, perpendicular ﬂow; sin-
gle wafer reactor, horizontal wafer, parallel ﬂow. Lamps or
RF coils for heating are shown, but the reactor chamber is
not
reactors where the wafers are placed vertically. The
wafers can be placed on a horizontal susceptor, with
perpendicular gas ﬂows, as in a pancake reactor (or disk
reactor). In a single wafer reactor the wafer is placed
horizontally, and a lateral gas ﬂow is parallel to the
wafer surface.
Two wafer heating methods, namely induction (RF
coils) and lamp heating, are used. Lamp heating can be
used in all major reactor types. The wafer surface is
hotter than the back side because lamps heat the wafers
from the top, and the wafers are bowed upward at the
centre. Induction heating heats the graphite susceptor,
and wafers bow up at the edges, which is countered
by designing curved wafer recesses in the susceptor.
Induction heating is more suited for sustained high
temperatures (90 min is usual for power devices.), and
lamp heating for short depositions/thin layers.
As for much other equipment, there are both batch
and single wafer reactors on the market. Both designs
coexist because they have different strengths regarding
ﬁlm thickness, growth rate, interface abruptness or doping
uniformity. Batch reactors typically have about 1 μm/min
growth rates and are preferred for thick-layer applications
(up to 200 μm in some power devices) where interface
sharpness is not an issue. Batch loading reactors can take
for instance 30 wafers of 100 mm diameter, or 12 wafers
of 200 mm diameter.
Single wafer reactors offer high growth rates, for
example 5 μm/min at 1120 ◦C using trichlorosilane. In
addition to the steep interface due to short deposition
time, single wafer reactors are superior with respect to
ﬁlm uniformity, 1% across the wafer for thickness, 4%
for resistivity. A rotating susceptor is easy to implement
in a single wafer tool. It has several consequences.
Rotation ensures good uniformity, and rotation can be
used to reduce boundary layer thickness: the velocity in
Equation 34.7 is now the relative velocity of the gas and
the rotating wafer. A thinner boundary layer results in a
higher deposition rate, and the evaporated dopants from
buried layers will rapidly diffuse to the main gas ﬂow
and be swept away.
Epi reactors operate at atmospheric pressure but re-
duced pressure, typically 50–100 torr, can also be used.
Reduced pressure operation adds to equipment complex-
ity, and it is used for demanding applications only, includ-
ing SiGe epitaxy (which differs from silicon epitaxy in
regard to process temperature which is only about 700 ◦C).
Gases used in epitaxy are extremely pure: carrier
hydrogen must be free of oxygen and water below the
100 ppb level. Silane purity is measured by resistivity:
above 3000 ohm-cm. Dopant gases are very dilute:
100 ppm phoshine or diborane in hydrogen is typical.
All piping for process gases must be made of stainless
steel because chlorosilanes and HCl are aggressive gases.
Electropolishing down to nanometer surface roughness is
used in piping to eliminate particle contamination.
Epi reactors are power hungry: keeping wafers at about
1100 ◦C consumes hundreds of kilowatts, which turns into
waste heat, 80–90% of it into cooling water and the rest to
hot exhaust gases. These gases are unused silanes (typical
silane utilization is 10–30%) and hydrogen, which can
account for 99% of the ﬂow. Gas treatment is done by
burn systems, wet scrubbers or by thermal decomposition.
The growth process for an epilayer 13 μm thick in
a single wafer reactor is shown in Figure 34.7. As can
be seen, the actual deposition is just a fraction of total
process time: the remainder is spend on heating, cooling
and cleaning. These steps are essential for epitaxial
ﬁlm quality. Prebake has many effects: native oxide is
removed (according to Equation 6.1) and the surface
layer will become depleted in dopants and oxygen
(similar to denuded zone formation, Figure 22.3). Any
damage from preceding ion implantation steps is annealed
away. All this improves crystal quality and minimizes
autodoping.
In some reactors wafers are loaded upright and their
back sides are exposed to gas ﬂows, and substrate
autodoping can be signiﬁcant (Figure 6.9). The back
sides of heavily doped wafers are usually protected by
CVD oxide (LTO) ﬁlm to prevent the evaporation of
dopant into the reactor. In addition to intentional doping
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 421]
CVD and Epitaxy Equipment
439
850 °C 
1050
950
1150
Heat up
26 s
HCl etch cleaning
73 s
Cool down
53 s
Load wafer
25 s
Heat up
55 s
Oxide removal
50 s
Cool down
45 s
Epitaxial
deposition
157 s
Cool down
72 s
Unload wafer
32 s
Figure 34.7
Single wafer epitaxy reactor running SiHCl3
process. Actual deposition time is 30% of total time. De-
position rate is about 5 μm/min, or ﬁlm thickness is 13 μm
and autodoping, ﬁlms on reactor walls release some
dopant. This is known as the reactor memory effect.
Even though silicon growth in epi reactors is typically
in the transport-limited regime, dopant incorporation
can be in the surface reaction-limited regime, which
necessitates accurate temperature control. Temperature
uniformity is also very important because even minor
temperature differences lead to crystal slips when silicon
yield strength is exceeded (Equation 22.1).
34.7 Control of CVD Reactions
Pressure has profound effects on the mechanism of ﬁlm
deposition. While temperature affects rate in a predictable
manner (Arrhenius behavior), pressure has more subtle
effects: the rate limiting step can change from surface re-
action limited to transport limited by a pressure change.
Many factors contribute to this: in single wafer reactors
the ﬂow rate can be made high, and the boundary layer
becomes thin, increasing the deposition rate. In batch re-
actors low pressure is used, and the diffusivity increase
switches the reaction from transport limited to surface
limited. The beneﬁts are increased uniformity over batch.
The drawbacks include reduced deposition rate and the
extra cost brought about by vacuum requirements.
Depending on the application and reactor design, it
may be advantageous to operate in the transport-limited
regime where temperature dependence is small but ﬂow
control must be accurate. On the other hand, in the surface
reaction-limited regime the uniformity of deposition be-
comes independent of ﬂuid dynamics, but critically tem-
perature dependent.
34.8 Exercises
1. What is the Knudsen number in
(a) APCVD
(b) LPCVD
(c) UHV–CVD?
2. Polysilicon LPCVD activation energy Ea is 1.7 eV.
What happens to the deposition rate if, instead of stan-
dard 630 ◦C deposition, 570 ◦C is used?
3. If the gas phase transfer coefﬁcient h is 3 cm/s,
and
the
surface
reaction
coefﬁcient
k = 5 × 107
exp(−1.7 eV/kT) (in cm/s), at what temperature does
the reaction turn from transport controlled to surface
controlled?
4. What is the cost of an epiwafer of 150 mm diameter if
the single wafer process described in Figure 34.7 costs
$2 million, running costs are $800 000 a year (gas and
graphite costs are signiﬁcant, much higher than labor
costs) and starting wafer cost is $20?
5. Single wafer reactor, 150 mm wafer size, deposits ox-
ide with a rate 200 nm/min. What is the utilization
of silane if the ﬂow of silane is 150 sccm silane and
overerabundance of N2O is present?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 422]
440
Introduction to Microfabrication
6. Nitride LPCVD is midzone is at 750 ◦C. What thick-
ness difference does a 6 ◦C temperature difference be-
tween front and rear zones indicate if Ea = 1.9 eV?
7. What is the thinnest layer that could reasonably be
deposited using the PECVD parameters of Table 7.2,
assuming a single wafer reactor volume of 5 liters?
8. What is total gas consumption in the process shown in
Figure 34.7?
References and Related Reading
Cote, D. R. et al. (1995) Low-temperature chemical vapor de-
position processes and dielectrics for microelectronic circuit
manufacturing at IBM, IBM J. Res. Dev., 39, 437.
Crippa, D., D. R. Rode and M. Masi (2001) Silicon Epitaxy,
Academic Press.
Elers, K.-E. et al. (2006) Film uniformity in atomic layer de-
position, Chem. Vapor Depos., 12, 13–24.
Everstyen, F. C. (1967) Chemical-reaction engineering in the
semiconductor industry, Philips Tech. Rep., 29, 45.
Low, C. W. et al. (2007) Characterization of polycrystalline
silicon-germanium ﬁlm deposition for modularly integrated
MEMS applications, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 16, 68–77.
Middleman, S. and A. K. Hochberg (1993) Process Engi-
neering Analysis in Semiconductor Device Fabrication,
McGraw-Hill.
Ohring, M. (1992) The Materials Science of Thin Films, Aca-
demic Press.
Vossen, J. and W. Kern (1991) Thin Film Processes, II, Aca-
demic Press.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 423]
35
Cleanrooms
Cleanrooms
were
initially
a
solution
to
particle
contamination reduction and were not invented for
microelectronics but for ﬁne mechanical assembly. Later
on temperature and humidity control for improved repro-
ducibility in lithography were recognized. Other features
have been added over the years, so a modern cleanroom
is a system of facilities which ensure contamination-
free
processing
under
very
stable
environmental
conditions.
Particle size distributions in cleanroom air, in process
gases, in DI water and in wet chemicals all have the
same basic characteristics: 4–8 times more particles
are
detected
if
the
detection
threshold
is
halved.
Therefore, if the minimum linewidth is halved, the
number of particles that are potential killers increases
4–8 times.
In microfabrication cleanrooms (wafer fabs) particle
cleanliness can be achieved by applying overpressure
to blow dirt outside, but virus labs need to contain
everything. In both pharmaceutical and microfabrication
cleanrooms a great many harmful and even toxic
chemicals are used, but fortunately the silicon wafers
themselves are not dangerous to humans. But just as
with pharmaceuticals, worker contact with the product
should be minimized to reduce contamination.
35.1 Cleanroom Construction
Cleanrooms are build in an onion-like fashion: there is
the outer shell of the building, with the cleanroom inside,
and the cleanroom is partitioned into areas of different
levels of cleanliness and environmental control. A clean-
room facility consists of the actual cleanroom plus all
the supporting facilities for air-conditioning, water, chem-
ical delivery, etc. An overall view of a cleanroom is
shown in Figure 35.1. Cleanroom takes up three ﬂoors:
ground ﬂoor and 2nd ﬂoor for supporting facilities, with
the actual cleanroom on the ﬁrst ﬂoor. Other main features
of cleanrooms are:
• overpressure (50 Pa) for keeping particles outside
• ﬁltered air (99.9995% at 0.15 μm particle size)
• heating/cooling/humidiﬁcation/drying of incoming air
• laminar (unidirectional) airﬂow in the working areas
• materials compatibility
• mechanical and electrical interference minimization
• working procedures.
Cleanroom envelopes of walls, ﬂoor, ceiling, etc., need
to be made of materials compatible with the overall objec-
tive of environmental control. The walls must not outgas,
must be easy to clean and have to be easily removed
for installing equipment. They must also be tight be-
cause cleanliness is partly ensured by a slight overpressure
which prevents the outside air from entering. The ceiling
consists of blank elements and ﬁlter elements. The higher
the proportion of ﬁlter elements, the better the cleanliness.
A raised perforated ﬂoor is essential for unidirectional
(laminar) ﬂow conditions: air from ceiling ﬁlters can
travel unidirectionally. If particles are generated in
the cleanroom, they will be transported away directly
through the ﬂoor, hopefully not interfering with the
wafers. Return air will travel laterally under the raised
ﬂoor and be returned either in the service aisles or in
separate return air ducts.
Vibration
isolation
is
important
for
lithography
and microscopy. Massive air handling units generate
vibrations, and therefore mechanical separation of air
circulation fans from other parts of the building is
needed. Sensitive process areas for lithography are
established on isolated concrete slabs extending down
to bedrock. Elimination of mechanical disturbances
is just part of the story: static electricity can destroy
delicate chips and stray electric ﬁelds disturb sensitive
measurements, which translates to ﬁber optic lighting.
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 424]
442
Introduction to Microfabrication
Supply plenum
Optical floor
Flex
Vibration
isolator
Silencer
R.A
space
R.A.
plenum
R.A. = Return air
Silencer
Fan +
system
Fan +
system
Hepa ceiling
Figure 35.1
Cleanroom: laminar airﬂow from HEPA ﬁlter ceiling, optical ﬂoor and return air (RA) space Reproduced
from Whyte (1999) by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Much process equipment produces excessive heat
loads, for example furnaces in the range of 100 kW,
and this heat has to be removed in order to maintain
a constant temperature in the cleanroom. Most of the
waste heat is taken away by cooling water. The design
of a cleanroom must therefore always include knowledge
about the processes that will running there. This applies
to other functions as well: for instance, epitaxial reactors
are very high on electric power consumption. Electric
supplies should have a backup system: at least the toxic
gas and ﬁre alarm systems should be connected to an
uninterruptible power supply (UPS), but sometimes
critical processes are also protected by UPS: it is
worthwhile not switching off oxidation of 200 wafers
unexpectedly.
Static electricity elimination, acid neutralization, acid
regeneration, waste chemical storage, particle counters,
air quality monitors and various other systems are req-
uired to operate a cleanroom. The cleanroom can be
regarded as a single big instrument because proper
cleanroom conditions can only be fulﬁlled when all
subsystems are running.
35.2 Cleanroom Standards
Cleanrooms are classiﬁed mainly on the basis of particle
counts per volume. Older speciﬁcations like Fed. Std 209
specify particles/cubic foot, and designation “Class 100”
refers to 100 particles, 0.5 μm, per cubic foot, as shown
in Table 35.1.
Newer ISO standards employ units of particles/m3
(conversion
factor:
1 m3 = 35.3 ft3).
ISO
standard
Table 35.1
Simpliﬁed Fed. Std 209D airborne particle
cleanliness classes (particles/ft3)
Class
1
10
100
1000
10 000
No. of particles 0.5 μm
1
10
100
1000
10 000
No. of particles 0.1 μm 35 350 3500 35 000 350 000
cleanliness Class N with particle concentration Cn
(particles/m3) is calculated from
Cn = 10N ×
0.1 μm
D
2.08
(35.1)
where D is particle size in μm. The proper way to spec-
ify cleanroom cleanliness is therefore: Class X (at Y
μm particle size). In the ISO cleanroom classiﬁcation in
Figure 35.2 it can be seen that smaller particles are al-
lowed in greater numbers than larger ones.
Federal Standard and ISO correspondence is given in
Table 35.2. It also gives average air changes that are re-
quired in the cleanroom.
Data in Table 35.3 lists cleanroom features, and, as
can be seen, there is really a lot more to a controlled
environment that particle cleanliness.
Cleanliness is deﬁned for three different stages of clean-
room construction:
1. As-built: cleanroom construction is ﬁnished, but no
tools installed.
2. Static: with process tools installed and running, but no
personnel.
3. Operational: with people working in the cleanroom
(Figure 35.3).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 425]
Cleanrooms
443
Particle size, D (µm)
Airborne particle concentration, cn
0.1
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
0.1
0.3
ISO Class 9
ISO Class 8
ISO Class 7
ISO Class 6
ISO Class 5
ISO Class 4
ISO Class 3
ISO Class 2
ISO Class 1
0.5
1.0
5.0
Figure 35.2
Cleanroom class vs. particle size and density (ISO 14644-1)
Table 35.2
Cleanroom classes and air
change frequency
ISO 6
Class 1000
150–240/h
ISO 5
Class 100
240–480/h
ISO 4
Class 10
300–540/h
ISO 3
Class 1
360–540/h
Table 35.3
Fed. Std Class 1 cleanroom. Adapted from
Cheng and Jansen (1996)
Feature
Values
Cleanliness, process area
<35 particles/m3,
>0.10 μm
Temperature, lithography
22 ± 0.5 ◦C
Temperature, other areas
22 ± 1.0 ◦C
Humidity, lithography
43 ± 2%
Humidity, other
45 ± 5%
Air quality:
Total hydrocarbons
<100 ppb
NOx
<0.5 ppb
SO2
<0.5 ppb
Envelope outgassing
6.3 × 108 torr-l/cm2/s
Pressure
Typical 30 Pa relative to
outside
Acoustic noise
<60 dB
Vibration
3 μm/s (8–100 Hz)
Figure 35.3
ISO 4 (Class 10) cleanroom. Courtesy VTT
As-built tests should indicate about one class better clean-
liness than the designed operational class. Laser scattering
of sampled air is used to measure particle counts. There
are some methodological problems in the best cleanrooms:
there are simply too few particles to get good statistics.
Cleanrooms need not be large halls or rooms; in fact
cleanroom area should be minimized because it is expen-
sive to maintain laminar, constant temperature airﬂow.
One way to reduce the need for a high-cleanliness area is
shown in Figure 35.4: cleanliness is locally higher where
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 426]
444
Introduction to Microfabrication
Tool
Class 1
Class 10−100
Wafers
Raised floor
Figure 35.4
Air ﬂows over a tool: wafers are kept in Fed.
Std Class 1 area while the rest is Fed. Std Class 10–100 Re-
produced from Rubloff and Boronaro (1992) by permission
of IBM
wafers are handled. In Figure 35.5 another solution is
shown: the actual wafer handling takes place in a high-
class cleanroom but the equipment is situated behind a
partition; in service area (also known as gray area) clean-
liness is much less (e.g., ISO 3 vs. ISO 6), and in the ISO
6 area airﬂow is turbulent, not laminar.
35.3 Cleanroom Subsystems
35.3.1 Air
Air handling consists of four major blocks:
• extraction unit
• make-up air unit
• recirculation unit
• ﬁlter fan units.
In the ﬁrst phase air is ﬁltered of coarse objects and hu-
midiﬁcation or dehumidiﬁcation is performed. Airborne
pollutants like SOx, NOx and ammonia are removed
by activated carbon ﬁlters. Cooling coils and heaters
are used to stabilize air temperature. Successive stages
of ﬁltration remove ﬁner and ﬁner particles. The ﬁnal
Figure 35.5
Cleanroom and gray area: ISO 3 (Class 1)
area for wafer processing, ISO 6 (Class 1000) turbulent
ﬂow in service aisle Reproduced from Whyte (2001) by
permission of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ﬁlter is called HEPA (High Efﬁciency Particle) or ULPA
(Ultralow Penetration Air): it is installed in the cleanroom
ceiling. ULPA ﬁlters have 99.9995% ﬁltration efﬁciency
at particles greater than 0.12 μm. Filter efﬁciencies can
also be classiﬁed according to most penetrating particle
size (MPPS). Filter defectivity (pinholes) is also a major
concern. Filter fan units have another function in addition
to particle ﬁltering: they make the airﬂow laminar.
Airﬂow velocity and air change requirements increase
with cleanliness. As indicated in Table 35.2, 500 air
changes per hour is typical of modern cleanrooms. Once
the air has been processed, it is recirculated, with only
10% of replacement air introduced at each cycle.
The settling velocity of particles on wafers depends
on many factors. For larger particles (in the micrometer
range), the gravitational settling velocity (Equation 35.2)
is an important parameter:
ug =
ρgd2
p
18μ
(35.2)
where ρ is the density (actually the density difference
between the particle and the ﬂuid), g is 9.8 m/s2, dp is
the particle size and μ the air viscosity, 1.8 × 10−5 Pa-s.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 427]
Cleanrooms
445
Smaller particles do not necessarily settle at all: they
remain airborne because of Brownian motion. A word of
caution: not all particles that deposit on the wafer remain
there, and not all small particles are fatal to devices.
The particle deposition rate J on a wafer which is par-
allel to the airﬂow is given by
J = nu
(35.3)
where n is the particle density (1/m3) and u is the sum
of gravitational and diffusive settling velocities. For sub-
micron particles the settling velocity is on the order of
10−3 cm/s.
35.3.2 DI water
De-ionized water (DI water, DIW), also known as ultra-
pure water (UPW), is a major subsystem because of the
enormous water consumption in modern IC fabrication. A
big fab uses a million cubic meters of ultrapure water a
year. Water is puriﬁed in a multistep process that involves
many different techniques, to get rid of many different
impurities (Table 35.4). Coarse sand and carbon ﬁltering
remove larger particles, while reverse osmosis and ion
exchangers remove salts, and UV treatment kills bacteria.
DI water quality is monitored by resistivity measurements:
18 Mohm-cm is required. Regular bacteria checks are also
performed, as well as particle tests.
35.3.3 Gas systems
Gas system requirements include particle speciﬁcations
(which set limits on the choices of materials for piping,
valves, regulators, mass ﬂow controllers, etc.), leak rates
(static leak test, helium leak test) and gas impurity tests.
Bulk gases (also known as line gases or house gases)
are gases shared by many tools. These include nitrogen,
Table 35.4
Production of DI water
• Sand ﬁlter
• Active carbon ﬁlter
• Particle ﬁltering at 3 μm
• Softening of water
• RO: reverse osmosis
• CEDI: continuous electrical deionization
• UV treatment
• Ion exchangers
• Particle ﬁltering at 0.2 μm
• Storage tank
• Continuous DI water circulation in the
cleanroom loop
oxygen, hydrogen, argon and compressed air. Nitrogen
is especially widely used, both in processes and as an
inert protective gas. Four purity classes of nitrogen can
be offered, for different applications:
1. Process
nitrogen:
furnace
annealing
or
reactive
sputtering, 99.99999% (7N) purity.
2. Dry
nitrogen:
venting
and
ﬂushing
of
process
chambers, 99.999% (5N) purity.
3. Pistol nitrogen: for drying.
4. Pump nitrogen: as ballast for pumps.
Specialty gases are used by dedicated equipment, and they
are supplied from gas bottles in a one-to-one distribution
topology. These include for example SF6 and Cl2 for etch-
ers, SiH2Cl2 and NH3 for nitride LPCVD, SiH4 and N2O
for PECVD oxide, PH3 for doped polysilicon LPCVD and
WF6 for tungsten CVD. Ion implanter gas consumption is
very small, and AsH3, PH3 and BF3 minibottles are usu-
ally located inside the implanter cabinet. Implanter gases
can also be supplied from SDS (Safe Delivery System)
sources: the dopant gases are absorbed in the solid ab-
sorber material in the bottle and released by application
of temperature or under pressure.
35.4 Environment, Safety and Health
(ESH)
Various gases, chemicals and tools are sources of poten-
tial health hazards to cleanroom personnel. Ion implanters
operate at 200 kV and are sources of X-rays (gamma rays
may be emitted in hydrogen implantation); plasma sys-
tems may leak microwave energy and UV radiation and
wet etch and plating baths may contain cyanides. These
hazards are dealt with in many different ways.
Strong mineral acids like H2SO4, HNO3, H3PO4 and
HCl are routinely used. Normal burn hazards are associ-
ated with them, and they must be neutralized after use.
HF is different because its effect is not immediate but
delayed; it does not attack skin but bone. Special care is
needed for all HF-containing liquids and separate disposal
of HF is required.
Solvents and organics come from various sources:
HMDS, which is used as a priming agent before
photoresist coating is released into cleanroom air (HMDS
is the main airborne pollutant in many cleanrooms);
solvents which are released from resists upon baking;
IPA and acetone used for drying and cleaning. Solvents
are major reasons for ﬁres in cleanrooms.
Process exhausts remove unwanted thermal and mass
ﬂows from the cleanroom. Acid vapors from wet benches
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 428]
446
Introduction to Microfabrication
are removed and safely disposed of in plastic ducts, while
solvent exhausts are removed in stainless steel ducts. Sep-
arate piping is required to prevent explosive mixing. In
most cases cleanroom systems protect wafers from hu-
mans, but in wet benches protection of humans from
chemicals is required. Acid vapors will be cleaned by
gas abatement systems (solid absorber, combustion sys-
tem and/or gas efﬂuent washing machine, or wet scrubber)
before release to the outside air.
In many processes the utilization of source gases is
very low and the outpumped ﬂow consists mostly of
unused source gas. These gases, for example SiH4 from a
LPCVD system, may be incinerated or diluted. Silane is
spontaneously ﬂammable. It is used at 100% concentra-
tion in LPCVD polysilicon, but in PECVD systems it is
usually dilute, 1–5% SiH4 in nitrogen, argon or helium.
Wet oxidation is usually done by in situ-generated
water from H2 and O2 gases (Figure 32.1). Hydro-
gen/oxygen mixtures are ﬂammable between 4% and
75% hydrogen, and hydrogen content in exhaust gases
needs to be controlled, by combustors or by other gas
abatement systems.
A toxic gas alarm system is required because many of
the gases used in semiconductor processing are extremely
toxic: hydrides, PH3, AsH3, B2H6 are lethal in the low
ppm concentrations and chlorine was used in World War
I as a battleﬁeld gas. Many chlorine-containing gases
react with humid air to form hydrogen chloride (HCl)
which is similarly toxic and corrosive. Table 35.5 lists
some of the common toxic and dangerous gases used in
microfabrication.
Plasma etcher and CVD pumps and pumps oils can
accumulate considerable amounts of unknown com-
pounds: for example, products from reactions between
etch gases and photoresist. Pumping oxygen is a safety
concern: oxygen can explode if it reacts with pump oil.
Therefore, either most plasma and CVD equipment uses
inert perﬂuorinated pump oils (Fomblin, Krytox), or
else dry pumps are employed. Dry pumps are beneﬁcial
also because they tolerate more corrosive and abrasive
chemicals than standard mechanical pumps.
Fire detection in a cleanroom cannot be done in the
same way as in normal ofﬁce rooms because the high
cleanliness prevents particle-based detection and ioniza-
tion detectors in the ceiling from seeing anything because
of the unidirectional downﬂow. Local sampling and ther-
mal detection are used. Fire extinguishing must be accom-
plished without generating particles because damage from
extinguishing might be intolerable to the cleanroom as a
whole. Carbon dioxide or water mist systems are used.
Alarm strategies in a microfabrication cleanroom need
to be carefully planned. In the case of a toxic-gas alarm
Table 35.5
Toxic gases in semiconductor
manufacturing
TLV
IDLH
Other
(ppm)
(ppm)
properties
NH3
25
300
DO: 0.04–50 ppm
Cl2
0.5
10
DO: 0.03–0.4 ppm
HCl
5
50
HF
3
30
BF3
1
25
a
SiH4
5
N/A
ER: 1.37–96%
GeH4
0.2
N/A
SiCl2H2
b
N/A
ER: 4.1–99%
AsH3
0.05
3
DO: 0.5–4 ppm, garlic
PH3
0.3
50
DO: 0.01–5 ppm, ﬁshy
B2H6
0.1
15
DO: 1.8–3.5 ppm, sweet
aReacts to form HF upon contact with moisture.
bReacts to form HCl.
TLV = Threshold Limit Value: no adverse effects for prolonged
exposure.
IDLH = Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health: 30 min escape time
to ensure no permanent health effects.
ER = Explosive Range (% by volume in air).
DO: Detectable Odor.
N/A: Not Applicable.
Source: Baldwin, D.G., M. Williams and P.L. Murphy (2002).
personnel need to be evacuated, but it does not necessarily
mean that oxidation furnaces have to be shut down. If
a lot of 200 wafers is lost in the case of an unplanned
shutdown, massive damage will be incurred. In the case
of a ﬁre alarm, air circulation needs to be closed down
because otherwise it would spread the ﬁre efﬁciently, but
it is important to keep exhausts operational. If the ﬁre
originated from a wet bench (which is the usual case),
then the wet bench exhaust will at least remove hot acid
and/or solvent vapors, but there is a danger that the ﬁre
will spread along the exhaust ducts.
35.5 Cleanroom Operating Procedures
A cleanroom must include not only the structures and
airﬂows, but also procedures for transferring people and
materials. People enter cleanrooms in zones of increasing
cleanliness:
• pre-change zone
• change zone
• entrance zone.
In the pre-change zone extra clothing is removed, personal
belongings like mobile phones are set aside, a glass of
water is drunk (to reduce particle counts in exhaling).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 429]
Cleanrooms
447
Shoes are cleaned, covered or changed to special
cleanroom shoes. Hair is covered by a hairnet (disposable
hat). A sticky mat is often used to remove dust from the
soles of shoes. In the change zone a cleanroom overall
and face mask are put on. Temporary gloves may be used
in this zone. Upon entry into the entrance zone shoes are
covered by cleanroom boots, and ﬁnal gloves are put on.
Additionally, goggles may be applied. Another sticky mat
and possibly an air shower are passed on the way to the
cleanroom proper. The details of these procedures vary
from cleanroom to cleanroom, but the aforementioned
chain of events is typical of ISO 3 (Class 1) cleanrooms.
In ISO 5–6 (Classes 100–1000) cleanrooms more relaxed
gowning procedures are applicable.
A
similar,
but
somewhat
reverse,
procedure
of
increasing cleanliness applies when new tools, wafers,
sputtering targets or any other material are transported
into the cleanroom. The transportation packaging is
removed in a non-clean area. Wood chips or wood
ﬁbers from cardboard boxes should be minimized.
Cleanroom tools and materials are packed in a multilayer
fashion. The outermost plastic packaging is removed in a
semi-clean area, and the plastic packaging underneath is
possibly cleaned before being taken into the cleanroom.
The
innermost
packaging
layer
is
removed
under
cleanroom conditions. Obviously, tools and materials for
cleanrooms have to be packed in a cleanroom!
Contamination can come from air, water, chemicals
or people, but also from wafers. Major contamination
problems arise if wafers are processed improperly. For
example, if wafers with metal on them are cleaned
in a SC-1/SC-2 cleaning bath, metals will be etched
and the cleaning bath contaminated. Similarly, if a
gold-containing wafer is processed in a high-temperature
tool, the tool will be contaminated. If contact holes in
oxide are etched in a HF bath intended for native oxide
removal before oxidation, organic contamination from
the resist will be carried over into the oxidation furnace.
Working in a cleanroom must be very disciplined.
It is not enough for you to understand the desired
processes – you must also understand the collateral
damage from mistaken processes. These may ruin your
wafers, and everything that is being processed after you.
35.6 Mini-Environments
In the mini-environment approach a small cleanroom is
built locally around the tools or the wafers. It is easier
to maintain high purity locally over a small area than
in a big room. At one extreme the wafer box is the
cleanroom, ﬁlled with high-purity nitrogen. Compared to
the cleanroom, it has two beneﬁts: nitrogen is inert, so
reactive impurities from the atmosphere are eliminated;
and the gas is stagnant in the box, so particles do not
move, as they would do in the laminar airﬂow of the
cleanroom.
Elimination of the cleanroom itself has been toyed with:
if all tools were to use a standard interface, wafers could
be carried in mini-environment boxes from tool to tool,
and they would never see the cleanroom air, in which
case the cleanroom would become redundant. Wafer fabs
with such standard mechanical interfaces (SMIFs) have
been built, but cleanrooms have not been made redundant
because conversion of all process and measurement tools
has been elusive.
35.7 Exercises
1. What is the linear air velocity if cleanroom air in
exchanged 360 times per hour?
2. What class of cleanroom would be suitable for (a) 1 μm
and (b) 0.1 μm CMOS production?
3. What would be the gravitational settling velocities of
1 μm and 0.1 μm particles?
4. Explain how the factors listed in Table 35.3 affect
wafer processing!
5. If a 0.5 liter bottle (under 50 bar pressure) of boron
triﬂuoride (BF3) leaks into a 1000 m2 cleanroom, will
it be immediately dangerous to health?
6. How many particles will be deposited on a 200 mm
wafer in an ISO Class 2 cleanroom in a hour?
References and Related Reading
Baldwin, D.G., M. Williams and P.L. Murphy (2002) Chem-
ical Safety Handbook for the Semiconductor/electronics
Industry, 3rd edn, OEM Press.
Cheng, H.P. and R. Jansen (1996) Cleanroom technology,
in C.Y. Chang and S.M. Sze (eds), ULSI Technology,
McGraw-Hill.
Middleman, S. and A.K. Hochberg (1993) Process Engi-
neering Analysis in Semiconductor Device Fabrication,
McGraw-Hill.
Rubloff, G.W. and D.T. Boronaro (1992) Integrated processing
for microelectronics science and technology, IBM J. Res.
Dev., 36, 233.
Whyte, W. (ed.) (1999) Cleanroom Design, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Whyte, W. (2001) Cleanroom Technology, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Zhou, Z. (2004) From classrooms to the real engineering world:
the training program in the microelectronics research center
at Georgia Tech, IEEE Trans. Educ., 47, 114–120.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 430]
36
Yield and Reliability
Microfabrication is a statistical business: some devices
always fail due to random errors and ﬂuctuations in pro-
cess performance. Understanding these losses is a life and
death issue in wafer fabs. Yield loss can mean for example
non-functional chips or wafer breakage. Catastrophic pro-
cess problems can destroy a batch of 100 wafers, for
example if gas runs out during ﬁlm deposition, resulting
in no ﬁlm at all, or a ﬁlm with unknown properties.
Device testing after manufacturing classiﬁes chips into
good and bad, but there are failure mechanisms that only
manifest themselves over longer periods of time. Some
of these can be found in accelerated testing: running
devices under extreme conditions (higher than rated
voltage, humidity and temperature), which will reveal
some systematic problems. However, if the accelerated
conditions change the failure mechanism, the tests are
of little use. Random failures are even more difﬁcult to
screen out.
Reliability can be taken to mean performance as
designed, resistance to failure or avoiding unexpected fail-
ure. In contrast to yield, it is about long-term performance
in the ﬁeld. Metallic wires subject to high current density
will be damaged, so electromigration lifetimes must be
assessed. Locally thin regions of oxides will be subject to
higher electric ﬁelds than areas of speciﬁed thickness, and
this may limit the reprogramming cycles that the device
can tolerate. Metallic movable mirrors will have memory
effects if they are switched to one side more often than the
other, leading to reduced contrast or color shift. Vacuum
packages for MEMS resonators may leak and resonance
frequency drift to unusable values. Solar cells are subject
to “photobleaching,” a conversion efﬁciency drop due to
high-energy UV photons. In all these cases the goal is to
understand the physical basis of ageing mechanisms, and
to tailor the processes to minimize them.
Yield and reliability are connected: poor process con-
trol leads to low yields and more failing devices, and
devices with poorly controlled properties are subject to
larger variation and more failures. For instance, in a well-
controlled process gaps are always closed, but in a poorly
controlled process they are sometimes closed and some-
times open. Process gases, cleaning chemicals, rinsing
water and other ﬂuids can be trapped in the keyholes
(Figure 5.16d), and these ﬂuids can be released or react in
an unpredictable manner when environmental conditions
change, for example the temperature rises.
36.1 Yield Deﬁnitions and Formulas
Yield is success rate. It can be calculated at different
points of the process, and different yield numbers
obtained. In all cases yield is the quotient “good
outcomes/total.” Fab yield takes into account the number
of wafers out of the process, divided by wafer starts.
Note, however, that for example 10% of wafers in fab to
be used for monitoring and testing and not contribute to
saleable chips, even in theory, but fab yield for prime
wafers approaches 99%.
Die yield, or chip yield, is the fraction of functional
chips on a wafer. In one survey die yields ranged from
46% to 92% for 0.5 cm2 devices. Again, not all chips on
the wafer are product chips: some chips are dedicated to
process monitoring test structures (identical in all prod-
ucts, to gather statistical data on the process) and some
are product-speciﬁc test structures.
Yield (Y) is a product of yields of individual process
steps (Yi), according to
Y =

i
Yi
(36.1)
Total yield can never be better than the yield of the lowest
yielding step. If CVD yield is 99%, CMP yield 95% and
bonding yield 90%, the total yield of this process sequence
will be 85% only.
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 431]
450
Introduction to Microfabrication
A six mask student lab PMOS process with 50 steps
and 95% step yield results in 8% total yield and hundreds
of transistors for measurements. But an industrial 50 step
MEMS process would probably have 99.5% step yield
and 78% total yield. A CMOS process with 500 steps
requires at least 99.9% step yields. However, one single
badly yielding step, with say 70% yield, will limit the total
yield to less than 70%; therefore, process development
effort must be carried out on all process steps.
Yield can also be viewed as a product of systematic
and random components:
Ytotal = Ysystematic × Yrandom
(36.2)
Random yield loss comes from process errors and equip-
ment malfunctioning, and the systematic yield loss from
process capability limitations. All processes have varia-
tion (across the wafer, wafer to wafer, lot to lot) and
devices cannot be designed to tolerate tails of statistical
distributions.
SRAM is the prototypical test vehicle for process de-
velopment: in a regular memory array of transistors it is
easy to locate the electrical fault, and to investigate it by
optical, physical and chemical means and to correlate it
with a physical defect, a particle, a residue, corrosion or
linewidth change.
36.2 Yield Models
Random yield loss has been described by many models.
The Poisson distribution (Equation 1.3) is the simplest
model: exponential dependence on area and defect den-
sity. This holds fairly well for small chips and/or low
defect densities, as can be seen in Figure 36.1, but clearly
the data shows that discrepancies rapidly develop if the
model is applied to chips that are a little bit larger.
A more general model takes defect clustering into ac-
count and models yield as
Yrandom =

1 + AD0
α
−α
(36.3)
where α is the cluster factor.
Cluster factor α presents the tendency of defects to
cluster; that is, they are not randomly distributed but tend
to cluster. The values of α are usually considered trade
secrets, and companies are reluctant to reveal their yield
statistics. Figure 36.2 compares yield models to cluster
factors. A cluster factor α = ∞corresponds to the Pois-
son distribution, and α = 1 results in Seeds’ model, that is
Y =
1
1 + AD
(36.4)
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0
0.1
Yield
0.2
Chip area, (cm2)
0.3
Poisson model 
D0 = 7 defects/cm2
0.4
0.5
0.2
Figure 36.1
Poisson distribution of chip yield: good ﬁt
for small chips. Reproduced from Cunningham (1990) by
permission of IEEE
Another yield model is known as Murphy’s model, that is
Y =
1 −e(−AD)
AD
2
(36.5)
Chip size A is a result of two opposing trends: as
linewidths are scaled down, chip area should decrease;
but because more and more functionality and memory are
desired, the number of transistors on a chip increases so
fast that chip area in fact is constantly increasing. Defect
density must be scaled down with decreasing linewidths
because the product DA must be made smaller. Not all
particles will destroy a chip: some are too small and
some land on non-critical sites. The model shown in
Figure 36.3 estimates yield DRAM yield when particle
fatality is a parameter that is set from 10% to 20%.
36.3 Yield Ramping
Process research for a new generation of chips starts
about 10 years before commercial introduction. It invol-
ves the exploration of new technologies and materials,
and novel device structures. About 5 years before
introduction, equipment should be available in single
units, and 2–3 years before introduction pilot production
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 432]
Yield and Reliability
451
0
2
4
6
8
Poisson 
yield
Defects (D × A) in chip area
Chip yield Y
10
12
100%
10%
1%
1
1 +
∝
∝ = 1/2
∝ = 1
∝ = 2
∝ = 4
∝ = ∞
e−D × A
∝
D × A
Y =
Figure 36.2
Yield models compared: cluster factor α
ranges from 0.5 to inﬁnity. Reproduced from Carlson and
Neugebauer (1986) by permission of IEEE
1
2
Y = e−DA
5
10
20
50
100
Number of particles/5" wafer (>0.1 μm)
1
10
100
1000
DA
α = 20% 10%
64 M 16 M
 4 M 1 M
256 K
(10 to 20%)
Yield (%)
64M
D = DoNa
Do Particle density/step
N: Number of steps
a: Ratio of fatal damage
Figure 36.3
Particle-induced yield loss in DRAMs ac-
cording to the Poisson model. Note that only 10–20% of
particles are assumed to cause fatal damage to chips. Re-
produced from Hattori (1998)
quantities of equipment will be purchased, say ﬁve units
in a major company.
Working devices are ready a year or two before in-
troduction. This implies device and equipment readiness,
but does not give any indication of systematic or random
yield. Depending on device type and company culture,
10–20 lots, each taking 1–3 months (running partly in
parallel), are fabricated and analyzed. Production start is
the date when every lot produces functioning devices.
Figure 36.4 shows yield data over time. The yield was
ramped rapidly from an initial 20% to nearly 100% in
less than six months.
Yield is related to a particular process characterized by
its linewidth or process technology generation. It is not
constant over the device lifecycle: at product introduc-
tion yield is low and it rises with production volumes.
Some schematic values for processes at different stages
of maturity are given in Table 36.1.
The yield ramp phase often determines commercial suc-
cess or failure. Commodity devices like DRAMs have
a market price, and because fab investments are similar
for same-generation technology, the difference in rev-
enue comes mostly from yield in the early phase. The
IC industry has been able to prosper in spite of dire pre-
dictions about yield-limited economics. In fact, statistics
show that yield ramp rates have been steeper for new,
small linewidth processes (Figure 36.5). This is partly
due to multiple fabs, where everything is copied from
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
Mirror Yield
0%
10/20/0112/9/01 2/28/02 3/19/02 5/8/02 6/27/02 8/16/02 10/5/0211/24/021/13/03 3/4/03
Figure 36.4
Yield over time for an optical beam steering
device, with 100 000 polysilicon micromirrors. Reproduced
from Romig et al. (2003), copyright 2003, Pergamon
Table 36.1
Yields (%) at different stages of maturity
Yrandom
Ysystematic
Ytotal
Introduction
20
80
16
Ramp-up phase
80
90
72
Mature
95
99
94
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 433]
452
Introduction to Microfabrication
1.0 μm
Log Defect Density (Arb Units)
0..8 μm
0.5 μm
0.35 μm0.25 μm
0.18 μm
0.13 μm
300
mm
Q4 '00
Q4 '98
Q4 '96
Q4 '94
Q4 '92
Q4 '90
Q4 '88
Q4 '86
0
Figure 36.5
Defect density reduction is getting faster and
faster for each successive technology generation. Repro-
duced from Natarajan et al. (2002) by permission of Intel
an existing fab, and experience accumulates faster than in
one-of-a-kind fabs.
Yield stability during ramp-up and production is
mandatory because otherwise there is no yardstick for
process development efforts. Gross variations in yield
would mean that even major process improvements might
be rejected if yield variation and process improvement
have opposite signs. Similarly, cosmetic improvements
might get approval even though the effect came from
normal yield variation. Yield decreases at the end of the
product lifecycle: it is caused by phasing out the process
and decreased engineering effort.
36.4 Package Reliability
Devices come with different degrees of packaging and
reliability concerns: solid state devices with no moving
parts can be cast in epoxy, and packaging is ﬁnished.
Of course they will experience mechanical movements,
induced by thermal expansion, for example. But MEMS
devices are much more varied and much more difﬁcult to
package. Devices come in ﬁve classes of difﬁculty when
it comes to packaging and reliability difﬁculty:
1. Solid state devices, no moving parts.
2. Devices with channels/cavities but no moving parts.
3. Devices with moving but non-contacting parts.
4. Devices with contacting surfaces.
5. Devices with contacting and rubbing surfaces.
Many microﬂuidic devices belong to the second class,
for example nozzle devices, or microreactors. Pressure
sensors,
microphones,
accelerometers,
IR
detectors,
cMUTs and RF resonators belong to the third class.
Digital micromirrors, microvalves and pumps and RF
switches belong to the fourth class. Gears, turbines and
pop-up mirrors are members of the ﬁfth class. Devices in
this last class remain to be commercialized, and very few
devices in the fourth class are commercially available,
apart from digital micromirrors and a few RF switches.
36.5 Metallization Reliability
Metal-to-metal contacts in in-line RF switches are subject
to deformation and welding. Deformation is not detrimen-
tal as such, because it leads to good contact and low
contact resistance, but the more intimately the surfaces
make contact, the likelier it is that they will stick together.
This is especially important for “hot contacts” that carry
signiﬁcant current (e.g., 100 mA) during switching. While
cold contacts (small currents) can be switched 109 times,
hot contacts might survive 107 switchings only.
There are materials solutions to metal–metal contacts:
instead of gold, rhodium can be used; it is harder, requires
a higher force for intimate contact, and is less prone to
adherence. Contact force of course changes contact re-
sistance: for example, a 100 mN force might lead to a
0.2 ohm Au–Au contact resistance, but a smaller force
may result in 0.4 ohms. This will change over time: the
contacting surfaces are not perfectly smooth, and initially
only the highest points (asperities) contribute to the con-
tact; later on the repeated contacts of surfaces lead to
increased contact area (and smaller resistance). This situ-
ation is analogous to CMP (Figure 16.3).
36.5.1 Electromigration
Electromigration is atom movement due to electron mo-
mentum transfer. Electrons dislodge metal atoms from the
lattice, and these atoms consequently move and accumu-
late at the positive end of the conductor and leave voids
at the negative end. This is shown both schematically and
in the SEM micrograph in Figure 36.6. This effect is en-
countered in aluminum conductors when current densities
approach the level of mega-amps per square centimeter,
but copper and tungsten tolerate higher current densities.
Electromigration depends on a number of factors:
macroscopic factors include geometry of the lines, their
width, shape, area as well as passivation. Microscopic
factors include grain size, texture, alloy solutes and
their precipitation at grain boundaries and interfaces.
Solutes like copper in aluminum increase resistance
to electromigration because CuAl2
formed at grain
boundaries blocks diffusion at grain boundaries. What
is more, grain size and linewidth are not independent:
when grain size and linewidth become equal (typically
when
the
thickness-to-width
ratio
is
about
unity),
the number of grain boundaries is strongly reduced,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 434]
Yield and Reliability
453
Voids
Electrons
Current
(a)
Hillocks, whiskers
(b)
Figure 36.6
Electromigration: atoms are transported from the anode end of a wire towards the cathode with electron
wind. Voids are left at the anode end, and hillocks form towards the cathode end: (a) schematic. Figure courtesy Antti
Lipsanen, VTT; (b) SEM micrograph of Al lines (4 μm wide). Reproduced from Hu, C.-K. et al. (1993), by permission
of American Inst of Physics Reproduced from Hu et al. (1993) by permission of American Institute of Physics
leading to a so-called bamboo structure with one grain
extending across the line. In polycrystalline material
grain boundary diffusion is important, and elimination of
grain boundaries will affect electromigration.
Mean time to failure (MTTF) due to electromigration
is given by
MTTF = AJ −ne(Ea/kT )
(36.6)
where A is a constant depending on the wire geometry
and metal microstructure, J the current density and Ea
the activation energy. The factor n is not known very ac-
curately, but n = 1.7 is used for aluminum. For aluminum
thin ﬁlms Ea is on the order of 0.5–0.8 eV, whereas for
bulk aluminum it is 1.4–1.5 eV. As a general trend, the
higher the activation energy, the better the electromigra-
tion resistance. It can be roughly estimated on the basis
of metal melting point Tm: the higher the melting point,
the higher the electromigration resistance. To put it an-
other way: high melting point equals high bond strength.
At room temperature, which is Tm/3 for aluminum, alu-
minum atoms have a reasonable probability for diffusion.
For tungsten, room temperature corresponds to Tm/10, and
electromigration is orders of magnitudes less. But for cop-
per the situation is different: instead of bulk diffusion it
is surface diffusion that matters, therefore control of in-
terfaces and barriers is of paramount importance.
In Figure 36.7 the incubation time of resistance increase
is plotted for Al–2% Cu lines and tested at 225 ◦C to
see how fast the resistance increase starts. This is again
critically dependent on current density.
36.6 Dielectric Defects and Quality
Even though the interface between silicon and thermally
grown silicon dioxide can be reproducibly fabricated, it is
far from ideal. The interface trapped charges are caused by
broken bonds (from structural defects, oxidation-induced
defects and contamination). Because they are at the in-
terface, the potential in silicon will charge or discharge
them. Interface trapped charges can be reduced by form-
ing gas anneal.
There is always some positive ﬁxed charge in the
vicinity of the interface, and it is related to silicon
ionization during the oxidation process. There are also
trapped charges, which can be positive or negative,
caused by energetic electrons or ionizing radiation, and
there can be mobile charges from contamination, most
notably from Na+ ions.
The electric ﬁeld that oxide can sustain is usually re-
ported by breakdown voltage: >10 MV/cm is considered
to be the intrinsic breakdown ﬁeld. This is also termed C-
mode failure; B-mode failure happens at 2–8 MV/cm and
A-mode below 2 MV/cm. An example of oxide break-
down statistics is shown in Figure 36.8.
A-mode failures are gross defects: pinholes and voids.
B-mode failures are more benign and more subtle, like
oxide thinning, trapped charges or metal contamination-
induced defects. C-mode failures are intrinsic to oxide
structure but can be affected by nanoscopic defects like
increased surface and interface roughness. These different
oxide defects are shown in Figure 36.9. A-mode failures
are seen as yield loss; B-mode failures as reliability prob-
lems in accelerated testing or in the ﬁeld; C-mode failures
become important at the end of product lifetime.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 435]
454
Introduction to Microfabrication
14
10−1
2
6
10−0
3
τ (h)
8
2
4
10−2
3
6
17
20
23
26
0
0
Δ R (Ω)
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
Time (h)
(b)
1/T (10−4 K−1)
(a)
1000
0.3 MA/cm2
W/Ti/AI(2%Cu)/Ti  Line-W stud
0.74 MA/cm2
0.55 MA/cm2
1.0×106 A/cm2
AI(2%Cu)
0.36 MA/cm2
800
1200
AI(0.5%Cu)
Pure Al
Figure 36.7
(a) Mean time to failure of 2.5 μm wide Al, Al (0.5 wt% Cu) and Al (2 wt% Cu) lines at different temper-
atures with 1 MA/cm2 current density. Reproduced from Hu, C.-K. et al. (1993), by permission of AIP. (b) Incubation
time before resistance increase sets in at 255 ◦C. From Hu, C.-K. et al. (1995a), by permission of Elsevier
1
4
 8
12
breakdown field MV/cm
frequency
A
B
C
Figure 36.8
Oxide breakdown distribution: A-mode at
low ﬁeld; B-mode at medium ﬁeld; C-mode at high ﬁeld
Na+
+ +
−
−
+ + +
silicon substrate
Figure 36.9
Oxide defects (left to right): Na+ mobile
charge, thinning, ﬁxed charge, surface and interface micror-
oughness, pinhole, void, interface charge, particle, stacking
fault. Adapted from Schr¨oder (1998)
Metals are responsible for many of the defects de-
scribed above. If the surface is contaminated, silicates like
MgSiO4 or silicides like Cu3Si and NiSi can be formed,
rather than silicon dioxide. Their formation consumes sil-
icon and therefore oxide will be locally thinner. Unreac-
tive metals dissolve in the growing oxide, which leads to
decreased intrinsic breakdown strength. Sodium (Na) con-
tamination leads to an increased oxidation rate, whereas
iron (Fe) and aluminum (Al) lead either to an increase
or decrease depending on the level of contamination and
time. Metals can also catalyze the reaction SiO2 (s) +
Si (s) ⇒2 SiO (g) (which takes place under low oxy-
gen partial pressure, e.g., during ramp-up in a furnace),
leading to oxide evaporation and pinhole-like defects.
Oxide dielectric strength is tested by a number different
experimental set-ups:
• Ramped voltage: the voltage between the MOS gate and
substrate is linearly increased (0.1 or 1 V/s) until the
oxide breaks down. Breakdown voltage VBD is deﬁned
as the voltage where a sudden voltage drop occurs.
• Time-to-breakdown under constant current (TTBD,
tBD): constant, preset current is fed into the insulator,
and voltage is recorded as a function of time. TTBD is
the time when a sudden voltage drop occurs.
• Charge-to-breakdown (QBD): in a constant current test
QBD = Jinjected × tBD. Good oxides exhibit values of
10 C/cm2, but this is dependent on injected current.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 436]
Yield and Reliability
455
36.7 Stress Migration
Electromigration is studied by accelerated tests under cur-
rent densities that are higher than normal at elevated tem-
peratures. But voids appear in metal lines at elevated
temperatures even when no current runs through them.
This is known as stress-induced voiding, or stress mi-
gration. The driving force is the gradient in the strain
ﬁeld: some atoms ﬁnd it energetically favorable to move
to voids.
The source of stress is thermal expansion mismatch
between the metal and the encapsulating (PE)CVD
dielectric. Strain (elongation) is proportional to the
CTE and temperature difference, which for aluminum
translates to 1% linear elongation, or about 3% volume
change when 300 ◦C PECVD is done. This elongation
corresponds to stresses of about 1 GPa (as can be
estimated from Equation 4.1). Aluminum lines expand
during PECVD, and they are ﬁxed at their elongated
state because of the mechanical stiffness of deposited
oxide/nitride layers. This high tensile stress can be
relaxed by cracks, and once a crack is formed, it tends
to grow.
Compressive stresses in aluminum can be relaxed via
hillock formation. Hillocks are small protrusions. Their
size can be up to micrometers, which is equal to the
insulator thickness between two levels of metallization. If
some mechanically stiffer ﬁlm prevents relaxation in the
vertical direction, hillocks can grow laterally, and, again,
a micrometer is a very sizable distance relative to line
spacing. In both cases hillocks can short two metal lines.
Low-temperature processing helps to reduce hillocks
(and stress and electromigration). Alloying aluminum
with copper is also helpful to minimize hillock formation
because it blocks grain boundary diffusion.
36.8 Die Yield Loss
Because microfabricated devices are small and complex,
usually no repair is possible or feasible. There are a few
exceptions: big memory arrays with redundant cell blocks
can be repaired by disconnecting malfunctioning blocks
and connecting redundant blocks. Another repair opera-
tion in regular use is photomask repair: because mask
writing is slow and expensive, it makes sense to repair
a few defective sites rather than rewrite the whole mask
plate. Masks are also inspected 100% and therefore de-
fects are caught early on.
The
ﬁshbone
diagram
in
Figure
36.10
depicts
contributors to die yield loss. As can be seen, the yield
loss mechanism can be difﬁcult to pinpoint because both
design and manufacturing contribute to it, in addition to
Systematic 
defects
Transistor 
functionality
Shorts
Resistances
Junction 
leakage
Step 
coverage
Al Hillocks
Opens
Complexity
Design
Process
Operational 
window
CpK
Layout
Feature
Size
Die
Manufacturing 
practices
Cycle 
time
Downtime
Product 
issues
Process 
interactions
Extra 
material
Wafer 
edge
Machine
PatternCleans
Missing 
material
Corrosion
Etch
Pin holes
Random 
defects
Chemicals
Liquids
Environment
Ambient
Cleans
Parameters
Lithography
Equipment
Cleans
Vacuum 
systems
Particles
Clean 
room
People
Gases
Complexity
Substrate
Process
Die yield 
loss
Figure 36.10
Factors inﬂuencing die yield loss. Reproduced from Rao (1993) by permission of McGraw-Hill
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 437]
456
Introduction to Microfabrication
random processes. Despite the enormous complexity of
modern microdevices, they are routinely manufactured at
yields of over 90%.
36.9 Exercises
1. Compare the number of 0.5 cm2 chips on 100 mm and
150 mm wafers to the 6 mm edge exclusion rule. Re-
peat for 2 cm2 chips on 200 mm and 300 mm wafers
with 3 mm edge exclusion.
2. If linewidth is halved but the same old cleanroom is
used, what will happen to yield?
3. Use Minesweeper (for Windows, or XMine for Unix)
as a tool to simulate fabrication yield: chips are 1 × 1,
2 × 2, 3 × 3, 4 × 4, 5 × 5 or 6 × 6 areas on the grid.
Vary defect density (= the number of mines) and check
how defect density and chip size are related.
4. What is the extrapolated yield of a new 2 cm2 chip if
D = 2 cm−2 using the Poisson model, measured from
a large sample of small chips (<0.6 cm−2). What is the
yield if Murphy’s model is used instead? How about
Seeds’ model?
5. If 64 Mbit DRAM chips are 2 cm2, what must the fab
defect density be?
6. Accelerated tests for chips are run at elevated tempera-
tures in order to ﬁnd failures faster. Acceleration factor
temperature (AFT) is given by
AFT = e(E/kToperation)/e(E/kTtest)
Using an activation energy of 0.7 eV, what acceler-
ation factor does 175 ◦C present? (Temperatures are
junction temperatures, and typical values are 55 ◦C for
consumer and 85 ◦C for industrial electronics.)
7. If Al (2% wt Cu) lines have MTTF of 400 h at 255 ◦C,
what is their expected lifetime under standard operat-
ing conditions?
8. If a TiW/Al (50 nm/400 nm) line experiences a void in
aluminum, by how much will line resistance increase?
(TiW resistivity is 150 μohm-cm).
References and Related Reading
Carlson, R.O. and C.A. Neugebauer (1986) Future trends in
wafer scale integration, Proc. IEEE, 74, 1741.
Cunningham, J.A. (1990) The use and evaluation of yield mod-
els in integrated circuit manufacturing, IEEE Trans. Semi-
cond. Manuf ., 3, 60.
Diebold, A.C. (1994) Materials and failure analysis methods
and systems used in the development and manufacture of
silicon integrated circuits, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B12, 2768.
Gardner, D.S. and P.A. Flinn (1988) Mechanical stress as a
function of temperature in aluminum ﬁlms, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, 35, 2160.
Hattori, T. (ed) (1998) Ultraclean Surface Processing of Sil-
icon Wafers, Springer.
Hayashi, M., S. Nakano and T. Wada (2003) Dependence of
copper interconnect electromigration phenomenon on barrier
metal materials, Microelectron. Reliab., 43, 1545–1550.
Hu, C.-K. (1995) Electromigration failure mechanism in
bamboo-grained Al(Cu) interconnections, Thin Solid Films,
260, 124.
Hu, C.-K. et al. (1993) Electromigration of Al(Cu) two-level
structures: effect of Cu kinetics of damage formation, J.
Appl. Phys., 74, 969.
Hu, C.-K. et al. (1995) Electromigration and stress-induced
voiding in ﬁne Al- and Al-alloy thin- ﬁlm lines, IBM J. Res.
Dev., 39, 465.
Hu, S.M. (1991) Stress-related problems in silicon technology,
J. Appl. Phys., 70, R53–R80.
Kim, K.O., M.J. Zuo and W. Kuo (2005) On the relationship of
semiconductor yield and reliability, IEEE Trans. Semicond.
Manuf ., 18, 422–429.
Li, Q. et al. (2009) Assessment of testing methodologies for
thin-ﬁlm vacuum MEMS packages, Microsyst. Technol., 15,
161–168.
Melzner, H. and A. Olbrich (2007) Maximization of good chips
per wafer by optimization of memory redundancy, IEEE
Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 20, 68–76.
Natarajan, S. et al. (2002) Process development and manu-
facturing of high-performance microprocessors on 300mm
wafers, Intel Technol. J ., 6, 14–22.
Rao,
G.P.
(1993)
Multilevel
Interconnect
Technology,
McGraw-Hill.
Romig, A.D., M.T. Dugger, and P.J. McWhorter (2003) Mate-
rials issues in microelectromechanical devices: science, en-
gineering, manufacturability and reliability, Acta Mater., 51,
5837–5866.
Schroder, D.K. (1998) Semiconductor material and device
characterization, 2nd edn, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Spanos, C.J. (1992) Statistical process control in semiconductor
manufacturing, Proc. IEEE, 80, 819.
Stapper, C.H. and R.J. Rosner (1995) Integrated circuit yield
management and yield analysis: development and implemen-
tation, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 8, 95.
Tabata, O. and T. Tsuchiya (eds) (2008) Reliability of
MEMS: Testing of Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH
Verlag GmbH.
Tan, C.M. and A. Roy (2007) Electromigration in ULSI inter-
connects, Mater.Sci.Eng., R58, 1–75.
Warwick, C. and A. Ourmazd (1993) Trends and limits in
monolithic integration by increasing the die area, IEEE
Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 6, 284.
Witvrouw, A., H.A.C. Tilmans, and I. De Wolf (2004) Materials
issues in the processing, the operation and the reliability of
MEMS, Microelectron. Eng., 76, 245–257.
Yue, J.T. (1996) Reliability, in C.Y. Cheng and S.M. Sze (eds),
ULSI Technology, McGraw-Hill.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 438]
37
Economics of Microfabrication
This chapter deals with the economics of microfabrica-
tion, the cost structures and trends of IC, MEMS, solar
cell, display and magnetic data storage manufacturing.
These devices are driven by very different motives: large-
scale integration for CMOS, large area for displays, novel
functionality for MEMS, low cost for solar cells, extreme
throughputs for hard disk drives, etc. Starting material
costs, equipment cost and operating costs differ. Silicon
wafers are just a few percent of the cost of an IC but
roughly 30% of the cost of a crystalline silicon solar cell.
Lithography is a central cost and performance issue in ICs
and hard disk read heads, while large-area substrate pro-
cessing drives thin-ﬁlm solar cells and ﬂat-panel displays.
All dollar values in this and the following chapters
are bound to be crude approximations for many reasons.
Some numbers are proprietary and can only be gauged by
outsiders, for example costs are trade secrets but prices
are public knowledge. Currency ﬂuctuations make world-
wide comparisons time dependent. Business cycle ups and
downs can result in 30% increases annually as well as
decreases in sales volumes. This has been especially true
for DRAM memories, but solar cells have experienced
similar-sized ﬂuctuations.
37.1 Silicon
There are only half a dozen companies making high-purity
polysilicon, and this industry has very high entry barriers:
the facilities are big and expensive, and it takes three years
to get a new facility up and running. Companies making
CZ silicon wafers or MC solar wafers buy their electronic-
grade polysilicon on long-term contracts for something
like $50 per kg. As in the oil industry, there is a spot
market where prices can gyrate wildly, and in 2007–2008
solar boom poly spot prices shot to $300 per kg.
c:\pitstop\in\Input Folder\
Some 20 companies make silicon wafers and 1000
fabs (and hundreds of university labs) process devices
on those silicon wafers. Silicon wafers are tailored to
customer needs, and a wafer manufacturer has thousands
of wafer speciﬁcations. Sometimes customer-speciﬁc
features are crucial for device performance, like SOI
device layer thickness in scaled-down SOI MOSFETs or
interferometer optical devices; sometimes it is customized
gettering, or novel back-side particle speciﬁcation or
edge exclusion minimization, and sometimes it is just
convenience, like specialized markings for wafer tracking
or non-standard ﬂats.
In order to ensure wafer supply, device manufacturers
have a second source of wafers. This second-source sup-
plier may supply for instance 30% of wafers, and in case
the primary supplier has problems, the second source is
expected to boost deliveries, so this 30% may not present
more than 20% of capacity of the second source. Ob-
viously the more specialized the wafers used, the more
difﬁcult it is to ﬁnd a second source, and in order to be
the ﬁrst on the market, it may pay to rely on a single
innovative wafer supplier.
The annual usage of 5 km2 of silicon wafers trans-
lates to roughly 200 million wafers. The 300 mm wafers
account for about 30 million wafers, 200 mm for 70 mil-
lion, 150 mm for 60 million, 125 mm for 25 million and
100 mm for 10 million. Figure 37.1 shows the general
trends of wafer size usage over decades.
Wafer size transitions have been important events in IC
history: all tooling has to be upgraded, and every process
has to be available and qualiﬁed for the new wafer size,
including all metrology and testing as well. Wafer sizes
used to last for 5–7 years, but more recently it seems that
lifecycles are getting longer. The transition from 300 mm
to 450 mm has been envisioned to start in 2012, but noth-
ing is certain yet. In 2009 there were 100 fabs running
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 439]
458
Introduction to Microfabrication
Total Wafer Area Trend
1976–2025: 10% CAGR
100%
33%
10%
Pilot
1960
Area Demand per Year (Millions in2)
1965
75mm
+
100mm
125mm
+
150mm
200mm
300mm
450mm
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
0
Figure 37.1
Wafer usage evolution over the years. Reproduced from Doering and Nishi (2001), copyright 2001, by
permission of IEEE
300 mm wafers. The ﬁrst ones were built in 2000, and it
seems that 300 mm wafers will continue to be used for
quite some time to come.
37.2 IC Costs and Prices
Based on a few numbers, like IC sales ($250 billion),
silicon area (5 km2) used and the number of photomasks
(700 000 annually), many interesting statistics can be cal-
culated. The average price of a starting silicon wafer turns
out to be $40 (about $0.1 per cm2), and that of processed
silicon is $5 per cm2. The latest generation technologies
(e.g., 45 nm CMOS) command higher prices, for example
$10 per cm2, while older technologies are much cheaper,
though price depends on volumes, of course.
The photomask industry produces some 700 000 pho-
tomasks a year, which translates to 30 000 mask sets with
an average price per set of over $100 000 according to
data from VLSI Research Corp. Average price is mis-
leading, though, because of the escalation in mask prices:
for 0.25 μm CMOS technology a mask set costs $50 000,
for 65 nm, $1 million, and for 45 nm, $2 million. A mask
set is used to expose 5000 wafers on average, but because
R&D uses masks too, production series are in fact longer.
The number of IC designs is even larger because some
mask sets contain many designs. Additionally, ﬁeld pro-
grammable gate arrays (FPGAs) are customized by users.
If a processed 90 nm CMOS wafer sells for $5000,
production runs smaller than 100 wafers (which might
comprise 100 000 chips) do not cover even the non-
recurring mask costs. Semicustom chips solve the mask
price problem, at least partially: front-end processing,
and therefore the transistors, are identical in all products,
and chips are customized by a few customer-speciﬁc
metallization masks. In the best case only one mask is
product speciﬁc, while all the other masks are shared
between many products. Of course, semicustom chips
cannot use silicon area optimally, but the cost reduction
relative to full custom design is signiﬁcant, especially
for small series products. For very special chips direct
write may be an option: with a speed of 1 WPH for
electron beam lithography, not many wafers can be
processed, but if a handful of chips sufﬁce, direct write
makes sense because mask cost is eliminated. There is
an analogy in the CD business: if you need 1, 10 or 100
copies, they are burned in a CD player; if you need 1000
or more, it makes sense to fabricate a master and use
injection molding.
Many companies have captive mask shops for a vari-
ety of reasons. It makes sense to collaborate with a nearby
unit in developing new technology, and it may be advan-
tageous to keep these developments secret from outsiders.
It is also useful to be able to understand the cost structure
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 440]
Economics of Microfabrication
459
1.0
0.8
0.6
Chip Yield
0.4
0.2
0.0
60
Minimum Feature Size (nm)
80
100
120
Chip Cost (A.U.)
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Minimum Feature Size (nm)
60
80
100
120
Profit (A.U.)
Minimum Feature Size (nm)
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Figure 37.2
Chip yield, chip cost and proﬁt as a function of linewidth. Reproduced from Mack (2007) by permission
of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1
10
100
Total
Process
package
Yield loss
Cost
Chip area
Figure 37.3
Chip size vs. costs: constant process cost; huge packaging cost for small chips, and huge yield loss cost
(waste) for large chips
of a supplier: a captive mask shop is seldom the main
mask supplier, rather a reference.
Yield and proﬁt are closely related, but somewhat
counter-intuitively. As shown in Figure 37.2, chip yield
goes down if feature size is scaled down too aggressively.
Cost per good chip goes up dramatically when the
number
of
good
chips
declines.
Maximum
proﬁt,
however, does not coincide with minimum chip cost,
because smaller linewidth equals higher performance,
and these chips command higher prices. Therefore, in this
case, maximum proﬁts are generated at 80 nm linewidth,
even though 85 nm minimizes production costs.
Looking further at the cost structure, the cost of silicon
chips can be seen to consist of three elements:
• cost of wafer processing (both capital and running costs)
• cost of scrap (yield loss)
• cost of package.
If chip size increases, package cost is reduced because
fewer chips need to be packaged, but scrap cost (yield
loss) increases with chip size (Figure 37.3). The cost of
processed silicon per square centimeter has remained
more or less constant for over 30 years, which is remark-
able considering the growth in complexity of fabrication
processes. This cost always refers to the most advanced,
yet established, process technology of its day – older
technologies are cheaper.
37.3 IC Industry
There are many levels of actors in any industry. The elec-
tronics industry as a whole is worth about $1200 billion
annually, and IC production about $250 billion, which
means that ICs comprise about 20% of the value of elec-
tronic products.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 441]
460
Introduction to Microfabrication
Table 37.1
Equipment industry (2007 and
2008 averages in billions of dollars)
Process equipment:
27
Lithography
6.5
Deposition
5.7
Etch
4.3
Inspection and measurement
3.1
Resist processing
1.8
Surface preparation/clean
1.8
Implantation
1.1
CMP
1.1
Thermal processing
1.1
Other wafer processing
0.3
Assembly and packaging
2.4
Testing
4.3
Fab facilities
1.6
Other
0.9
Total
36
Source: SEMI.
The big IC companies are producing large-volume
products:
microprocessors,
signal
processors
and
memories. A much larger number of players produce RF
devices, analog devices, power semiconductors, opto-
electronics, sensor interface circuits, etc.
There are many types of IC manufacturers: merchant
manufacturers design and produce their own chips for
sale. Of the top 20 manufacturers, 16 are merchants. Cap-
tive manufacturers are divisions of large companies, and
they cater for their internal customers. In the 1980s every
major electronics and aerospace company had a captive
CMOS division, but today captives usually offer spe-
cial technologies, not mainstream CMOS. Foundries are
companies without their own chip designs: their product
is fabrication service. Fabless companies are companies
that design chips, but do not own fabrication facilities;
foundries make the chips. Only one foundry and three
fabless companies are in the top 20 IC companies.
Behind the semiconductor industry is the $30–40 bil-
lion equipment industry (Table 37.1; because of the cycli-
cal nature of the semiconductor business, equipment sales
experience large ﬂuctuations, especially in 2007 and 2008,
for which the latest statistics are available). Materials
like resists, gases, cleaning chemicals, sputtering targets,
CMP slurries, etc., add another $10 billion. CMP slurries
represent a $1.7 billion business, larger than the CMP
equipment business.
The IC industry has been growing 17% annually for
over 30 years, whereas the electronics industry as a whole
grows only 7% annually. For the IC industry to keep
growing at its historical rate, the IC content of electronics
has to rise at the expense of discrete devices, circuit
boards, connectors, displays, switches, keyboards, or else
IC growth will slow down. Is it reasonable to expect the
proportion of ICs to rise to 30% or to 50% of all electron-
ics, as it is now in handheld devices like MP3 players?
Mainframe computers
1980s
10% of value consists
of ICs
Personal computers
1990s
20–30% of value
consists of ICs
Handheld devices
2000s
40–50% of value
consists of ICs
Measures from IC manufacturing can be used to check
if the rate of introduction of novel devices is slowing
down. The ramp rate of production at high volumes is
one measure. There are some indications that this might be
slowing down. The cost of a fab compared to the revenue
it is assumed to generate during its lifetime is another. Ob-
viously, the former must be kept to a fraction of the latter,
but recently the cost of the fab has been rising faster than
the revenue. Both of these measures are tricky because
the IC industry is very cyclical, and long-term trends are
easily camouﬂaged by annual or quarterly ﬂuctuations.
More complex devices are introduced at regular inter-
vals, which means that the R&D effort must grow for
each successive device generation: development of 1 Mbit
DRAM has been estimated to have cost $200 million dol-
lars, and $1.5 billion dollars for 1 Gbit DRAM. So far the
market size has grown steadily, which means that there
have always been customers for more memory and more
processing power, therefore the interval between introduc-
tions of new generations has been steady.
37.4 IC Wafer Fabs
IC wafer fabs can be massive: high-volume fabs have
monthly production of 50 000–100 000 wafers (wafer
starts per month, WPM). In a high-volume fab there
are separate furnace tubes for gate oxidation, other dry
oxides, wet oxides and polysilicon oxides; in a research
lab the division might be gate oxide vs. other oxides,
or dry oxides vs. wet oxides. Fabs have plasma etchers
dedicated to oxide, poly, aluminum and tungsten. In a
university lab with two plasma etchers the division is
based on ﬂuorine vs. chlorine processes (or between
clean and not-so-clean processes). LPCVD processes
have dedicated tubes for poly, nitride and oxides, and
this holds for small fabs and labs alike because thin-ﬁlm
interactions would ruin reproducibility. In a research
lab one sputtering system can take care of all metal
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 442]
Economics of Microfabrication
461
Table 37.2
Fab investment
(millions of dollars) for volume
manufacturing (top fab of its day)
1957
0.2
1967
2.5
1977
10
1987
100
1997
1000
2007
3000
2017
?
depositions, but production sputters are dedicated to
certain ﬁlms or ﬁlm stacks exclusively.
Wafer fab cost has increased exponentially with de-
creasing linewidth, Table 37.2. Cleanrooms have become
more expensive as the size of a killer particle has gone
down, but equipment is the most expensive part of a fab.
One recent estimate gave capital investment in tools as
equivalent to 80% of revenue that the fab is going to
generate in its lifetime.
The IC industry is faced with a number of challenging
issues, in fab economics, device structures and packaging.
Fab cost is not only high, but the amortization times are
very short, 5–7 years only. Lithography cost especially is
rising very fast, with $50 million price tags for lithogra-
phy tools. One solution to rising costs and risks is called
“copy exactly”: the second and successive fabs are exact
copies of the ﬁrst. It is, however, only really applicable
to the biggest companies. This approach will mean faster
learning curves and higher yields (see Figure 36.4). Pre-
viously the thinking was that the ﬁrst fab is an experiment
and improvements are made in each successive fab. But
rapid yield ramp is a crucial element in getting to the mar-
ket early, and constant process and tool changes can be
detrimental. Of course, there is no escaping the fact that
sometimes fabs with new technology and new equipment
have to be built.
37.4.1 Fab operation
Regular wafers are run in lots of 25 or 50 wafers. Cycle
time (CT) is the time in days it takes to complete a lot.
Process time (PT) is the time that the wafer is actually
being processed. Cycle times vary based on process com-
plexity, degree of automation and capacity utilization, but
3–7 weeks is typical. The ratio of cycle time to process
time, CT/PT, is a measure of fab efﬁciency. For standard
processing CT/PT is about 2, which means that wafers
spend half of the time in a queue and storage.
For batch processes like oxidation many batches are
combined, which leads to higher CT/PT. Sometimes a lot
is made up of 24 wafers together with a monitor wafer.
The monitor wafer is not physically one and the same
wafer but an allocation only: in gate oxidation it is a prime
wafer which then continues to polysilicon deposition, poly
doping and polysilicon etching, and exits after that. A new
monitor wafer starts at ﬁrst interlevel dielectric deposition,
and it is then used as a contact hole etch monitor and as
the ﬁrst-metal resistance and step coverage monitor. This
monitor is not a prime wafer, but a monitor quality wafer.
In addition to the device and process-speciﬁc monitor
wafers which are run with the product wafers, a lot of
other monitor wafers are running in a wafer fab. These
are used in:
• equipment qualiﬁcation (e.g., after maintenance)
• regular monitoring (e.g., particle tests, ﬁlm thick-
ness/uniformity)
• process development (e.g., modifying an existing pro-
cess step)
• short-loop test wafers (e.g. via-chain test).
In the start-up phase of a new fab product wafers may in
fact represent less than half of all wafers. Test/monitor
wafers are often reclaimed wafers. Reclaimed wafers
have been recycled after processing: thin ﬁlms have been
etched away, and the wafers may have been repolished
and inspected. Reclaimed wafers have been through
various process
steps,
especially thermal processes,
which affect the properties of the wafer bulk, for example
oxygen precipitation and wafer curvature. Reclaimed
wafers are cheaper choices for non-critical processes: as
thin-ﬁlm thickness monitors, as equipment qualiﬁcation
wafers, or as particle test wafers.
CT and PT are intimately coupled to batch vs.
single wafer tool combinations in a fab. Most front-end
processes are batch and most back-end processes single
wafer. For batch processes PT is “overhead + batch
time,” which is fairly constant, but for single wafer
processes PT is “overhead + lot size × single wafer
time,” and lot size has a major effect. All single wafer
fabs have been experimented with and record CTs of
three days have been demonstrated for 0.25 μm CMOS.
There are no single wafer fabs running in volume
production, but in order to reduce the risks associated
with billion-dollar fabs, the minifab concept has been
created. Minifabs are low-volume fabs with mostly
single wafer and some small batch equipment (batch
size of 25 wafers in thermal processes vs. 200 wafer
furnace batches in high-volume fabs). Such minifabs are
expected to be more agile because CTs will be shorter,
and production scheduling is going to be more ﬂexible.
Other ways to reduce CT include lot status and priority
classiﬁcation schemes. Hot lots (or rush lots) are priority
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 443]
462
Introduction to Microfabrication
lots that receive preferential treatment in the fab. When
a hot lot arrives at a process tool, it is processed in front
of the queue. Hot lot CT may be 30% less than that of a
regular lot. Super hot lots (or bullet lots) are even more
prioritized: process equipment is reserved for the super
hot lot so that it can be processed as soon as it arrives.
For a super hot lot, CT/PT is thus 1. The catch is that not
too many such lots can run at any one time, otherwise
production scheduling goes berserk.
Yields of hot lots tend to be consistently better than
those of standard lots. This can be explained by a simple
particle deposition model: hot lots spend less time in the
wafer fab, and there is less time available for particles to
be deposited on the wafers.
37.5 MEMS Industry
The MEMS industry is worth roughly $8 billion a year
and products employing MEMS devices sell for about
$100 billion. MEMS are a much more poorly deﬁned con-
cept than ICs, and different sources give different values.
Table 37.3 lists major MEMS products.
MEMS fabs use some 4 million 150 mm wafers a year
and smaller amounts of 100, 125 and 200 mm wafers. For
bulk micromechanics scaling to 200 mm is not an attrac-
tive option, because through-wafer etching of thick wafers
wastes area. In surface micromechanics wafer size in-
creases productivity just as in ICs, and waveguide optical
microsystems are fabricated on 200 mm wafers because
the chips are large due to large radii of curvature. Be-
sides, IC companies are abandoning old 200 mm wafer
fabs, and those are converted to MEMS fabs.
Accelerometers
and
microphones
are
typically
square millimeters in size, but a 96-channel capillary
Table 37.3
MEMS market (millions
of dollars) by products, 2010 estimate
Ink jet heads
1610
Accelerometers
1122
Microﬂuidics
1051
Pressure sensors
1041
Gyroscopes
945
Microdisplays
746
RF MEMS
499
MOEMS
270
Microbolometers
254
Microphones
193
Microtips and probes
134
Others
103
Total
7968
Data from Yole Development.
electrophoresis
“chip”
takes
up
a
whole
wafer.
Calculation of MEMS chip costs takes into account the
following: wafer usage, industry turnover and silicon
share of MEMS device cost. A typical cost breakdown
could be 30/30/30/10 for silicon, ASIC, package and
testing. If silicon cost is taken as 30%, then MEMS
silicon price is about $3 per cm2, roughly the same as
that of ICs. While fewer mask levels are used in MEMS,
use of epi, SOI and capping wafers, and low-throughput
DRIE, push up MEMS prices.
Annual production volumes of many MEMS chips are
in the 1000 to 100 000 range, corresponding to 0.01–1%
of monthly production of a big IC fab. These chips include
various aerospace, biomedical and instrumentation system
applications where MEMS are providing a small, but of-
ten essential, element which makes the product distinct.
For instance, pacemakers have silicon accelerometers, for
detecting physical exercise, but the market is small both
in the number of devices and for the money involved.
The automotive industry has long been the driving
force for new MEMS devices. Pressure sensors are used
for power train management, tire pressures and fuel
economy applications. Accelerometers and gyroscopes
are used for passive safety: crash sensing, rollover
detection for launching airbags and tensioning seatbelts;
as well as for active safety: electronic stability control
(ESP), antilock braking (ABS) and traction control
(TCS). The same devices also contribute to ride comfort
via electrically controlled suspension (ECS). Single axis
accelerometers sell for a few dollars and three-axis
versions for a little bit more. Some 100 million units are
supplied annually to the automotive industry.
Consumer electronics requirements are quite different
from automotive ones, and cost pressures much more
severe. About a billion cell/mobile phones are made an-
nually, and many of them contain silicon microphones
and FBAR/BAW duplexers. The total cost of hardware
for the cheapest cell phones is less than $10, and that in-
cludes the display, PCB and keyboard in addition to ICs
and MEMS. Therefore it is no wonder that MEMS micro-
phones for cell phones sell for 50 cents (and 300 million
are sold annually). Accelerometers for display orientation
sensing are also sold by the hundreds of millions. Their
prices are similar to microphones. More elaborate orien-
tation sensing is needed in gaming and virtual reality,
and digital camera image stabilization systems rely on
MEMS gyros.
If RF switches, varactors, local oscillators, delay lines
and resonators could be produced with high enough qual-
ity factors and good temperature stability, there would
be a huge market. For instance, a ﬁve-band cell phone
has some 20 RF components, and even if only a few of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 444]
Economics of Microfabrication
463
those were replaced by RF MEMS devices, the market
would be a billion devices a year. Many new devices are
being developed for the cell phone market: namely, mi-
crozoom optical devices for cameras, and compasses and
barometric pressure sensors for sports models.
Microﬂuidic/BioMEMS devices have potentially large
markets, if they can be made cheap enough for disposable
applications, like point-of-care measurements in health
monitoring where $10 might be a reasonable price for a
test, which translates to a dollar or two for the bare chip.
37.6 Flat-Panel Display Industry
Worldwide production of ﬂat-panel TVs is about100 mil-
lion units, but they are outnumbered by computer displays,
and small displays for MP3 players and cell phones are
made by the billions.
Flat-panel
display
fabrication
deals
with
large
substrates.
Glass
panes
of
2160 mm × 2460 mm,
or
5.2 square meters, are being introduced. If TVs are
made, six or eight ﬁt on a pane, but if displays for cell
phones or digital cameras are produced, hundreds can
ﬁt on a single “mother pane.” Photomasks are large too,
though smaller than mother panes, and step-and-repeat
(Figure 10.2) is usually used (and just as in the IC
industry, scanners are also available). In contrast to IC
step-and-repeat, however, ﬂat-panel steppers are 1×
machines, not reduction optical tools. 42 inch masks cost
tens of thousands of dollars (and a mask set for a ﬁve-
or seven-mask process hundreds of thousands). Small
displays can be made with substantially cheaper 6 or
7 inch masks (which can hold for example four or six
displays). They are getting more expensive, however,
because for instance AMOLED displays require 1–2 μm
linewidths and more mask levels: 10 today and more in
the future.
The number of lithography steps for LCD TFT is
typically ﬁve. Some companies have even reduced this,
sometimes even without losing performance, because
polysilicon mobility has been improved simultaneously.
Fabrication of a ﬁve-mask TFT process is shown in
Figure 37.4. The process ﬂow details the process steps.
Process ﬂow for ﬁve-mask bottom gate
PMOS TFT
• Buffer layer: 100 nm CVD oxide/nitride
• Metal gate sputtering
• Gate patterning, mask 1
• Gate oxide CVD
• a-Si:H 50 nm by PECVD
• a-Si patterning, mask 2
• Anneal hydrogen out
• Crystallization (by laser)
• S/D doping
• Activation anneal
• S/D metallization
• S/D patterning, mask 3
• Passivation ﬁlm
• Contact patterning, mask 4
• Hydrogenation
• Transparent electrode deposition
• ITO pattering, mask 5
Gate oxide thickness, which is a critical MOS transistor
parameter, is not aggressively scaled in TFTs. CVD ox-
ide quality is inferior to thermal oxides, and for example
breakthrough voltages are 3–5 MV/cm vs. 10 MV/cm for
CMOS gate oxides. Roughnesses of polysilicon (in top
gate) or sputtered chromium (in bottom gate) are not
amenable to very thin oxides.
Linewidth scaling and mobility improvement both con-
tribute to greater integration possibilities: it is now pos-
sible to fabricate driver transistors on the TFT panel it-
self, instead of using separate driver ICs, which must be
mounted on the edges of the glass panel. With an inte-
grated SRAM pixel memory the power consumption of a
LCD can be reduced by two orders of magnitude. LCD
backlight efﬁciency can be improved by microlenses that
are fabricated and aligned to pixels, to focus the light to
the pixels, instead of uniform illumination. It is also pos-
sible to integrate polysilicon ambient light sensors which
control backlight intensity. Both techniques reduce power
consumption, which is a critical issue in portable devices.
Direct writing is being considered for both displays
and solar cells. Patterning processes using lithography and
laser direct write are contrasted in Figure 37.5. Laser tool
cost is in the $10 million range, which may sound expen-
sive, but the lithography tool price for 42 inch displays is
also very expensive. The resist dispensing tool, and devel-
opment, etch and stripping wet benches for large panes,
are costly, too. Additionally, chemical consumption in the
wet processing of 5 m2 panes is formidable. Through-
puts of laser systems are highly variable, depending on
ﬁlm thickness and etch/ablation rates. There is always the
possibility to use parallel laser beams, and in fact eight-
beam systems exist. Writing times of 10–100 seconds per
42 inch display, or 100–1000 seconds per mother pane,
make laser systems competitive in certain applications,
like plasma display ITO electrode patterning.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 445]
464
Introduction to Microfabrication
glass substrate
#5
#4
#3
#2
#1
a-Si
oxide
nitride
metal
ITO
Figure 37.4
Bottom gate TFT process: top view, cross-section of a single transistor and the ﬁve photomasks. Adapted
from Ukai (2007)
resist spin/bake
exposure
development
etching
resist stripping
cleaning
laser direct write
cleaning
Figure 37.5
Lithographic patterning vs. direct write
37.7 Solar Cells
The solar cell industry (also known as PV, for photo-
voltaics) is still dominated by crystalline silicon cells
(Figures 1.14, 24.9, 25.2) as of this writing, but thin-ﬁlm
solar cells (Figure 24.10) are rapidly catching up. In 2008
multicrystalline and single crystalline silicon accounted
for over 80% of all solar cells.
Solar cells are the ultimate low-cost devices. CZ
silicon can be used for solar cells, but multicrystalline
(MC) silicon is dominant. It is made by casting 200 kg
of electronic-grade silicon into a crucible and solidifying
from the bottom up. The crucible is then broken and the
silicon ingot sawn ﬁrst into 25 rectangular 5 or 6 inch
blocks, which are wire sawn to square wafers. This is
good for ﬁlling space: round wafers leave empty spaces
between them. Solar wafers are thin (e.g., 200 μm) in
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 446]
Economics of Microfabrication
465
order to make more wafers out of the same silicon ingot.
MC wafers cost one-tenth of similar-sized CZ wafers.
There
is
intensive
research
ongoing
to
develop
cheaper silicon puriﬁcation methods. The chlorosilane
gas
phase
puriﬁcation
with
distillation
and
CVD
conversion described by Eqs. 4.2–4.4 is extremely
efﬁcient but also energy consuming. Starting from
upgraded metallurgical-grade silicon (UMG) which has
typically metallic impurities at 10 ppm levels, a simple
plasma torch method can purify that to sub-ppm levels.
Microfabrication technologies are used for perfor-
mance,
like
thermal
oxidation
for
passivation
and
PECVD
nitride
antireﬂective
coatings,
but
cheaper
techniques like phosphoric acid diffusion sources and
screen
printing
of
conductive
pastes
are
used
for
cost minimization. Another reason for screen-printed
metallization is current density: it is easy to screen-print
thick conductors (10 μm), while PDV metals are limited
to a micrometer or so.
Light capture can be improved by nitride antireﬂection
coatings (Figure 25.2). Texturing can also be used to
reduce reﬂections: in Figure 1.14 lithography and KOH
etching were used to create inverted pyramid structures,
but random pyramids formed by non-lithographic KOH
etching serve almost as well, and eliminate photomask,
resist
processing
and
lithography
equipment
cost.
Figure 37.6 shows a cross-section of an interdigitated
back contact cell. It has 100% collection efﬁciency on
the front side because all metallization is on the wafer
back side. The limitation with this design is the need for
high-quality silicon, because the charge carriers have to
diffuse all through the wafer before they are collected at
the electrodes.
Solar cell linewidths are relaxed, in the 50 μm range.
This enables cheap mask technologies and screen printing.
Some solar cells are made completely without lithogra-
phy (Buried collector cell, Figure 24.9, is laser patterned).
Another lithography reduction technique is to ﬁre metal
through a dielectric: no contact holes are deﬁned, but the
metal is patterned. A ﬁring (annealing) step drives the
metal through the dielectric where metal lines are pat-
terned. Yet another way to eliminate lithography is to
make point contacts by laser doping and to contact those
by the laser ﬁring of metallization.
Laser processing has found various other applications in
solar cell production: laser grooves (Figure 24.9) enable
narrow (and deep) metallization which minimizes front
surface area lost to metallization. Diffusion is an immer-
sion process and the edges of the wafer are also doped.
This creates a current path that has to be eliminated, and
laser cutting is used routinely in this edge isolation.
Light absorption can also be increased by fabricating
tandem and multiple cells: using different materials in
combination can increase the use of the spectrum: one
layer is more sensitive to IR wavelengths, the other to
visible light. Ga0.35In0.65P/Ga0.83In0.17As/Ge triple junc-
tion solar cells (similar to Figure 6.2) have shown 40%
efﬁciency when run under 400× concentrated sunlight.
Single junction crystalline silicon cells can reach 22% ef-
ﬁciency at best (the theoretical limit for a single junction
cell is 29%), multicrystalline silicon cells have record efﬁ-
ciencies around 17% and thin-ﬁlm cells around 10%. Note
that cells may show 22% efﬁciency for 1 cm2 area when
fabricated in a research lab, but when the same device
is mass produced on large wafers, using cost-optimized
tools and processes, the efﬁciency is probably only 17%.
Silicon nitride
Silicon oxide
n+ front surface field
p+ diffusion
n+ diffusion
Metal finger (point contacts to n+)
Metal finger (point contacts to p+)
n-type base
Silicon oxide
Figure 37.6
Interdigitated back contact cell. Reproduced from Neuhaus and M¨unzer (2007) (Creative Commons)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 447]
466
Introduction to Microfabrication
While IC makers can differentiate their products by
adding new features, and in memories speed can be used
to command a higher price, all solar cells produce ex-
actly the same ﬁnal outcome, power. There is very little
in competition except cost per watt. This can improved
by increasing efﬁciency, through better optical capture of
photons, higher conversion to charge carriers, and reduced
losses of those carriers before reaching the electrodes.
These translate to light conﬁnement structures and low-
loss cover glass.
The main metric for solar cells is the cost of a cell for
peak wattage (Wp). This approached 1$ per Wp in 2009,
down from $2 in 2002 and $8 in 1992. The solar electric-
ity system cost is roughly double the cell cost: it includes
mechanical structures, inverters, cabling, possibly batter-
ies, etc., and these are highly system size dependent. Solar
irradiation on the Earth’s surface is about 1 kW/m2 under
the best conditions and 20% conversion efﬁciency then
translates to 200 W/m2. But the sun does not shine 24/7,
and 3000 hours per year is a reasonable estimate for sunny
climates, while much less is available further north. As-
suming a lifetime of 20 years (different sources assume
15–25 years), the cost of solar electricity is 5–10 cents per
kWh. The cost of capital must also be added and annual
maintenance costs are estimated to be 1% of investment
cost. This is a very rough calculation and it is valid for
dollar cents and euro cents alike.
Coal-ﬁred power plants can produce electricity at about
5–10 cents per kWh but local tariffs for consumers in-
clude grid costs and taxes, bringing the price up to 30
cents per kWh, making solar power already economically
viable in some regions. If the trends of solar cell per-
formance are any guide, solar electricity should become
competitive with coal-ﬁred electricity around 2013–2017.
37.8 Magnetic Data Storage
Magnetic data storage uses microfabrication techniques
for many of its devices. The write head is an induc-
tive microfabricated coil, and the read head is a complex
magnetic multilayer stack (Figure 7.19). A MEMS posi-
tioner (Figure 30.22) keeps the read/write head on track.
Scaling of storage density in the last 50 years has been
impressive: in 1960 it was 10 kbit/in2, in 1980 it was
10 Mbit/in2, in 2000 it had reached 1 Gbit/in2 and in 2010
it is 100 Gbit/in2.
Thin-ﬁlm read/write head (TFH) fabrication for mag-
netic data storage shares surprisingly many aspects with
IC fabrication, especially the steady growth in the number
of process steps, the number of thin ﬁlms (up to 20) and
the steady (and very steep) decrease in linewidths: from
1990 to 2000 the minimum linewidth in TFH fabrication
103
102
10
0
$/MB
10−1
10−2
10−3
10−4
1985 1990 1995 2000
2005
Year
2010 2015
2020
HDD
NAND flash
Figure 37.7
Memory bit cost development, hard disk
drive (HDD) vs. NAND ﬂash memory. Reproduced from
Burr (2008) by permission of IBM Technical Journals
came down from 5 to 0.5 μm, and in 2010 it is equal to
IC linewidths at around 50 nm. This means that hard disk
drive memory density increases faster than semiconduc-
tor memory density. This linewidth reduction goes hand
in hand with cost/bit price development, which is pictured
in Figure 37.7. The cost of a stored bit on a hard disk drive
is about 1–10% of that of ﬂash memory storage.
The thin-ﬁlm head consists of two parts: a giant mag-
netoresistance (GMR) sensor read head and an inductive
coil write head (Figure 37.8). Film thicknesses in GMR
heads are very demanding: the thinnest ﬁlms are about
1 nm thick. The whole stack consisting of 10 layers totals
less than 50 nm thick. Sputtering systems for TFHs are
equipped with multiple targets. What is more, each one
must have approximately the same deposition time, oth-
erwise the in-line system would be choked by one thick
layer. Instead of increasing deposition rate, three identical
modules can be used, to deposit a third of the thickness,
for example 5 nm each. All the ﬁlms must be done in
one sputtering system because atmospheric oxygen would
destroy subnanometer ﬁlms.
Thickness control is, however, only part of the prob-
lem with GMR heads. Interface sharpness needs to be
maintained during the 10 year lifespan, so no mixing is
allowed during either processing or use. Smoothness is
also paramount when nanometer and subnanometer ﬁlms
are made. As discussed previously, thin-ﬁlm properties
are thickness dependent, and for example the PtMn an-
tiferromagnetic layer has to be at least 15 nm thick in
order to have the desired pinning effect. New materials
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 448]
Economics of Microfabrication
467
Pole Width
Top Yoke
Coil
Top Shield
MR Width
Gap Width
Bottom Shield
GMR Read Sensor
Figure 37.8
The read/write head of a HDD, with GMR
read head and inductive coil write head. Reproduced from
Childress and Fontana (2005), copyright 2005, by permis-
sion of Elsevier
will probably be needed when thinner layers are required
in the future.
The density of magnetic recording depends on two fac-
tors: track pitch, or how closely neighboring tracks can
be written, and GMR track gap, or how thin the magnetic
read head can be made (Figure 37.9). The actual magnetic
structure is about 30 nm thick, but shields on both sides
take up space. The sensor height is taken as half-pitch.
Production volumes for magnetic memory disks are
huge: about a billion per year. This is reﬂected in through-
put requirements for equipment: 100 WPH would be good
for a IC sputtering system, but in magnetic media disk
production 1000 WPH is more typical. Fortunately, the
magnetic layers are rather thin, with a total thickness be-
low 200 nm for perpendicular recording, as was shown in
Figure 7.18.
One future development in magnetic media is expected
to be patterned media: each bit is stored in a magnetic area
of its own, eliminating interference from neighboring bits
which are present in continuous ﬁlm. Currently there are
some 60 grains for a bit, which equals a grain size smaller
than 10 nm. A leading candidate for patterning the disks
is NIL (see Chapter 18). Resolution of NIL is extremely
good: as long as a master can be obtained, NIL can stamp
even 5 nm patterns. In patterned media applications no
alignment is required, which reduces the cost of a NIL
system considerably. But the master fabrication remains
problematic: writing a terabit (1012) master may take a
month with an electron beam.
write
width
track
gap
track pitch
shield
shield
pole 1
pole 2
GMR sensor
= read width
gap
gap
Figure 37.9
Three lanes of data with the head overlaid.
Redrawn from Childress and Fontana (2005)
37.9 Short Term and Long Term
Semiconductor demand is inelastic in the short run, and
this explains some counter-intuitive aspects of price
swings: often prices go up hand in hand with volumes.
When the PC or cell phone market is strong, demand
surges and chip prices go up because ramping up chip
production takes time. Downswings show inelasticity
as well: when for example memory chip prices go
down, there is no sizable upsurge in demand. This price
reduction can be due to the fact that the chip is nearing
the end of its lifecycle, and nobody wants to increase
usage of a soon-to-be-extinct chip.
But on a more fundamental level it has more to do
with long design lifecycles: it is not possible to rapidly
switch chips on a whim, therefore a certain inertia is built
into the system. These are short-term effects, but in the
long run costs and prices do follow predictable trends,
like memory cost per bit and solar cell peak watt cost
falling 25% annually.
37.10 Exercises
1. The investment for a large-volume CMOS wafer
fab was $1 billion (year 2000, 0.25 μm technology,
200 mm wafer size). Fab running costs are $1 million
a day. Assuming 30 000 wafer starts per month
(WPM), what is the cost of the ﬁnished silicon?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 449]
468
Introduction to Microfabrication
2. Calculate the mask cost contribution to silicon area
price if 0.25 μm CMOS with 25 photomasks at $3000
per mask plate is used and each mask set is used to
fabricate 50/500/5000/50000 wafers?
3. Maskless lithography by direct writing is expensive
because it is very slow, but there is no photomask
cost. Assuming identical capital investment ($10 mil-
lion) and running costs ($1 million a year) for both
optical and direct write lithography systems (crude
approximations), and 100 WPH for optical and 1
WPH for DW on 300 mm wafers, what would be
the number of wafers where DW becomes compet-
itive with optical lithography for 90 nm CMOS if the
mask set cost is assumed to be $500 000?
4. If a multilevel metallization process consists of 10
layers, how many oxide plasma etchers are needed to
etch contact holes if the oxide etch rate is 1 μm/min,
in a 100 000 WPM fab?
5. How many LPCVD tubes are needed in a 30 000
WPM fab if the process has ﬁve polysilicon layers?
6. If we assume an average big fab to have 50 000 WPM
capacity, how many such fabs are there in the world?
7. How many silicon crystal pulling systems are there
in the world?
8. What is the price per kilogram (or carat price) of thin-
ﬁlm diamond if PECVD capital cost is $500 000 and
running costs are $100 000 a year? Take 10 nm/min
for the deposition rate on 150 mm wafer size in a
single wafer system.
9. What is the bit density of the system shown in
Figure 37.9.
10. TFT itself takes up very little area compared to pixels,
and the transistor packing density increase offered by
self-alignment is not important. What are the beneﬁts
of self-alignment in TFT fabrication for displays?
References and Related Reading
Beaucarne, G. et al. (2006) Epitaxial thin-ﬁlm Si solar cells,
Thin Solid Films, 92, 511–512 533–542.
Berglund, C.N., C.M. Weber and P. Gabella (2009) Bench-
marking the productivity of photomask manufacturers, IEEE
Trans. Semicond. Manuf ., 22, 499–506.
Burr, G.W. (2008) Overview of candidate device technologies
for storage-class memory, IBM J. Res. Dev., 52, 449–464.
Childress, J.R. and R.E. Fontana (2005) Magnetic recording
read head sensor technology, C.R. Physique, 6, 997–1012.
Degoulange, J. et al. (2008) Multicrystalline silicon wafers pre-
pared from upgraded metallurgical feedstock, Sol. Energy
Mater. Sol. Cells, 92, 1269–1273.
Doering, R. and Y. Nishi (2001) Limits of integrated circuit
manufacturing, Proc. IEEE, 89, 375.
Garg, D. et al. (2005) An economic analysis of the deposi-
tion of electrochromic WO3 via sputtering or plasma en-
hanced chemical vapor deposition, Mater. Sci. Eng., B119,
224–231.
Hamakawa, Y. (ed.) (2004) Thin-Film Solar Cells: Next Gen-
eration Photovoltaics and Its Applications, Springer.
Lawes,
R.A.
(2007)
Manufacturing
costs
for
microsys-
tems/MEMS
using
high
aspect
ratio
microfabrication
techniques, Microsyst.Technol., 13, 85–95.
Leonovich, G.A. et al. (1995) Integrated cost and productiv-
ity learning in CMOS semiconductor manufacturing, IBM J.
Res. Dev., 39, 201.
Liehr, M. and G.W. Rubloff (1994) Concepts in competitive
microelectronics manufacturing, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B12,
2727.
Mack, C. (2007) Fundamental Principles of Optical Lithog-
raphy, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Neuhaus, D.-H. and A. M¨unzer (2007) Industrial silicon wafer
solar cells, Adv. OptoElectron., 24521.
SEMI, Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International,
http://www.semi.org.
Saito, M. (2009) Global semiconductor industry trend VIDM
versus foundry approaches, Proc. IEEE, 97, 1658–1660.
Suzuki, T. (2006) Flat panel displays for ubiquitous product ap-
plications and related impurity doping technologies, J. Appl.
Phys., 99, 111101.
Terris, B.D. and T. Thomson (2005) Nanofabricated and self-
assembled magnetic structures as data storage media, J. Phys.
D: Appl. Phys., 38, R199–R222.
Ukai,
Y.
(2007)
TFT-LCD
manufacturing
technology
-
current status and future prospects, International Workshop
on the Physics of Semiconductor Devices (IWPSD), pp.
29–34. VLSI Research: https://www.vlsiresearch.com/more/
CompanyBackground.html?rdr=about_vlsi
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 450]
38
Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
This chapter deals with the past, present and future of
silicon integrated circuits, concentrating on CMOS logic
and memory, which are the driving force of scaling to
smaller linewidths and higher device densities. Device
physics,
materials,
fabrication
processes,
reliability
issues and manufacturability are discussed, along with
trends, limits, opportunities and threats to continued
scaling.
Early transistors could be made with just ﬁve elements,
Si, B, P, O, Al; fabrication of 0.18 μm CMOS uses 14 el-
ements. In addition to the aforementioned elements, N,
As, Ti, W, Co, Ta, Cu, C and F are used. Some of these
materials have been adopted easily, like the addition of
a TiW barrier underneath aluminum, or n-type doping by
arsenic instead of phosphorus, which were implemented
with the same equipment as the older versions. Introduc-
ing tungsten plugs necessitated a novel CVD equipment,
which was a major departure from previous metalliza-
tion schemes which were all based on PVD techniques.
CMP was another paradigm shift, a completely new way
of doing things, not an evolution of SOG and etchback
planarization. Copper metallization was again a major
transition, but because of the experience with oxide and
tungsten CMP, its adoption was made easier. New barrier
metals had to be invented, though, to eliminate contami-
nation risks.
Device structures have been intimately involved with
new materials and tools. The CMOS self-aligned polysil-
icon gate was a major change, because both gate material
and doping technology changed. Silicides were also pro-
found changes because new material and new process
technology, namely rapid thermal annealing, were intro-
duced hand in hand. Strained silicon wafers, deposited
gate oxides like HfO2 and metal gates are the current
major changes being implemented. Taken together, these
developments, both revolutionary and evolutionary, have
contributed to the realization of microchips with a billion
devices.
38.1 From Transistor to Integrated
Circuit
Transistor fabrication in the 1950s was crystallography
and metallurgy, not microfabrication. Junction formation
was an alloying process that does not share many features
with modern transistor fabrication. Pallets of indium, a
p-type dopant, were attached to both sides of an n-type
semiconductor piece, the diffusion step was performed,
and metal wires attached to the two p-type and one n-type
regions; voil`a, the pnp transistor was ready.
The modern key concepts of microfabrication, namely
diffusion masking by an oxide layer, photolithographic
patterning, wet etching of the oxide and the use of
evaporated aluminum as a conductor, emerged in the
mid 1950s mostly at Bell Laboratories and at Fairchild
Semiconductor. These techniques were put together
in what is known as the planar process for transistor
fabrication, by Jean Hoerni.
The integrated circuit was invented twice, simultane-
ously and independently. Jack Kilby of Texas Instruments
demonstrated integrated circuits in 1958 and ﬁled for a
patent in early 1959. However, Kilby used germanium
transistors and gold wire bonds for connecting the devices.
Six months later Robert Noyce at Fairchild based his in-
vention on the planar process, using evaporated aluminum
for metallization and silicon dioxide as an insulator, and
realized the ﬁrst device that became the forerunner of
current ICs.
There were many objections to ICs at the beginning of
the 1960s, as Jack Kilby (1976) reminiscences:
1. Electronics designs would become hard to change once
the circuits had been etched onto silicon.
2. Electronics engineers would be out of work because
all design would shift to IC manufacturers.
3. Transistors are low-power devices which are suitable
only for some special applications.
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 451]
470
Introduction to Microfabrication
4. ICs do not use optimum materials: NiCr resistors are
better than silicon resistors, and Mylar capacitors are
superior to oxide capacitors.
5. The yield of transistors is low (e.g., 80%) and if, say,
20 of them are made on a single chip, the combined
yield will be miniscule.
Argument number 1 still holds today: custom circuits es-
pecially take a long time to design: one year is typical,
and changes are hard to make. This is, however, a small
price to be paid for the enormous gains in speed and
functionality. We now know that argument number 2 was
groundless as ICs propelled the electronics industry into
supergrowth.
Argument 3 was wrong; some people had seen it al-
ready in the 1950s: Bob Wallace of Bell Labs stressed:
Gentlemen, you’ve got it all wrong! The advantage
of the transistor is that it is inherently a small-size
and low-power device. This means that you can pack
a large number of them in a small space without ex-
cessive heat generation and achieve low propagation
delays. And that’s what we need for logic applica-
tions. The signiﬁcance of the transistor is not that it
can replace vacuum tube but that it can do things
that the vacuum tube could never do! (Ross 1997)
Many MEMS and nanodevices today are miniaturized
versions of existing devices. Sometimes smaller size is
useful because it results in, for example, smaller power
consumption or higher speed. But it is equally important
to look for new applications where new physical phe-
nomena, new combinations of speed and power, can be
utilized, or where macroscopic counterparts do not exist,
or where the scale economies of microfabrication have
not yet been utilized.
The whole can be more than the sum of its parts. The
very concept of integration seems to have escaped the
attention of supporters of argument number 4. ICs paved
the way for more powerful electronic systems. And the
savings in assembly costs quickly more than compensated
the higher cost of ICs.
Argument 5 was mathematically valid, but it was based
on the technology of its day, and it did not anticipate the
tremendous strides in microfabrication technologies. The
success of ICs has been dependent on the fact that, in spite
of continuous miniaturization and complexiﬁcation of the
manufacturing process, the yield of individual transistors
on ICs has improved dramatically. In 1960 the yield of
50% for individual devices resulted in a 3% yield for a
ﬁve-transistor IC. Today, in 2010, chips with a billion
devices are manufactured with about 90% yields, which
translates to practically 100% yield for individual devices,
and this is for 32 nm devices, compared to the 30 μm
devices of 1960. Integrated microﬂuidic systems face a
similar situation: while pumps, valves and mixers may
have reasonable yields, systems consisting of many such
devices have rather low yields.
The early proponents of the IC had to balance between
two options:
1. Suitable only for price-insensitive applications like
military or space technology.
2. Will be cheap in the future once the technology ma-
tures.
Early growth was of course along the ﬁrst argument be-
cause somebody had to pay for the chips, but at the end of
the 1960s the second argument was ﬁnally realized, and
the IC became a household term.
38.2 Historical Development of IC
Manufacturing
In addition to scaling the lateral and vertical dimensions,
a multitude of other reﬁnements have taken place in IC
manufacturing during the past 50 years. These involve
new materials for both metallization and dielectrics, new
equipment designs, new control measurements and in-
spections tools, new contamination control strategies as
well as new devices, Table 38.1.
Lithography has evolved from 1× contact/proximity
printers to 1× projection tools to 5× step-and-repeat
systems
to 4× step-and-scan machines.
Batch wet
etching has been replaced by single wafer plasma
etching. Thermal diffusion has been replaced by ion
implantation.
Some
processes
have
remained
fairly
unchanged, like wet cleaning and thermal oxidation.
The industry has been quite conservative, with very few
radical changes in any one technology generation.
In the 1960s practically everything in IC production
was proprietary: the product, process ﬂow, process recipe
and even process equipment were developed in-house
and kept as trade secrets. Then equipment manufacturers
emerged
and
started
offering
everybody
the
same
tools. The recipe remained proprietary. Then equipment
manufacturers started selling not only the equipment
but also the recipe. Some equipment manufacturers are
even selling uptime, not hardware but availability. Little
by little as the technology matured, even process ﬂow
became a commodity, and only the product differentiated
manufacturers. This opened up the market for both
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 452]
Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
471
Table 38.1
Historical development of IC processes
1960s–1970s
30 μm to 3 μm linewidths
Proximity and projection 1× lithography at
λ = 436 nm
Fewer than 10 lithography steps
Wet etching
Doping by furnace diffusion
Batch processing
(Pure) aluminum metallization; one level of metal
Si, O, N, P, B, Al needed
Wafer size increase from 1 inch to 3 inches
1980s
3 μm to 1 μm linewidths
Step-and-repeat lithography at λ = 365 nm
introduced at 1.2 μm
10–15 lithography steps
Plasma etching replaces wet etching for critical
steps
Ion implantation for doping
Single wafer equipment emerging, ﬁrst in plasma
etching
Two levels of metallization
SOG and resist etchback planarization
Silicides introduced
New elements: As (n-doping), Cu (in Al:Cu alloy),
Ti, W (in TiW barrier)
100/125/150 mm wafer size
1990s
Linewidths 1 μm to 0.25 μm
20–25 lithography steps for advanced CMOS
High-density plasma (HDP) equipment for etching
and deposition
W plugs by CVD with TiN barrier
CMP oxide planarization
Cu metallization introduced in damascene structure
Number of metal levels increasing up to seven in
logic circuits
150/200 mm wafer size
2000s
Linewidths 0.25 μm to 45 nm
30 lithography steps for advanced CMOS
Step-and-scan lithography with λ = 248 nm
introduced at 0.25 μm
Phase shift masks (PSMs) adopted at 0.18 μm
New elements: Co (in CoSi2), F (in SiOF), Ta (in
TaNSi barrier for Cu)
Copper becoming standard for high-performance
circuits
Low-k dielectrics introduced in multilevel
metallization
200/300 mm wafer size
Table 38.1
(continued)
2010s
Linewidths 32, 22 and 15 nm
Lithography DUV immersion 193 nm, maybe EUV
High-k deposited gate dielectrics with EOTs <1 nm
Metal gates, different for NMOS and PMOS
Copper metallization in commodity chips
Vertical and multigate devices
Strain engineering
Over 10 levels of metallization in logic circuits
Wafer size 300 mm, maybe transition to 450 mm
foundries and fabless companies. Now even the product
is beginning to be commoditized: companies are selling
IP blocks (for intellectual property); designs can be
traded.
The commoditization of process ﬂow has been car-
ried furthest in CMOS, and foundries are CMOS houses.
The cost of process development increases with every
technology generation, and companies form joint ven-
tures to share the development risk. This reduces the
number of independent CMOS process ﬂows. There are
differences, of course: bulk and SOI processes, aluminum
and copper metallization, cobalt and nickel silicides. The
same linewidth CMOS can often be found both as a low-
power version for battery-powered operation and as a
high-performance version for the desktop. The main dif-
ference is in gate oxide thickness: slightly thicker gate
oxide in the low-power version (2.4 vs. 1.3 nm in 130 nm
CMOS) reduces leakage currents 100–1000-fold, while
maximum frequency goes down by only 50%.
Adding features like analog capability (resistors, capac-
itors, inductors), bipolars (for RF operation at very high
frequencies) and embedded memory for programmability
is done in a modular fashion: the basic CMOS process
ﬂow is kept as it is, and the additions are implemented
in modules. Systems with embedded memory cannot be
optimized for both logic and memory, so, depending on
whether the system is memory or logic dominated, sac-
riﬁces are made in the minority part, and performance is
optimized according to the requirements of the majority
device type.
38.3 MOS Scaling
Linewidth scaling has been very predictable, and it cap-
tures most of the public’s imagination of scaling, together
with memory capacity increase. But practically every as-
pect of CMOS is being scaled and modiﬁed constantly.
The schematic of Figure 38.1 shows the main elements of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 453]
472
Introduction to Microfabrication
Silicided 
elevated S/D
Poly/metal gate
Stacked DRAM 
capacitor
Trench DRAM 
capacitor
STI
S/D junction and 
extension
Channel doping 
and strain
Spacer
STI
Figure 38.1
Schematic of a modern transistor
MOS and DRAM. Aspect ratios are increasing in DRAM:
both stacked designs and trench designs call for extreme
aspect ratios. Shallow junctions necessitate small thermal
budgets, and selective epitaxial elevated source/drain ar-
eas need ultimate surface preparation control.
Gate oxide thickness used to relate to gate length as
about L/50 for a long time. Oxide and later nitrided ox-
ides were used, but the end is in sight for two reasons:
ﬁrst, tunneling currents through thin oxides increase leak-
age to unacceptable levels; second, boron from the doped
polysilicon gate diffuses through the oxide and dopes the
channel. Deposited oxides like ALD HfO2 are being im-
plemented, but there is most often silicon dioxide between
the high-k oxide and silicon, for example 0.4 nm thick.
This is partly inevitable because oxide forms when oxygen
is present, and partly it has to do with the interface qual-
ity: the scattering of channel electrons at the interface can
be minimized by SiO2, leading to higher channel mo-
bility. Then again, it has to be 0.4 nm in a controllable
fashion.
Source/drain junction depths (xj) were scaled with
linewidths as L/5 for decades, but more recently it
has been difﬁcult to scale down xj as aggressively as
linewidth. Junction formation involves low-energy ion
implantation together with annealing. Damage anneal
times have become shorter and shorter, with millisecond
ﬂash anneals now in use and microsecond laser anneals
being studied. In order to minimize diffusion, some
non-activated
dopants
and
some
remaining
damage
may have to be tolerated, but this leads to increased
leakage currents. In addition to junction depth, junction
abruptness is an optimization parameter.
Gate linewidth is considerably less than the technol-
ogy node might indicate. Lithographic half-pitch, which
describes the lithography capability, and gate width are
therefore two separate concepts. Narrow gates are made
by resist trimming (Figure 10.17). The polysilicon gate is
being replaced by metal gates, or, to be more precise, by
multilayer polysilicon/metal stacks. This introduces many
etching problems: some of the metal halides may not be
volatile enough, leading to micromasking and contami-
nation. Gate etch selectivity against the nanometer-thick
gate oxide must be extremely high, and multistep etching
is essential. In situ interferometry can be used to mon-
itor the remaining gate thickness in real time, so that
high-rate etching can be switched to a high-selectivity
end point step. The allowed variation for gate linewidth
is 12%, but this includes contributions from lithography,
resist trimming and gate etching.
With shallower junctions, silicide formation has be-
come limited, with 10 nm silicon consumption reserved
for silicide. NiSi is replacing CoSi2, because less sili-
con is consumed in nickel silicidation. NiSi can also be
formed at lower temperatures, with a 13 ohm/sq design
value for silicide sheet resistance. Contact resistance at
the silicon/silicide interface is a key issue, with a target
value for contact resistivity of 7 × 10−8 ohm-cm2 for a
45 nm technology node.
One solution to the shallow junction contacting prob-
lem is to make elevated junctions. This involves selective
epitaxial growth on S/D areas. Silicide thickness can then
be chosen irrespective of junction depth. Selective epitaxy
is a difﬁcult step, however. Another solution to silicide
formation is to use SiGe on S/D areas: it is more easier
silicided.
In earlier generations pre-gate cleaning was the ulti-
mate cleaning challenge, but now post-gate cleaning is
becoming more critical. This cleaning must remove metal-
lic residues from metal gate etching, while not attacking
the nanometer-thick oxide. Spacer etching ends against
the thin gate oxide again, and preferably it should not con-
sume it. If it does, cleaning before epitaxy for elevated
S/D becomes critical because the etching has compro-
mised surface quality.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 454]
Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
473
Oxide and silicon loss in cleaning are limited to 0.3 nm
per step in 45 nm node. The old cleaning methods relied
on etching away some silicon to undercut contaminants
(Figure 12.4) but clearly this can no longer be done. To
reduce etching, more dilute solutions are being used. In-
stead of ammonia/peroxide (SC-1), ammonia/water might
be used, and instead of HCl/peroxide (SC-2), dilute HCl
clean can be used. Organics removal is based more and
more on ozonated water and not sulfuric acid. Photore-
sist stripping would preferably be done in wet solutions
to eliminate plasma damage, but resists are often hard-
ened in plasmas and implantation and must be removed
by plasma. However, in addition to oxygen, new plasma
chemistries are being developed, and completely new ap-
proaches are being explored, like cryogenic aerosols.
In order to implement materials which cannot withstand
front-end high-temperature steps, a replacement gate has
been formulated (Figure 38.2). Oxide or nitride serves
in place of the metal gate during the high-temperature
steps. After completion of S/D implant activation anneals,
the ﬁrst dielectric layer is deposited and planarized. The
dummy gate is etched away, gate dielectric is deposited,
and the ﬁnal metal gate is deposited (followed by CMP).
The replacement gate makes return of the aluminum gate
possible, but refractory metals are more likely candidates.
The added process complexity is quite considerable, and
oxidation/oxide deposition into the groove left by dummy
gate etching is by no means easy or straightforward.
With 3 billion transistors in graphics processors, the
design complexity is enormous, and the same applies
to device testing. CMOS was originally a solution to
power consumption: CMOS logic consumes energy only
during switching, but the sheer number of devices means
Source
Dummy gate
Drain
STI
1
3
CMP
2
PMD 
(TEOS)
6
CMP
5
Metal gate (AI or W)
4
Barrier metal (TiN)
Gate insulator (SiO2 or Ta2O5)
Figure 38.2
Replacement gate process. Reproduced from
Yagishita et al. (2001) by permission of IEEE
that excessive amounts of waste heat are generated in
advanced chips. Chip cooling has two elements: hotspot
cooling and overall cooling. Waste heat powers are
approaching
200 W
in
high-performance
processors,
whereas processors for battery-powered devices consume
10 W or even less than a watt.
38.4 Departure from Planar
Bulk Technology
Historically, transistor intrinsic speed has increased 17%
annually (τ = CV /I , where C is capacitance per microm-
eter gate length, V the operating voltage and I the drain
current). This trend is now coming to an end, as far as
planar bulk silicon devices are concerned. For SOI and
3D transistors the trend is expected to continue, maybe
until 2020. After that transistor development is expected
to continue, but probably the historical pace cannot be
continued unless dramatic departures from current MOS
offer room for future speed increases.
When MOS transistors are made extremely small, the
ability of the gate to control the current in the channel is
diminished. This can be overcome if two (or more) gates
are used instead of one, as shown in Figure 38.3. Fabri-
cation of these devices is not obvious, and the two-gate
version can exist in various conﬁgurations, with the gates
parallel to the silicon surface or vertical. One approach
is FINFET: the channel is formed in an etched piece of
silicon, and gate oxide is grown on three sides of the ﬁn.
This is a formidable etching problem: the quality of the
sidewall has to be good enough so that nanometer-thick
oxide can be deposited on it.
Another technology for making multiple gate devices
is tunnel epitaxy. The SiGe layer is selectively etched
away to create a tunnel, which can be reﬁlled by epitax-
ial silicon. Selective epitaxial growth (SEG) and epitaxial
lateral overgrowth (ELO) processes are used, as shown in
Figure 38.4. In addition to the sacriﬁcial dummy chan-
nel, dummy gates made of nitride were used originally,
1
2
3
Buried oxide
4
5
G
G
G
G
G
S
S
S
S
S
D
D
D
D
D
Figure 38.3
SOI MOSFETs with: 1, one gate; 2, two
gates; 3, three gates; 4, four gates; 5, extended three gates.
Reproduced from Park and Colinge (2002) by permission
of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 455]
474
Introduction to Microfabrication
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Nitride
Nitride
Nitride
Nitride
Nitride
Nitride
Tunnel
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Silicon substrate
Silicon substrate
Silicon substrate
Seed
window
Gate
Gate
Source
Channel
Drain
Figure 38.4
Selective epitaxial growth (SEG) to fabricate double gate MOS: epitaxy proceeds laterally in the tunnel
once a suitable seeding surface is available. Adapted from Wong et al. (1997) by permission of IBM Technical Journals
later replaced by the gate proper. CMP was also needed
to planarize after SEG.
The MOS saturation current is given by
Idsat = WCinvμ(Vg −Vth)2
2L
(38.1)
The ﬁrst term is determined by lithography; oxide thick-
ness determines inversion capacitance; Vt is a doping-
level issue; and Vg is related to operating voltage and
power consumption. The mobility (μ) is the key to chan-
nel engineering. Strain affects charge carrier mobility and
there are many ways to exert strain. Global strain can be
implemented by SiGe epitaxy: as discussed in connection
with epitaxial growth (Section 6.1), Si1−xGex alloys have
lattice constants larger than silicon and they are under
compressive stress, and consequently silicon on Si1−xGex
will be under tensile stress. This tensile stress introduces
an energy split in the conduction band of silicon, which
leads to mobility enhancement, for electrons by a factor
of two, for holes by a factor or four (depending on ger-
manium content, doping level and ﬁeld strength). Higher
operating frequency can thus be obtained from MOSFETs
without lithographic scaling.
Local strain can also be produced by nitride spacers or
some other thin ﬁlms. Using two different nitride depo-
sition steps enables the even tailoring of stress indepen-
dently for NMOS and PMOS. Wafers of different crystal
orientations behave differently with regard to strain, and
<110> is considered a candidate material because of its
high hole mobility. However, electron mobility in <110>
is detrimentally reduced due to strain.
Implementing new features like strain necessitates new
measurements. The general outline given in Chapter 2
will apply: the methods must be considered based on
many criteria. Spatial resolution for localized strain mea-
surement, strain sensitivity, sample preparation needs (if
any) and strain gradient measurement capability must be
considered. Many methods are available, with different
features: wafer curvature measurement is very sensitive
and requires no sample preparation, but is applicable to
global strain only. X-ray diffraction can be carried out
on a 100 μm scale, is non-destructive, and does not re-
quire sample preparation, while nanobeam diffraction can
resolve 100 nm areas; it is applicable to local strain mea-
surements, but is sample destructive.
The same performance-enhancing techniques of silicon
MOSFETs can mostly be applied to TFTs as well. For
instance, LDD structures for better short channel behav-
ior can be made, with a few extra masking steps. Vertical
TFTs are also possible, as shown in Figure 38.5. Channel
length is now determined by a-SiNx:H deposited thick-
ness, not by lithography.
38.5 Memories
DRAMs are capacitors and capacitance is proportional
to area and dielectric constant and inversely propor-
tional to dielectric thickness. The ﬁrst designs were
polysilcon–insulator–semiconductor
(PIS)
capacitors
(Figure 38.6). The same polysilicon served as the
transistor gate and capacitor top plate. The bottom
plate was a diffused silicon area. Initially DRAM
scaling involved area scaling with insulator thickness
reduction to keep the capacitance unchanged. Planar
design continued for another 10 years but with a
polysilicon–insulator–polysilicon (PIP) structure. This
gave more freedom to design the DRAM capacitor
because the capacitor dielectric could be optimized
irrespective of the MOS gate.
At the end of the 1980s, 3D structures came on the
scene: in order to keep capacitance reasonably high, area
could not be reduced any further, but by going to 3D
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 456]
Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
475
Drain
Drain
Cr
Cr
Source
Gate
a-SiNX:H
a-SiNX:H
n+ µc-Si:H
undoped a-Si:H
Glass
Glass
Source
Figure 38.5
Vertical TFT. Reproduced from Chan and
Nathan (2005), copyright 2005, American Institute of
Physics
planar PIS:
polysilicon-
insulator-silicon
capacitor
planar PIP:
polysilicon-
insulator-polysilicon
capacitor
3D stacked capacitor
3D trench capacitor
Figure 38.6
Evolution of DRAM from 1980 to 2005:
from planar single poly to planar double poly to 3D stacked
and trench designs (which can be PIP, PIS or MIM).
Adapted from Gerritsen et al. (2005)
structures silicon chip area could be still reduced, while
capacitor area was not affected. Two competing solu-
tions to 3D storage node emerged: the trench capaci-
tor and the stacked capacitor. In the trench capacitor a
deep trench of high aspect ratio is etched into silicon,
forming a PIS capacitor. In the stacked design a pillar or
crown is deposited on the wafer, resulting in a PIP ca-
pacitor. A DRAM cell for 1 bit, including the capacitor
and transistor, occupies an area of 6F 2 for the stacked
design and 8F 2 for the trench version, where F is the
minimum lithographic feature size. Capacitor area can be
2 μm2 yet occupy only 100 nm × 50 nm silicon area. Over
the years both trench depth and crown height have con-
stantly increased to keep capacitance constant, while cell
area has been reduced. Aspect ratios of trench capacitors
are approaching 100:1 and stacked capacitors exhibit 40:1
pillars.
Recently silicon dioxide and nitrided oxide have been
replaced by materials with a high dielectric constant, like
Al2O3, Ta2O5, HfO2 and ZrO2. These have dielectric con-
stants of 10–30, while that of silicon dioxide is 4. The
equivalent oxide thickness of DRAM capacitors is roughly
1 today, with an extrapolated trend to 0.3 by 2013. More
exotic future materials include BST (barium strontium ti-
tanate) and STO (strontium titanate) which have dielectric
constants of over 100. However, as shown in Figure 5.2,
the dielectric constant is a function of ﬁlm thickness, and
the full potential of these new materials may not be re-
alized. Another development is toward MIM capacitors:
metals as both the top and bottom electrodes. Extreme
step coverage is required for electrode deposition in both
the trench and stacked designs and ALD is a prime can-
didate. Titanium nitride is the standard choice: it has long
been used in contact plugs as a barrier and adhesion pro-
motion layer. Research is being conducted on platinum,
iridium oxide, ruthenium and others.
Flash memory has recently taken over as the device
with the smallest half-pitch, replacing DRAM. In 2009,
ﬂash half-pitch was 40 nm while DRAM half-pitch was
50 nm. The market for non-volatile memory (NVM) has
been good in recent years, with MP3 players and digi-
tal cameras demanding more NVM, pushing ﬂash NAND
developments.
Flash scaling is getting difﬁcult: bits are stored as
charge in the ﬂoating gate and injecting those holes into
the ﬂoating gate requires an electric ﬁeld of roughly
1 V/nm, but tunnel oxide cannot be made much thinner
(presently 6–7 nm in NAND and 8–9 nm in NOR ﬂash)
because injection gradually degrades the oxide, limiting
programming cycles (erasure is by Fowler–Nordheim
tunneling of electrons out of the ﬂoating gate). Interpoly
oxide
is
10–13 nm
thick
because
a
rougher
poly
surface results in a lower quality (Figure 13.6), but
the erase voltage is only 0.3 V/nm, making life easier.
However, the slow erase is one of the reasons why other
non-volatile memory technologies are being investigated
as a replacement for ﬂash memory.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 457]
476
Introduction to Microfabrication
Crystalline GST
Amorphous GST
Top electrode
W
W
Si
SiO2
GST
SiGe
TiN
Si Substrate
Thermal insulator
Resistor/heater
Bottom electrode
Figure 38.7
Phase change memory (PCM): left, rapid heating and quenching amorphizes the GST layer, changing
resistance; right, device implementation. Reproduced from Lee et al. (2008) by permission of ECS – The Electrochemical
Society
As an example of a radical departure from previous
memory technologies, phase change memory (PCM,
also known as ovonic memory) has been proposed.
PCM operation is based on resistivity changes between
the amorphous (high resistance) and crystalline (low
resistance)
phases
of
GST,
germanium
antimony
telluride, Ge2Sb2Te5. While the material sounds exotic,
it is well known in rewritable DVDs (where reﬂectivity
difference between the two phases is used), which makes
its adoption more likely. The operation is based on
localized heating of GST, as shown in Figure 38.7. A
fast high-current pulse melts the GST layer, and rapid
cooling results in an amorphous structure. The reverse
operation is achieved by a smaller amplitude, slow
(10–100 ns) current pulse.
PCM offers many intriguing advantages: ﬁrst of all, it
is at least an order of magnitude faster than ﬂash, and it
scales nicely; the heating power needed to change a bit
becomes smaller and smaller when the cell size is scaled
smaller. At 180 nm node a 450 μA programming current is
needed, but at 50 nm only 250 μA is required. And PCM
has been reported to endure 1013 erase/write cycles; even
though the consensus estimate is 108, it is much more
than 105 cycles for ﬂash memories. There are problems,
of course: the programming temperatures are 600 ◦C, and
thermal stresses will be considerable, so reliability needs
to be assessed.
Speed and memory capacity can be traded for each
other: SRAMs are the fastest non-volatile memories, but
each cell is about 50F 2 in size, while the PCM cell is
6F 2 and ﬂash is 1–2F 2. But if PCM can provide the
speed advantage it has indicated over ﬂash, it may be a
winner.
Totally new materials are not accepted easily, and
it takes a long time to gather reliability data, say, on
copper metallization or deposited high-k oxides, before
customers will be convinced. This holds back the
adoption of many technologies that use difﬁcult or exotic
materials, for example ferroelectric RAM memories
(FeRAMs), which use PZT, Pb(Zr,Ti)O3, for the storage
layer and IrO2 or SrRuO3 as electrodes. FeRAM is
a non-volatile memory which stores information as
changes in the polarization state of a ferroelectric
capacitor. FeRAM has many attractive properties like
high speed, low voltage and low power. A drawback of
FeRAM is cell size: 10–20F 2 area per cell. Magnetic
tunnel junction memories (MRAMs) sense resistance
changes when the magnetic moment is switched in a
ferromagnet–insulator–ferromagnet triple layer structure.
The materials challenges are formidable but MRAM
promises to be indeﬁnitely rewritable like DRAM, as
fast as SRAM and non-volatile like ﬂash.
38.6 Lithography Future
Several lithography technologies have been advertised
over the decades as the future lithography. Optical
lithography was predicted in the mid 1980s to be able
to print 0.5 μm lines, no smaller, and the hunt was on
to ﬁnd alternatives. We will shortly discuss what it
takes to overthrow optical lithography, and why optical
lithography has been so pervasive.
First of all, massive infrastructure exists for optical
lithography. This includes investments made in lens
fabrication, focusing and alignment mechanics, metrology
tools, simulation software, photoresists, photomasks and
other related technologies over the decades. Scanner
optics and mechanics have been made by the thousands,
bringing in experience in volume manufacturing that
no emerging technology can hope to match. Immersion
lithography with water enables numerical apertures in
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 458]
Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
477
excess of 1, and oils would raise this to 1.35, extending
the life of optical lithography by another generation or
two, enabling 22 nm generation devices (2012 onward)
to be printed optically. Even though narrow linewidths
have been demonstrated by many techniques, there are
additional requirements, like exposure area, which is
currently 8.58 cm2 in optical lithography, so that big
memories and processors ﬁt within a single exposure
ﬁeld. It is possible that current 4× demagniﬁcation will
be abandoned in favor of a larger demagniﬁcation factor
(when wafer steppers ﬁrst appeared, both 10× and 5×
were used). Advantages include less polarization effects
and cheaper masks and lenses, but, unfortunately, smaller
chip area.
All RET technologies, PSM, OAI, SRAF and OPC
(Section 10.6), are used in advanced optical lithography.
In order to push optical lithography even further, they are
optimized for each and every mask level independently.
Each mask will have customized off-axis illumination, op-
timized for its pattern shape and direction, and carefully
analyzed for polarization. Different types of phase shift
structures, embedded PSM, alternating PSM and comple-
mentary PSM will be used. Exposure dose can be adjusted
across the slit and along the scan. And in order to make
RET implementation easier, designs may have to be lim-
ited to certain simple basic shapes which are amenable to
analysis and adjustment.
Further into the future, double exposure and double
patterning are being investigated. Double exposure means
that two exposures are done, with two different masks,
and one etch step accomplishes the ﬁnal structure. Double
patterning refers to a method where lithography and etch
are done twice, to pattern one layer. These approaches are
very critical to overlay. Spacer lithography (Figure 11.14)
is another way to scale linewidth beyond optical limits.
A new light source needs to be developed and qualiﬁed
for next generation optical lithography: at 157 nm the F2
laser is a candidate, but at 126 nm the choices are wide
open. Quartz has served well as an optical material, both
for stepper and scanner lenses as well as for masks, but
at 157 nm new materials are needed, for example CaF2
lenses. The high thermal expansion coefﬁcient of CaF2,
19 ppm/◦C, presents major problems with thermal control.
As far as resists are concerned, it is not clear if evo-
lutionary approaches are feasible or whether completely
new resists have to be developed. These major changes
pose a radical departure from previous generation opti-
cal lithography, and perhaps a window of opportunity for
competing technologies may open.
The throughput of optical lithography is impressive,
approaching 200 wafers per hour (WPH). This was not
always the case: when step-and-repeat reduction optical
systems were introduced around 1980, they could print
25 WPH, while the then mainstream 1× projection tools
printed 100 wafers. New candidates are in very much the
same situation: they are selling extendibility into future
generations, even though their productivity today is less
than that of current tools. But in a few years’ time those
old tools will no longer be able to do the job, so it might
be worthwhile to start gaining experience with the new
technology.
38.6.1 Extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUVL)
Extending optical lithography from DUV to EUV involves
many more changes than in previous wavelength reduc-
tions. A completely new source of irradiation is needed,
and even though pulsed plasma laser sources exist, their
power output is insufﬁcient and their long-term reliabil-
ity and running costs uncertain. At 40 W power today,
throughput is only 10 WPH (partly also due to the low re-
liability of new technology), but increasing that to 200 W
will mean 50 WPH, and improving resist sensitivity from
15 to 7 mJ/cm2 will double that to 100 WPH, and so on.
The whole optical path has to be in a vacuum to elim-
inate atmospheric absorption. This presents additional re-
sist requirements: it has to be vacuum compatible. A shift
from refractive optics (which would absorb too much
EUV) to reﬂective optics is a major paradigm shift. In
an EUVL system light of 13.5 nm wavelength is reﬂected
from the mask and projected onto a wafer using reﬂec-
tive optics. EUVL may win because its process robustness
is good, while the optical lithography process window is
very narrow, as shown in Figure 10.4, and the situation
is getting worse with every successive generation.
EUV mask technology will be radically different, with
nanolaminate multilayer reﬂectors (shown in Figure 7.20).
Manufacturability of large-area masks with stacks of 80
layers consisting of 4 nm layers with 0.4 nm thickness
control is an open question. After the masks have been
made, inspection and repair techniques must be available.
If they are not, the masks cannot be qualiﬁed and defect
analysis cannot be done, and if improvements in mask
technology are not forthcoming, nobody will adopt them
in production.
The infrastructure for EUVL must come into existence
before it will be a serious competitor for optical lithog-
raphy and its extensions. These additional technologies
include software for proximity correction, overlay metrol-
ogy and new photoresists. The short wavelength means
that a lot of energy is hitting the mask, and because the
nanolaminate layers are very thin, their defect generation
and its effects on reﬂectivity need to be understood. One
additional requirement for EUVL is backward compati-
bility with optical technology: mix-and-match lithography
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 459]
478
Introduction to Microfabrication
must be available because there are non-critical mask lev-
els which must be made on cheaper, older, technology.
Estimates put the EUVL system price near $100 million,
as opposed to $50 million for the optical one, for systems
designed for 22 nm generation.
38.6.2 X-ray lithography (XRL)
The decisive difference between 13.5 nm EUVL and 1 nm
XRL is not really wavelength: many people would accept
13.5 nm as X-rays, but XRL as understood in microfab-
rication means transmissive exposure through the mask.
X-ray reduction optics do not exist, which necessitates
1× photomasks. This is a major drawback for XRL. Add
to this the blocking layers that need to be thick to ef-
fectively block X-rays: heavy elements like tungsten or
gold are used. Aspect ratios of chrome lines on an op-
tical reticle for 50 nm linewidths on a wafer are about
0.5, whereas in XRL they are 20:1. XRL has many ad-
vantages over optical lithography: the exposure ﬁeld is
larger and XRL is relatively insensitive to small particles
because, for example, 0.5 μm silicon particles are rela-
tively transparent to X-rays. Traditional X-ray sources are
not bright enough to produce reasonable throughputs, so
new sources have been developed: namely, synchrotron
radiation storage rings and laser plasmas. This leads to
enormous starting costs for XRL systems.
38.6.3 Electron and ion projection lithographies
Because direct writing with electron or ion beams is slow,
masked versions have been sought. In electron and ion
projection lithographies (EPL, IPL) a broad beam illumi-
nates the mask, and the main problem is again the mask:
electrons and ions need to be admitted through the mask at
selected sites and blocked elsewhere. This leads to masks
with thick (blocking) areas and thin or open (transpar-
ent) areas. Thin areas need to be made of materials of
low atomic weight for good transmission, with a thick-
ness on the order of 1 μm. And they must preferably be
several square centimeters across for large chips to ﬁt in a
single exposure ﬁeld. Thick blocking layers on these thin
membranes cause stresses and pattern distortions. Shadow
mask-like structures with open areas are excluded because
making donut-shaped objects would require two masks
and exposures. The mask will be heated by the incom-
ing beam, just like the photomask in optical lithography,
but, additionally, ions or electrons lead to mask charging
and damage. Electron scattering masks, instead of absorb-
ing masks, have been developed for EPL. This eliminates
many of the thickness, stress and heating problems. The
throughput of ion and electron projection systems remains
an open question because the current systems are research
tools and not close to production.
38.6.4 Nanoimprint lithography (NIL)
NIL is the latest contender to replace optical lithogra-
phy. As discussed in Chapter 18, NIL has the potential
to print even 5 nm structures, so basically it is capable of
future IC demands. This is important because any tech-
nology that only offers solutions to the next generation
and is not scalable to future generations has precious
little chance of being successful. NIL resists exist, but im-
printing throughput remains low compared to optical. The
main attractions are simplicity and price: for a few mil-
lion dollars the same linewidths can be produced as with a
$50 million optical tool. But while NIL linewidths are im-
pressive, alignment in NIL has lagged behind, and when
alignment systems are added, the price goes up steeply.
All new lithographies face serious mask technology
challenges, but NIL is in a class of its own because the
master actually makes contact with the resist, and this
generates serious concerns about master lifetime. One so-
lution is to deposit a thin ﬂuoropolymer layer to ensure
master–resist demolding, and to rework the coating, and
continue using the same master, which is hopefully intact.
Competition between full wafer thermal NIL and step-
and-repeat UV NIL is open. The step-and-repeat master
has to tolerate 100 times more contacts for the same num-
ber of chips. On the other hand, making chip-sized masters
is much cheaper and faster than making 300 mm masters.
Inspection technology for 3D objects is always very de-
manding, and the fact that NIL masters are 1× means
that they contain lines that are one-quarter the size of op-
tical reticle lines, and inspection of these is already very
demanding.
38.7 Moore’s Law
The development of ICs seemed to follow a regular pat-
tern: double the number of devices on the chip every year.
In 1965 Gordon Moore remarked on this pattern. His
observation was based on rather few data points since
the birth of the IC, but the conclusion became famous.
Later the prediction was revised to doubling every 18
months, and this version has been especially long last-
ing. It has been dubbed Moore’s law, even though it is
only an empirical pattern without fundamental justiﬁca-
tion. Table 38.2 lists the evolution of the technology over
the years, giving linewidth decrease and memory capacity
increase.
Moore’s 1965 prediction extended till 1975 and his ex-
trapolation was quite accurate. The trend has continued
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 460]
Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
479
Table 38.2
Moore’s law
Year
Transistors/
Memory
Linewidth
Wafer
chip
size
1959
1
30 μm
0.5 in
1960
2
1961
4
1962
8
1 in
1963
16
1964
32
20 μm
1.5 in
1965
64
1968
256
12 μm
2 in
1970
1024
1 k
8 μm
1973
4096
4 k
5 μm
1975
16 384
16 k
3 μm
3
1979
65 536
64 k
2 μm
1983
262 144
256 k
1.5 μm
100 mm
1986
1 048 576
1 M
1.2 μm
125 mm
1989
4 194 304
4 M
0.8 μm
150 mm
1992
16 777 216
16 M
0.5 μm
1995
67 108 864
64 M
0.35 μm
200 mm
1998
268 435 456
256 M
0.25 μm
2000
536 870 912
512 M
0.18 μm
2002
1 073 741 824
1 G
0.13 μm
300 mm
2004
2 147 483 648
2 G
90 nm
2006
4 294 967 296
4 G
65 nm
2008
8 589 934 592
8 G
45 nm
2010
17 179 869 184
16 G
32 nm
Note: DRAM used to be the memory device with the highest bit density
but since the turn of the century NAND ﬂash has been the leader: the
16 Gbit refers to NAND, while the largest DRAMs are 2 Gbit only. Flash
memory cell area is 2–4F 2 but each cell stores 2 bits, for 1–2F 2 per
bit, vs. 6–8F 2 for DRAM.
at approximately the predicted speed, give or take some
ﬂuctuations. Since the turn of the millennium the pace has
been even faster than predicted by Moore’s law. Memory
chips are best suited for Moore’s law studies because the
law is about production economics: chip size and cost
minimization. Processors are governed by quite different
laws: they are design heavy, rather than manufacturing
driven, and proprietary architectures are not subject to ul-
timate price reductions. It should be borne in mind that
sometimes product demonstration date is used (when the
ﬁrst fully functional chips are fabricated), sometimes pro-
duction start date is used, and sometimes peak production
year is stated.
Shrink versions make the situation more complex: the
ﬁrst functional 1 Gbit DRAMs were demonstrated using
0.18 μm technology, but production versions have been
made at smaller linewidths: 0.13 μm to 0.10 μm. Add
to this minor differences between companies reporting
Table 38.3
Scaling trends
Year
2010
2012
2014
2016
Memory half-pitch
(nm)
45
36
28
22
Processor gate in
resist (nm)
30
24
19
15
Processor gate after
trimming (nm)
18
14
11
9
Gate CD control
3σ (nm)
1.9
1.5
1.2
0.9
Resist thickness
(nm)
70–130
55–100
45–80
35–65
Metal 1 half-pitch
(nm)
45
32
28
23
Metal 1 aspect ratio
1.8
1.8
1.9
2
RC time delay for
1 mm line (ns)
2.1
3.5
6.4
10.6
Copper barrier
thickness (nm)
3.3
2.6
2.1
1.7
Oxide thickness
EOT (nm)
0.9
0.9
0.8
0.55
EOT thickness
control, 3σ (%)
< ±4
< ±4
< ±4
< ±4
Spacer thickness
(nm)
9.9
7.7
6.1
5
Silicon and oxide
loss per cleaning
step (nm)
0.09
0.09
0.06
0.06
Surface roughness
(nm)
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Critical surface
metals
(1010 cm−2)
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Critical particle
diameter (nm),
starting wafers
22.5
17.9
14.2
11.3
Particles/cm2
<0.15
<0.32
<0.16
<0.16
Source: ITRS 2007.
linewidth (or half-pitch) and it is fair to accept a few
years of discrepancies in Moore’s law data.
Table 38.3 considers future forecasts. It assumes
that the technology develops more or less according to
predictable paths. If the technology goals of linewidths,
ﬁlm thicknesses, particle counts and others can be met,
Moore’s law will be valid for another decade.
Moore’s law was originally proposed in the era of
bipolar transistors and it has held up well in the era of
PMOS, NMOS and CMOS, and seems set to hold for
the next decade of strained-silicon, SOI–CMOS and other
evolutionary MOS technologies. Moore’s law is about
device packing density and cost, not about any particular
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 461]
480
Introduction to Microfabrication
technology. There have been a number of dubious ex-
tensions of Moore’s law: it has been said to apply to
computing power, which is not true because computer ar-
chitecture is not part of it. Despite its non-fundamental
nature, it is one of the few predictions about the future of
technology that have held for almost 50 years.
38.8 Materials Challenges
Nominal or design width is just an idealization of a mi-
crostructure. The physical structure in silicon or in thin-
ﬁlm material adds its own features. These effects are the
more pronounced, the narrower the linewidth or the thin-
ner the ﬁlm. The smaller the details we study, the more
the effects come into play.
Line edge roughness (LER) is becoming signiﬁcant
compared to linewidth. In the extreme it is partly a materi-
als limitation: chrome, photoresist and the thin ﬁlm on the
wafer are granular to some extent, and for instance poly-
crystalline materials may be etched at slightly different
etch rates for different crystal orientations, so this prefer-
ential etching contributes to LER. It is not known exactly
which factors contribute to LER, and how to quantify it,
and it is not even certain how LER contributes to device
performance.
When linewidth scaling is continued, the relative im-
portance of physical effects changes. Current conduction
in a 1 × 1 μm cross-section of a conductor line is fully
characterized by the classical ohmic description. Narrower
lines, and thinner ﬁlms, reach a limit where the surface
scattering contribution to resistance becomes important,
and in the 10 nm size range quantum effects come into
play, when single electron conduction can be seen. The
characteristic scale for non-classical effects is given by
the mean free path, which is 40 nm for copper and 15 nm
for aluminum. However, some deviation from classical
behavior has been seen even at 500 nm, probably due to
grain boundary reﬂections, and at 100 nm linewidths cop-
per resistivity has been reported to increase by 100%, to
4 μohm-cm, Figure 28.14.
Film thickness downscaling in the back end is driven
by the need to keep aspect ratios reasonable, even though
RC time delays inevitably increase as resistance increases
in thinner wires, and capacitance increases when dielec-
tric thickness is scaled down. The ultimate limits are
fairly close in back-end scaling: copper is as close to
the minimum resistivity as any metal can practically be,
and with dielectrics, εr = 1 (vacuum) is not so far away,
with εr = 2 materials being introduced. Superconducting
wiring was touted in the early 1990s as a solution to re-
sistance problems, but enthusiasm waned rapidly when
Poly-Si
2.2 nm
2.6 nm
2.4 nm
SiO2
Si
Figure 38.8
Quantized gate oxide thickness: 2.2 nm,
2.4 nm and 2.6 nm represent possible thicknesses. Repro-
duced from Buchanan (1999) by permission of IBM
the difﬁculties of high-Tc superconductor deposition and
structural control became apparent. Optical interconnects
are now being explored, though at a very experimental
stage.
Scaling to atomic dimensions leads to inevitable
limitations. The gate oxide thickness is approaching
such limits: because atoms are discrete, the gate oxide
thickness is “quantized”: we cannot have any gate oxide
thickness, only integral multiples of atomic dimensions
(Figure 38.8). Putting it another way, each transistor will
have its own microscopic oxide thickness pattern and
consequently idiosyncratic microroughness which affects
channel mobility and tunneling currents.
38.9 Statistics and Yield
Yield is tied to the number of process steps, which has
been increasing constantly. With 25 lithography steps, and
about 500 steps altogether, individual step yield has to be
very high indeed. This is putting more and more demands
on metrology: process monitoring precision and speed
have to be increased so that more wafers can be checked.
With polymeric thin ﬁlms, ﬁlm thickness and density are
not enough, so pore size and pore size distribution must
be known. Film behavior in CMP, plasma ashing and wet
cleaning need to be understood, as do thin-ﬁlm deposition
and wet chemical penetration into nanometer pores.
Despite aggressive linewidth scaling, chip area keeps
increasing. The number of defects per chip has to remain
constant or decrease, which means that defect density has
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 462]
Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
481
to be scaled down more aggressively than linewidth. Chip
area increases because of the economic incentive to inte-
grate as many functions as possible on the chip, in order
to reduce packaging and assembly costs (Figure 37.3). At
the moment is seems that lithographic lenses are limiting
the increase in chip size: it has not been possible to simul-
taneously improve resolution and increase lens ﬁeld size
at the same pace. This, of course, applies mostly to evo-
lutionary scaling of refractive optical systems; reﬂective
optics, XRL and EPL have their own scaling trends.
Chemicals, DI water, gases and sputtering targets have
been “scaled” to higher and higher purity levels. Metal
impurity levels have been reduced by a factor of 100
in four technology generations. Measurement of minute
impurities must be available for gases, liquids and solids.
Cleanrooms have been “scaled” to higher and higher stan-
dards of purity. Cleanliness today is so high that particle
measurements have hit a barrier: there are simply not
enough particles to statistically assess particle purity. With
cleanroom costs increasing, there has been an incentive to
ﬁnd alternative operation modes. Integrated processing is
one such approach, keeping the wafers under controlled
ambients at all times.
Statistics with extremely large or extremely small quan-
tities can produce some surprises, even before the ultimate
limits. In a circuit with 1 billion devices the tails of sta-
tistical distributions can easily cause circuits to fail: there
are 20 devices which have a variation larger than six
standard deviations. In very small volumes the distribu-
tion of atoms becomes a source of variation: in 100 nm
linewidth MOS transistors, the volume under the gate is
about 100 nm × 500 nm × 10 nm (Leff × Weff × inversion
layer thickness), and the channel doping level is NA ≈
1018 cm−3, which translates to about 500 dopant atoms
only. The small number of dopants in itself leads to de-
tectable ﬂuctuations in threshold voltage, but also the
random positions of dopant atoms must be considered.
The standard deviation of threshold voltage Vth is given by
σ(Vth) = 3.19 × 10−8toxN0.4
A
√LeffWeff
(38.2)
Continued scaling to smaller dimensions, together with an
increase in the number of devices per chip, rapidly leads
to situations where not all devices switch.
Linewidth and gate oxide scaling are the most visible
parts of scaling, but there are many other parameters that
are continuously been pushed forward. The energy con-
sumption of a logic operation was 10 nJ in 1960, 1 pJ in
1980 and only 1 fJ in 2000. Operating voltage, which was
5 V for many generations (5 μm to 0.8 μm), is now being
reduced rather regularly, and 1 V operation will soon be
usual for non-battery-powered devices, too. The number
of metallization levels for logic is rapidly going up. Since
the 0.5 μm generation, when three levels of metals were
standard, one level of metallization has been added in al-
most every generation, leading to eight levels in 0.1 μm
technology. The corollary trend is that of output pin-count
increase, to thousands, which has led to various ball-grid-
like packaging solutions.
38.10 Limits of Scaling
The death of Moore’s law has been much discussed but
newer predictions of IC scaling have often proven in-
accurate, even in the quite short term: in 1994 it was
predicted that 0.1 μm technology would become available
in 2007, microprocessor chips would have 350 million
transistors and operate at 1 GHz with 1.2 V, which was
very pessimistic about the linewidth and speed. In 1986
it was predicted that 16 Mbit DRAMs would be avail-
able at the turn of the millennium, but actually it was
256 Mbit. Around 1980 the prediction was that optical
lithography could not print lines smaller than 1 μm and
in 1989 the end of optical lithography was predicted for
1997. Quite regularly, the end of optical lithography has
been predicted to be 10 years in the future, and this same
prediction still holds. Also in 1989 it was assumed that
silicon dioxide as the gate oxide would be replaced by
high-k dielectrics starting from 1993, but nobody dared
to do it before 2008. Long-term predictions have been off
by a far wider margin: the 1984 linewidth predictions for
2007 were 0.1 μm (optimistic) and 0.5 μm (pessimistic),
yet in 2007, 65 nm was in production.
How long can this scaling continue? If all goes accord-
ing to Moore’s law, in 2059, the 100th anniversary of the
integrated circuit, we will have:
• 0.25 nm minimum linewidth
• 0.004 nm gate oxide thickness
• 2 mV operating voltage
• 64 exabit memories (exa = 1018).
Obviously a scaled version of the current MOS transis-
tor cannot be the device described above, for instance
the atomic size is about 0.1 nm. But remember: Moore’s
law is independent of device technology. The ﬁrst work-
ing 1 μm MOSFET was reported in 1974, and about 15
years later 1 μm devices entered mass production. The
ﬁrst 100 nm device was unveiled in 1987, and about 15
years later 100 nm devices were being fabricated. At the
beginning of the third millennium, 10 nm devices exist
in laboratories and are extrapolated to enter production
before 2020. Extrapolation, however, is a tricky business.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 463]
482
Introduction to Microfabrication
38.11 Exercises
1. Price per bit has been scaled down at a rate of about
30% a year. If 1 Gbyte of DRAM memory cost about
$50 in 2010, how much will it cost in 10 years’ time?
2. Given the scaling trend predicted by Moore’s law,
when will CMOS gate oxide be one atomic diameter
thick?
3. The speed of light sets the ultimate limit on signal
speed. How close is this limit?
4. The price of the refractive lens used in a wafer step-
per has increased rapidly over the years: $25 000 in
1986, $102 000 in 1989, $294 000 in 1992, $670 000
in 1995, $1.5 million in 1998. What is the price of a
stepper lens today?
5. A DRAM trench memory cell for 1 bit takes up an
area of 8F 2, where F is the lithographic linewidth.
What is the chip size of 1 Gbit DRAM?
6. DRAM trench capacitors are cylindrical holes with
high aspect ratios. What is the aspect ratio in a
0.15 μm linewidth process if the capacitor oxide
thickness is 5 nm and the capacitance is 40 fF?
7. How does resist sidewall error contribute to linewidth
control?
8. The chip area of a 2 billion transistor is 3.5 cm2.
What is the area of a single transistor and what is
the linewidth?
9. How does PCM scale down? Which factors improve
with scaling and which become more problematic?
10. If NMOS and PMOS gates were fabricated from dif-
ferent metals (optimized for their respective devices),
how many process steps would be added compared
to a n+/p+ dual gate (Figure 38.2).
References and Related Reading
Asenov, A. et al. (2003) Simulation of intrinsic parameter ﬂuc-
tuations in decananometer and nanometer-scale MOSFETs,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 50, 1837 (special issue on
nanoelectronics).
Bohr, M.T. et al. (2007) The high-k solution, IEEE Spectr.,
October, 29–35.
Brueck,
S.R.J.
(2005)
Optical
and
interferometric
lithography – nanotechnology
enablers,
Proc.
IEEE,
93, 1704–1721.
Buchanan, M. (1999) Scaling the gate dielectric: materials, in-
tegration and reliability, IBM J. Res. Dev., 43, 245.
Burr, G.W. et al. (2010) Phase change memory technology, J.
Vac. Sci. Technol.., B28, 223.
Chan, I. and A. Nathan (2005) Amorphous silicon thin-ﬁlm
transistors with 90◦vertical nanoscale channel, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 86, 253501.
Chang, L. et al. (2003) Moore’s law lives on, IEEE Circuits
Devices Mag., 1, 35.
Chiang, C. and K. Jamil (2007) Design for Manufacturability
and Yield for Nano-Scale CMOS, Springer
Delhougne, R. et al. (2004) Selective epitaxial deposition of
strained silicon: a simple and effective method for fabricating
high performance MOSFET devices, Solid-State Electron.,
48, 1307–1316.
Doering, R. and Y. Nishi (2001) Limits of integrated circuit
manufacturing, Proc. IEEE, 89, 375.
Galatsis, K., R. Potok and K.L. Wang (2007) A review of
metrology
for nanoelectronics,
IEEE Trans. Semicond.
Manuf ., 20, 542–548.
Gerritsen, E. et al. (2005) Evolution of materials technology for
stacked-capacitors in 65nm embedded-DRAM, Solid-State
Electron., 49, 1767–1775.
Gottlob, D.B. et al. (2006) Scalable gate ﬁrst process for silicon
on insulator metal oxide semiconductor ﬁeld effect transis-
tors with epitaxial high-k dielectrics, J. Vac. Sci. Technol.,
B24, 710–714.
Henderson, R. (1995) Of life cycles real and imaginary: the un-
expectedly long old age of optical lithography, Res. Policy,
24, 631.
Hisamoto, D. et al. (2000) FinFET - a self-aligned double-gate
MOSFET scalable to 20nm, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
47, 2320.
Huff, H.R. (2002) An Electronics division retrospective 1952-
2002 and future opportunities in the twenty-ﬁrst century, J.
Electrochem. Soc., 149, S35–S58.
Integrated circuit technologies of the future (1986) Proc. IEEE,
74 (12), special issue.
ITRS, (2007) The International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors, 2007 Edition. International SEMATECH:
Austin, TX, http://www.itrs.net/
Kemp, K. and S. Wurm (2006) EUV lithography, C.R.
Physique, 7, 875–886.
Keyes, R.W. (2001) Fundamental limits of silicon technology,
Proc. IEEE, 89, 305 (special issue on limits of semiconduc-
tor technology).
Kilby, J. (1976) The invention of the integrated circuit, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, 23, 648.
Lacaita, A.L. (2006) Phase change memories: state-of-the-art,
challenges
and
perspectives,
Solid-State Electron.,
50,
24–31.
Lee. S.-Y. et al. (2008) Bilayer heater electrode for improving
reliability of phase-change memory devices, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 155, H314–H318.
Moore, G. (1965) Cramming more components onto integrated
circuits, Electronics, 38 (available at http://www.intel.com/
technology/mooreslaw/).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 464]
Moore’s Law and Scaling Trends
483
Park, J.-T. and J.-P. Colinge (2002) Multiple-gate SOI MOS-
FETs: device design guidelines, IEEE Trans. Electron De-
vices, 49, 2222.
Ross, I. (1997) The foundations of the silicon age, Bell Labs
Tech. J ., 2, 3 (50th anniversary issue on the invention of the
transistor).
Skotnicki, T. et al. (2005) The end of CMOS scaling, IEEE
Circuits Devices Mag., January, 16–26.
Sotomayor Torres, C.M. (2003) Alternative Lithography,
Springer.
Theuwissen, A.J.P. (2008) CMOS image sensors: state-of-the-
art, Solid-State Electron., 52, 1401–1406.
Wolf, S. (2002) Silicon Processing for the VLSI Era, Vol. 4,
Deep-Submicron Process Technology, Lattice Press.
Wong, H.-S., K. Chan and Y. Taur (1997) Self-aligned (top
and bottom) double-gate MOSFET with a 25nm thick silicon
channel, IEDM Tech. Dig., 427.
Wong, H.-S.P. (2002) Beyond the conventional transistor, IBM
J. Res. Dev., 46, 133 (special issue on scaling CMOS to the
limit).
Yagishita, A. et al. (2001) Improvement of threshold voltage
deviation in damascene metal gate transistors, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, 48, 1604.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 465]
39
Microfabrication at Large
Integration of different technologies is a major trend all
over microfabrication. Analog–digital ICs (or mixed sig-
nal circuits) integrate resistors and capacitors with MOS
or bipolar transistors; BiCMOS integrates bipolars and
CMOS; and microprocessors integrate more and more
SRAM (which in fact takes up most of the silicon area, up
to 90%, in microprocessors). MEMS integrate mechani-
cal and electrical functions by deﬁnition. Microsensors
for mechanical, optical, chemical and magnetic quanti-
ties most often produce an electrical output signal which
opens up possibilities to process, store and transmit those
signals with microelectronics, which may be integrated on
the same chip. With high-performance thin-ﬁlm transistors
now available, the display drivers and other electronics
can be integrated with the ﬂat-panel display, enabling
much thinner packages for displays.
Integration of two technologies enhances performance
but adds to process complexity: roughly speaking, a 20%
mask count increase leads to a 20% cost increase. A sur-
face micromachined airbag accelerometer integrated with
BiCMOS readout electronics has been commercialized
and is manufactured in signiﬁcant volumes. Many MEMS
devices are produced in small numbers, while millions of
IC chips are made in a month in a big fab. This dis-
crepancy often leads to hybrid integration: IC and MEMS
are fabricated separately, and integration takes place at
package level. The reason for this is economical: adding
advanced CMOS capability to a MEMS production line
would be too expensive, and adding special MEMS pro-
cess modules to a smoothly running CMOS process ﬂow
would be disruptive to the work ﬂow.
39.1 New Devices
Microfabricated devices have a number of beneﬁts com-
pared to classic or macroscopic devices: small size, low
cost, high speed (of electron transit time across bipolar
base, or of microreactor thermal ramp time), low power
consumption (and low reagent consumption in chemi-
cal microsystems) and high device packing density (of
DRAM cells or attached DNA strands) all relate to the
exceptional possibilities offered by microfabrication. One
of the special beneﬁts of microfabrication is the com-
pletely different cost structure compared to real-world
manufacturing. Material usage is minuscule and almost
any material can be used if it can be micromachined,
because its price is not a limiting factor.
New classes of devices are being introduced in
microfabricated versions, as are novel devices with
no macroscopic counterparts. New names for devices
and categories are popping up: nanoelectromechanical
systems (NEMS) (Figure 1.2), adaptive optics (Figure
17.8), biosensors (Figure 20.28), microacoustics (Figures
7.11, 20.19, 30.8, 30.19), micro power systems (Figure
1.10),
microrockets
(Figure
11.7)
or
DNA–CMOS
hybrids (Figure 39.1). DNA sensors have been made by
locally attaching DNA probe strands onto transistors and
covering the chip by PDMS microﬂuidic channels. The
change in threshold voltage is monitored as DNA strands
pair with their counter-strands.
Control capacitor (Cc)
Active area (As)
DNA molecules
Vc
S1
S2
Silicon body
MOSFET (M0)
Spacer
DRAIN
SOURCE
Figure 39.1
DNA pairing reaction changes transistor
threshold voltage. From Barbaro et al. (2006), by permis-
sion of IEEE
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 466]
486
Introduction to Microfabrication
Microfabrication possibilities are everywhere: polyester
ﬁber spinnerets in the textile industry are nowadays micro-
fabricated pieces; a micromachined interferometer mea-
sures carbon dioxide concentration for heating, ventilation
and air-conditioning applications. Superconducting quan-
tum interference devices are measuring weak magnetic
ﬁelds generated in the human brain, enabling new views
of human decision making, pain, pleasure and cognition.
Acoustic microsensors monitor mechanical machinery for
sounds of cracks and imbalances. MEMS microphones
have become standard in cell/mobile phones but only
partly for their small size and not for their sound quality,
rather because of their ease of mounting, which is simi-
lar to ICs, while traditional microphones require special
assembly.
Non-CMOS technologies ride on CMOS processes to
some extent: linewidths are lagging behind CMOS, but
steadily getting narrower, too. RF and analog circuits
are some two generations (5–6 years) behind CMOS in
linewidth, high-voltage and high-power circuits maybe by
three or four generations (10 years), mechanical microsen-
sors are further away, and many other MEMS devices are
still using 1980s’ linewidths. However, the high aspect
ratios make MEMS processes very demanding and very
different from 1980s’ CMOS.
39.2 Proliferation of MEMS
MEMS technologies are expanding in many directions,
and subﬁelds are emerging all the time: RF MEMS, pow-
erMEMS, optical MEMS, BioMEMS, etc. Mirrors pop
up in many applications both ﬁguratively and literally: in
Figures 29.22-24 and 39.2 mirrors do pop up from the
plane of the silicon wafer.
RF MEMS cover a wide range of devices, from
low-noise
reference
oscillators
to
passive
coplanar
waveguides, ﬁlters, antennas, inductors, phase shifters
and switch arrays, one of which is shown in Figure 39.3.
Many of these functions were earlier handled by either
semiconductor devices, or traditionally machined metal
parts.
PowerMEMS
similarly
include
a
wide
range
of
completely different devices, although fabricated by the
same technologies. Energy harvesting from vibrations
employs mechanical microdevices, utilizing for instance
piezoelectrics.
Thermal
energy
scavenging
utilizes
temperature differences and thermoelectric materials like
bismuth telluride. Various thrusters, turbines and nozzles
are used in microrockets, but also in more down-to-earth
applications like fuel injection. Lithium ion batteries
have been made by thin-ﬁlm deposition technologies.
Fuel cells have been made by various technologies,
1mm
Mirror
Frame
A’
A
Single-Crystal
Silicon (SCS)
Act1
Act 3
Act 2
Act 4
Subsrate
y
x
z
Figure 39.2
Planar pop-up micromirror with four actua-
tor stages. From Jain and Xie (2006), copyright 2006, by
permission of Elsevier
Figure 39.3
High-impedance tunable metamaterial: an ar-
ray of silicon bridges. Reproduced from Sterner et al.
(2010), copyright 2010, by permission of IEEE
including wet-etched, DRIE and electrochemically etched
versions (Figure 39.4). The beneﬁts of microfabrication
in fuel cells come from channel dimension control: the
microcapillaries (fuel channels) are made by etching
silicon (electrochemical or DRIE) so small that liquids
penetrate the channels by capillary action, irrespective of
cell direction, and no pumping is needed to supply fuel.
39.3 Microﬂuidics
While most microﬂuidic devices are fairly simple by mask
counts (17.1, 18.11, 18.24, 19.12, 25.7), more complex
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 467]
Microfabrication at Large
487
Fuel Inlet
Air Channels
Contact (−)
Fuel Chamber (Ethanol + Water)
Contact (+)
Anode
Micro Capillaries
(Fuel Channel)
Platinum catalyst
Nafion (PEM)
Cathode
Figure 39.4
Micro fuel cell: a proton conducting membrane sandwiched between two wafers with electrochemically
etched pores. Reproduced from Aravamudhan et al. (2005), copyright 2005, by permission of Elsevier
Parylene C
Channel Walls
Transparent
Ground
Plane
Seiving Matrix
20 micron
thick
Multilayer
Interference
Filter
P–type Silicon
Diode Detectors
Silicon Dioxide
Gold
Electrodes
Figure 39.5
Microﬂuidic separation chip with integrated optical detection. Reproduced from Webster et al. (2001), by
permission of the American Chemical Society
devices have been made, for example the 13-mask sep-
aration device with integrated ﬂuidic ﬁlters and optical
detection with optical ﬁlters (Figure 39.5).
Microreactors come in various forms: sometimes
fast temperature ramp rates are needed, sometimes
working
with
small
sample
amounts
is
beneﬁcial
because
of
dangerous
substances
like
ﬂuorine
or
radioactive elements, and sometimes multiple parallel
reactions need to be followed. PCR (Polymerase Chain
Reaction) is a DNA ampliﬁcation reaction that requires
95 ◦C →58 ◦C →72 ◦C ramping. Two basic reactor
conﬁgurations are used: a temperature ramp reactor
(Figure 19.13 glass reactor; Figure 25.7 SU-8 reactor)
and a continuous ﬂow reactor, Figure 39.6. The former
are scaled-down versions of traditional PCR instruments
but the continuous ﬂow reactor is completely different,
Inlet
outlet
A
A – denaturation (95 °C)
B – primer extension (72 °C)
C – primer annealing (e.g. 58 °C)
B
C
Figure 39.6
Continuous ﬂow PCR: DNA melting in
zone A (95 ◦C), extension in B (72 ◦C) and annealing in
C (58 ◦C). Reproduced from Obeid et al. (2003) by per-
mission of the American Chemical Society
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 468]
488
Introduction to Microfabrication
L ~~ 150 μm to mms
Surface channel
Supporting
substrate
Duct
SU-8
mesa
Reservoir
− 30 μm
Duct
Duct
Reservoir
Pigment
dispersion
Hydrophobic
dielectric
Surface channel (oil)
Top view
ITO
AI
SU-8
mesa
h ~~ 3 mm
Figure 39.7
Electroﬂuidic display based on mechanical pressure and electowetting forces. Reproduced from Heikenfeld
et al. (2009) by permission of Nature Publishing Group
enabled by microtechnology. Three temperature blocks
are maintained at constant temperatures of 95, 58 and
72 ◦C, and the liquid travels in a ﬂuidic channel between
the zones. After 30 cycles the output liquid contains
enough DNA for analysis.
Integration of detection with ﬂuidics is important and
many solutions have been implemented over the years.
Electrical detection, like conductivity, has been imple-
mented for CE (Figures 19.10, 19.11). Optical detection,
for example absorbance or laser-induced ﬂuorescence, is
widely used. Various degrees of integration are possible.
In Figure 18.9 integrated PDMS lenses improve the sig-
nal by focusing, but detection is external. Because lens
integration comes free of charge, it can be part of the ﬂu-
idic system, and disposable, while the expensive detection
system is reusable.
Microrockets have chemical action but the desired end
result, thrust, is physical and chemistry is just a way to
achieve that. Fluidic logic circuits have been made, and
ﬂuidics is used to cool high-power ICs and lasers. While
ink jets are mostly IT output devices, they have chemical
and biological applications as well: printing nucleotides
for DNA arrays, and dispensing very small amounts of
precious biological reagents. Ink jets are in fact very rapid
evaporators: picoliter drops dry in milliseconds (depend-
ing on liquid properties) and rapid evaporation is a con-
venient concentration method.
Most microﬂuidic devices work with liquids but there
are many gas phase ﬂuidic systems as well. One of the
earliest microﬂuidic systems was a gas chromatograph,
in the late 1970s. Mass spectrometric analysis has given
rise to a number of microdevices. These devices either
spray a droplet cloud or vaporize a sample from a mi-
cronozzle to a mass spectrometer. Ionization is based on
many different principles, for example high voltage (in
electrospray and corona ionization), high ﬂow velocity
(in supersonic ionization), temperature (in thermospray),
or photoionization.
Fluidics is also strongly present in novel displays and
electronic paper for e-book readers. These devices share
many features with ﬂat-panel displays, obviously, but sur-
face modiﬁcation with hydrophobic thin ﬁlms is also es-
sential. Figure 39.7 shows an electrowetting display. Pixel
optical properties are controlled by pigment spreading
over the pixel and pullback into a reservoir.
39.4 BioMEMS
BioMEMS in their purest form are about using mechan-
ical transduction or movement in a biological context. A
prototypical bioMEMS device could be a microgripper
for cell handling (Figure 39.8). Thermal actuation using
resistors enables the gripper to close its claws.
The patch clamp chip (Figure 21.20) holds a single cell
in place while electric cell membrane measurements are
Figure 39.8
Thermally
actuated
cell
gripper
(20 μm
thick) fabricated in SU−8. Reproduced from Chronis and
Lee (2005), copyright 2005, by permission of IEEE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 469]
Microfabrication at Large
489
microchannel
push-bar
chamber
cardiomyocyte sheet
check valve
Figure 39.9
Cardiomyocyte micropump: integration of live cells with MEMS moving parts. Adapted from Tanaka et al.
(2007)
made. Microneedles are available for drug delivery and
sample extraction (Figures 1.13, 21.16). The line between
microﬂuidics and BioMEMS chips is very vague, because
most biologically interesting phenomena take place in the
liquid phase. A microneedle for neural measurements with
CMOS electronics was shown in Figure 30.13. It is not
a ﬂuidic device, but it must be compatible with body
ﬂuids.
Cell culturing is another big application area of
BioMEMS: cell compartments, air and nutrient channels,
stimulus channels for supplying drugs, toxins or genetic
material are microfabricated on a chip. Additionally,
sensors for monitoring changes induced by the stimulus
are included: for instance pH, temperature and oxygen.
The cardiomyocyte micropump (Figure 39.9) is an
exempliﬁcation of another level of integration: live cells
are integrated with silicon microfabricated parts for a
pumping action. The contraction of cardiomyocytes cells
induces movement of the push-bar, changing the pump
chamber volume.
39.5 Bonding and 3D Integration
Silicon wafers used to be made of silicon but today wafers
are much more complex objects. Layer transfer techniques
enable thin layers of expensive or hard to make materi-
als to be transferred on common substrates, like SiC on
Si, silicon on quartz and germanium on oxidized silicon,
which results in GeOI, germanium on insulator. Bonded
wafers with silicide interlayer have been demonstrated for
RF circuits, Figure 39.10. Layer transfer often necessitates
temporary bonding: the thin layers need a support wafer
for transfer or for processing, and it must be debonded
easily. This is obviously quite a departure from traditional
bonding which aims at permanent (and often hermetic)
bonding.
An alternative way to increase transistor packing den-
sity without resorting to ever smaller linewidths is to stack
wafers on top of each other. 3D integration has been
around for decades because it is such an attractive idea. It
is possible to thin CMOS wafers down after processing,
and align those thinned wafers on top of other CMOS
wafers, to realize 3D integration. In addition to mechani-
cal joining of the wafers (bonding), the wafers have to be
joined electrically, too.
Vias (known as TSV, for through-silicon vias) can be
made from top or bottom side. Electrical contacts can
then be made on wafer backside. This saves area on
wafer front side, improves device packing density and for
example photosensor chips have more effective area for
light gathering. TSV are also essential in MEMS pack-
aging: electrical contacts to cavities can be made through
device or capping wafers (Figure 30.24).
After ﬁnishing device processing, two major possibili-
ties are open for TSV: etching narrow vias (for example
3 μm wide, 30 μm deep) on the front side, followed by
wafer thinning, or, alternatively, wafer thinning to 100 μm
followed by etching large vias (e.g. 10 μm) on the back-
side, Figure 39.11 a and b. In both cases aspect ratios are
approximately 10:1. Alignment accuracy of the front side
vias is much better, but thinning is more demanding. Af-
ter etching, an insulating layer is deposited, followed by
conductor deposition (often in two steps: a seed layer plus
the thick current carrying material). Front side via ﬁlling
is easier because less material needs to be deposited, for
example 1.5 μm thick CVD tungsten can be used to close
3 μm via (see Figure 39.12). Backside and combined front
& back vias (Figure 39.11c) are ﬁlled by electroplated
copper. Closing will be easy because of the thin part,
but two lithography and two etching steps are required.
If TSV is done on a capping (or carrier) wafer, there is
more freedom in ﬁlling: for example highly doped CVD
polysilicon can be used as the conductor. The TSV wafer
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 470]
490
Introduction to Microfabrication
handle wafer
C
B
E
B
n+ poly
n+ buried layer
buried silicide layer
silicided groundplane
n-Si NSEG
n-Si SEG
oxide
wafer bonded n-Si active layer
p+ SiGe NSEG
p+ poly
p+ poly
n+
Figure 39.10
Bipolar transistor on silicon on insulator with buried silicide conductive layer and silicide ground plane.
Reproduced from Bain et al. (2005), by permission of IEEE
a
c
b
d
Figure 39.11
Thru-silicon vias: a) top side narrow via; b)
backside wide via; c) combined front/back via; d) annular
via. Wafer thinning after TSV etch in a and d; thinning
before etching in b and c
can then tolerate practically all possible further processing
steps. In Figure 39.11d an annular TSV is shown. There is
no need for depositing any conductor because the highly
doped central silicon pillar itself is used as the conducting
element. However, thick insulator is needed. Note that this
approach is not amenable to most device wafers because
silicon has to be highly conductive in order to have low
enough via resistance. In Figure 39.12 integration of three
CMOS wafers is shown. The ﬁrst bond is face-to-face, but
the second one is face-to-back. CVD-W deposition tem-
perature of 400 ◦C is low enough and it can be done on
completed wafers.
Flexible electronics is a rapidly growing topic. Vari-
ous polymer devices (antennas, logic, displays) have been
processed on thin polymer sheets to enable bending and
even stretching. Silicon is not out of the race for ﬂexible
electronics. One approach is shown in Figure 39.13. After
completion of the CMOS (or MEMS) process, the wafer
is coated with a polymer layer, and the silicon wafer is
etched away almost completely, leaving only small islands
where the active devices are located. Another polymer
layer is coated on the back side, sandwiching the silicon.
39.6 IC–MEMS Integration
Silicon is just one possible substrate for MEMS, but it
is the one that promises integration with electronic (e.g.,
CMOS circuitry) and optical (e.g., photodiodes) functions.
This section discusses some general integration issues en-
countered with IC–MEMS integration.
MEMS and CMOS can be made side by side, with real
estate reserved for both. Integration beneﬁts come from
closeness: for example, preampliﬁers can be made close
to sensors. The other way is to build MEMS on top of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 471]
Microfabrication at Large
491
Third level
(thinned
substrate)
Second level
(thinned
substrate)
First level
Device
surface
Via bridge
Via plug
Device
surface
Device
surface
Bond
(face-to-back)
Bond
(face-to-face)
Figure 39.12
Chip stacking by wafer thinning and adhesive bonding. Via plugs ﬁlled by CVD tungsten. Reproduced
from Lu et al. (2000) by permission of Materials Research Society
Metal
SiO2
MEMS or ICs
polymer
polymer
polymer
polymer
Silicon substrate
Silicon island
Silicon island
Silicon island
Silicon island
(a) Coat and pattern polymer on front
(c) Coat another polymer layer on back
(b) Thin down and etch through from back
Figure 39.13
Flexible silicon circuits by thinning and silicon island polymer capping. Reproduced from Katragadda and
Xu (2008), copyright 2008, by permission of Elsevier
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 472]
492
Introduction to Microfabrication
CMOS. Classes of devices making most beneﬁt of this in-
clude various array devices, which use CMOS for readout,
for example photodetectors, infrared imagers, ﬁngerprint
sensors and steerable micromirror arrays (Figure 29.25).
CMOS wafers can be treated like any other substrates,
even though they are very expensive ones: a CMOS wafer
might cost for example $500 (0.8 μm CMOS on 150 mm
wafer) vs. $20 for a bulk wafer, $40 for an epiwafer,
$100 for a SOI wafer. Usually the topmost metalliza-
tion layer is not planarized, but CMP is needed when
CMOS is used as a substrate. CMOS transistors have to
be protected from chemical contamination. This has been
successfully done by combined oxide/nitride passivation
and polymeric protective coating, and even KOH etching
can be accomplished without any deleterious effects on
CMOS.
There are many ways of combining CMOS and MEMS:
• MEMS before IC (MEMS release after CMOS comple-
tion).
• MEMS using CMOS polygate as the mechanical struc-
ture.
• MEMS and CMOS interleaved (optimized for both
CMOS and MEMS).
• MEMS in silicon after CMOS (wet etch and DRIE ver-
sions).
• MEMS in thin ﬁlms using CMOS multilevel metalliza-
tion.
• MEMS
postprocessing
on
top
of
CMOS
(poly,
polySiGe, metal, polymers).
All of these have their strengths and weaknesses, but in
all cases process complexity increases and cases of suc-
cessful commercialization of integrated systems remain
limited.
In the MEMS-before-IC approach, MEMS devices are
processed and covered (by for example TEOS oxide), so
hopefully they will not be adversely affected by the hun-
dreds of process steps it takes to complete the IC. The
IC process temperatures limit severely the selection of
materials for MEMS-ﬁrst integration: silicon, polysilicon,
oxide and nitride are really the only candidates. Contact-
ing the MEMS part to the IC part is preferably done by
diffusions because metal/silicon interfaces cannot be made
until fairly late in the process.
The plug-up process shown in Figure 39.14 is a SOI
MEMS–IC process which consists of the following main
modules:
1. MEMS structure processing and encapsulation.
2. CMOS process.
3. MEMS structure release.
a
b
c
d
Figure 39.14
Integration of MEMS and electronics on
SOI: a) DRIE and semipermeable polysilicon deposition;
b) buried oxide etching through semi-permeable poly; c)
deposition of standard polysilicon and CMP; d) IC pro-
cessing and release hole etching by DRIE. Adapted from
ref. Kiiham¨aki
There is no topography increase in SOI MEMS steps, and
the sealed cavities do not pose problems for subsequent
CMOS processing if the CMOS and MEMS parts are side
by side on a wafer. The behavior of trapped gases inside
cavities requires attention, however, and planarity of the
prefabricated membrane is not guaranteed.
The simple approach to MEMS–IC integration is to
use CMOS polysilicon to make mechanical structures;
that is, to leave the IC process as it is and add subopti-
mal MEMS modules. CMOS gate polysilicon is typically
0.25 μm thick, whereas micromechanical poly is 1–2 μm
thick. CMOS gate poly is optimized for poly/SiO2 inter-
face properties and it is highly doped. Micromechanical
poly is designed for minimal stresses and stress gradients.
But the integrated electronics can be used to correct for
some of the performance losses in sensing.
True
interleaved
fabrication
offers
the
greatest
challenges and greatest beneﬁts because the best of
both
worlds
are
combined.
Often
this
integration
means a signiﬁcant increase in mask count and process
complexity. Only products with long production runs can
be made this way, because of the work and expense of
process development.
In MEMS using CMOS layers there are two basic ap-
proaches: using the thin ﬁlms of CMOS as in surface
micromechanics; and using lower ﬁlms or a silicon sub-
strate as sacriﬁcial layers. In both cases the release etching
is done from the front side. If back-side DRIE is done,
it is possible to use single crystal silicon for mechanical
elements and thin ﬁlms for actuation (e.g., heater resis-
tors and sense electrodes). These approaches are shown
in Figure 39.15. The pop-up mirror of Figure 39.2 is fab-
ricated by the method shown in Figure 39.15b.
Wet etching of silicon after CMOS completion is shown
in Figure 39.16. The pn junction etch stop is used to make
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 473]
Microfabrication at Large
493
(a)
(b)
Figure 39.15
Two ways to do post-CMOS MEMS: (a)
thin-ﬁlm MEMS by front release; (b) single crystal silicon
MEMS by back-side DRIE. Adapted from Jain and Xie
(2006)
Oxide support beam
Circuitry
Oxide
passivation
Aluminum
metallization
Pit etched in substrate
p-type substrate
Suspended n-well
Figure 39.16
Post-CMOS wet etching with electrochem-
ical etch stop to protect n-well of CMOS part. Reproduced
from Kovacs et al. (1998) by permission of IEEE
sure that the circuitry in the n-well is not affected in KOH
etching. This approach sacriﬁces some silicon area, but its
beauty is in the fact that only KOH etching is needed after
completion of CMOS.
The largest repertoire of choices is available in MEMS
postprocessing after completion of CMOS. One choice is
poly-SiGe with CVD oxides as sacriﬁcial layers. These
processes are limited by metal–silicon contact interface
stability, and about 450 ◦C is the limit of usable temper-
ature. The advantage of poly-SiGe over polysilicon lies
especially in the lower processing temperatures and larger
process window for stress-relief anneal.
Sputtered aluminum with photoresist sacriﬁcial layers
is an inherently low-temperature process. The problems
come from the mechanical stability of polycrystalline alu-
minum in dynamic applications: in micromirror applica-
tions 10 years of operation correspond to 1010 mirror
ﬂips. Even when no mechanical fatigue sets in, aluminum
mirrors have memory effects and alloys with better me-
chanical properties are used, for example TiAl.
Electroplated metals, typically copper and nickel, have
been used to make gyroscopes and other mechanical el-
ements on top of CMOS. Unlike sputtered aluminum,
electroplated ﬁlm thickness can be considerable, and seis-
mic masses and stiff vertical structures can be made.
Valley
Finger
Ridge
Cavity
Lower
electrode
Upper
electrode
T-shaped
protrusion
MEMS
structure
Figure 39.17
Fingerprint sensor on CMOS. Reproduced
from Sato et al. (2005), copyright 2005, by permission of
IEEE
PECVD nitride membranes can be deposited at 200–
300 ◦C, which is low enough for CMOS. In IR imagers
a sacriﬁcial Al-layer and nitride structural layer are used.
Each IR pixel has an ampliﬁer transistor right beneath it.
The nitride membrane is released to provide thermal isola-
tion. The stresses in the nitride have to be optimized, with
all the other layers on top of it, including the absorbers.
Fingerprint feature sizes are fairly large. A pixel size
of 50 μm is adequate, and even very old-fashioned, cheap
and high-yielding CMOS can be used as a substrate. In
the sensor shown in Figure 39.17, electroplated metals and
thick photosensitive polyimide have been used to fabricate
movable membranes for capacitive sensing of localized
forces.
More than two technologies can be combined, but at
the expense of increased mask count, of course. The inte-
grated microhotplate gas sensor pictured in Figure 39.18
combines bulk silicon micromachining, chemically sensi-
tive resistors and SOI CMOS transistors. However, simple
SOI wafers were not usable in this application because
device silicon thickness needs to be about 1.5 μm, there-
fore epitaxial deposition of silicon on top of a SIMOX
SOI wafer was used. Anisotropic wet etching of sili-
con was used for vertical thermal isolation, with SOI
buried oxide as an etch stop layer. But the sensor, op-
erating at 350 ◦C, has to be also laterally thermally iso-
lated from the readout electronics. This is achieved by
trench isolation, a technique borrowed from advanced IC
technologies. CMOS circuits on a SOI device layer take
care of signal processing, but MOSFETs are also used as
heaters. This was done in order to simplify the process:
platinum heaters would have added a new material and
new cleaning and contamination concerns. Contacting,
however, introduces exotic materials: the sensor material,
porous palladium-doped SnO2, makes contact with gold
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 474]
494
Introduction to Microfabrication
Gas sensing area
Sensor
Heater
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
Si
Si
n substrate
NMOS
PMOS
Electronic IC area
Silicon
Oxide
Polysilicon
Sensitive layer
Metal
Passivation layer
Si
S
S
D
D
n+
p
n+
p+
p+
n
n+
n+
p
Figure 39.18
Integrated SOI CMOS microhotplate resistive gas sensor. The MOS transistor below the sensor is for
heating; the readout electronics is situated beside the sensor for thermal isolation. Reproduced from Gardner et al. (2001)
by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
electrodes, which make contact with the electronics. In
order not to contaminate the SOI CMOS part, Au, Pd
and SnO2 depositions have to be made as postprocessing
steps, and they put extra demands on barriers.
39.7 Microfabricated Devices
for Microfabrication
As the microfabrication industries have expanded and
applications widened, microfabrication has been fed
into its own
infrastructure.
Microfabricated devices
are being used in the fabrication of future microfab-
ricated devices. The atomic force microscope (Figure
2.4)
is
already
the
established
standard
for
many
measurements within microfabrication. Similar to the
AFM, the four-point probe (4PP; Figure 2.9) has been
miniaturized (Figure 39.19). Size reduction in 4PP is
not just miniaturization for its own sake but extends the
measurement range into sizes not previously possible.
As an application, 4PP analysis of laser annealing of
ion implantation damage is shown in Figure 39.19b:
resistivity is non-uniform, which indicates problems with
laser scanning. Incomplete activation is therefore the
reason, because charge carrier mobility is constant across
the scanned area.
Residual gas analysis (RGA) in vacuum chambers
is one application where microsystems have already
been commercialized. Instead of bulky traditional mass
spectrometers, vacuum residual gases are analyzed by
microfabricated mass spectrometers (Figure 39.20). Their
760
750
740
730
720
710
700
690
680
670
760
740
720
700
680
Rs (Ω)
−5
5
−2
−1
0
1
2
0
y (mm)
x (mm)
Mag = 20.00 k x
1μm
EHT = 5.00 kV
WD = 11
Signal A = SE2
Photo No. = 4733
Date :11 Sep 2008
Time :21:10
Figure 39.19
Micro 4PP: left, SEM micrograph; right, 4PP data. Reproduced from Petersen et al. (2010) by permission
of the American Institute of Physics
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 475]
Microfabrication at Large
495
Figure 39.20
Microfabricated mass spectrometer. Repro-
duced from Wapelhorst et al. (2007), copyright 2007, by
permission of Elsevier
performance does not match that of traditional instru-
ments (mass resolution especially is poor, and mass
range limited) but the lower price makes it possible
to install RGAs in all vacuum equipment, for routine
monitoring. In the past, RGA was a special tool that
was used in troubleshooting and system check-ups by
professionals. While a pressure sensor is a much simpler
and cheaper device for vacuum monitoring, RGAs can
tell which gases are present (hydrocarbons from pump
oils vs. water vapor), which can be valuable information
in troubleshooting.
Micromirror-based patterning systems (23.3, 29.25,
39.21) offer many beneﬁts over existing systems. No
physical mask plates are needed, reducing cost and time
needed to make microstructures. Both expensive high
resolution systems and simple systems have their own
applications, in ICs and microﬂuidics, respectively.
DNA microarrays consist of sample spots containing
DNA strands, made by for example microfabricated
silicon pin spotters or by ink jetting. In those methods
the DNA strands have been synthesized before they are
applied on a chip. The microfabrication alternative is to
synthesize the DNA strands on the chip one nucleotide
at a time (i.e. adding one of the four bases A,C,G,T). A
set of 25 masks is used to create DNA strands with 25
nucleotides, by adding one nucleotide in each lithographic
step. DNA arrays have been made commercially by
optical lithography since mid-1990’s. These chips can
have over one million spots with different DNA strands.
Increasing the number of spots and decreasing their size
is easy but increasing the mask count, and hence the
length of DNA strands, is very expensive. Virtual masks
provided by cheap micromirror devices enable pixels in
the 10 μm size range to be printed very economically.
DNA strands with up to 100 nucleotides are fabricated
this way. Combining virtual masks with microﬂuidic
reactors for DNA synthesis makes it possible to integrate
DNA chip fabrication into a single system.
Micromirror array (also known as spatial light modula-
tor, SLM), excimer laser, optics and mechanics make up
an advanced pattern generator system capable of exposing
80 nm pixels (Figure 39.21). An array of 2048×512 con-
sists of individual mirrors 16×16 μm in size, resulting in a
chip 33×8 mm. Actuation speed is 2 kHz. The feature size
and patterning speed are enough to write advanced pho-
tomasks, and of course direct writing is also an option,
but throughput is the limiting factor. Microsystems and
nanotechnology are still in a nascent state, and there are
many contenders for the main devices and device classes.
Some of them may reach CMOS-like volumes and mar-
kets, some will remain niche applications, but most will
never enter the manufacturing stage. This is how evolution
in technology imitates natural evolution: the more varia-
tion there is and the more experiments are conducted, the
more likely it is that some viable applications and tech-
nologies will emerge and will reproduce into many future
generations.
39.8 Exercises
1. Find out about permeable polysilicon and explain how
the plug-up process of Figure 39.14 works.
2. If 5 μm diameter, 50 μm deep TSV is ﬁlled by copper,
what is the via resistance? What if the ﬁlling is by
poly? By tungsten?
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 476]
496
Introduction to Microfabrication
Figure 39.21
Micromirror array (SLM, for Spatial Light Modulator) for deep submicron pattern generation: virtual
masks created in a 2048 × 512 mirror array are projected onto a wafer or a mask blank. Courtesy Micronic Mydata and
Fraunhofer Institute, by permission of the American Institute of Physics
3. Draw the mask layout views and develop the fabrica-
tion process for the microgripper of Figure 39.8.
4. What will be the critical steps in fabricating the wafer
stack of Figure 39.12?
5. How would you fabricate the PCR chip of Figure 39.6?
6. How is the starting wafer of Figure 39.10 fabricated?
What limitations does it impose on the bipolar fabri-
cation process, if any?
7. Break down the fabrication of the hot plate sensor of
Figure 39.18 into the main process modules, and ex-
plain in which order they are undertaken!
8. Select polymers and design the fabrication process for
ﬂexible silicon electronics of Figure 39.13!
References and Related Reading
Aravamudhan, S., A.R.A. Rahman and S. Bhansali (2005)
Porous silicon based orientation independent, self-priming
micro direct ethanol fuel cell, Sens. Actuators, A123–124,
497–504.
Bain, M. et al. (2005) SiGe HBTs on bonded SOI Incorporat-
ing buried silicide layers, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 52,
317–324.
Barbaro, M. et al. (2006) A CMOS fully integrated sensor for
electronic detection of DNA hybridization, IEEE Electron
Device Lett., 27, 595–597.
Brand, O. (2006) Microsensor integration into systems-on-chip,
Proc. IEEE, 94, 1160–1176.
Chronis, N. and L.P. Lee (2005) Electrothermally activated
SU-8 microgripper for single cell manipulation in solution,
J. Microelectromech. Syst., 14, 857–863.
Dunn-Rankin,
D.,
E.M.
Leal
and
D.C.
Walther
(2005)
Personal power systems, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 31,
422–465.
Fedder, G.K. et al. (2008) Technologies for cofabricating
MEMS and electronics, Proc. IEEE, 96, 306–322.
Gardner, J.W., V.V. Varadan and O.O. Awadelkarim (2001)
Microsensors, MEMS and Smart Devices, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Garrou, P., C. Bower, and P. Ramm (eds) (2008) Handbook
of 3D integration, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.
Heikenfeld,
J.
et al.
(2009)
Electroﬂuidic
displays
us-
ing
Young–Laplace
transposition
of
brilliant
pigment
dispersions, Nat. Photonics, 3, 292–296.
Hierlemann, A. and H. Baltes (2003) CMOS-based chemical
microsensors, Analyst, 128, 15–28.
Jain, A. and H. Xie (2006) A single-crystal silicon micromir-
ror for large bi-directional 2D scanning applications, Sens.
Actuators, A130–131, 454–460.
Katragadda, R.B. and Y. Xu (2008) A novel intelligent textile
technology based on silicon ﬂexible skins, Sens. Actuators,
A143, 169–174.
Kiiham¨aki, J. et al. (2004) “Plug-up” – a new concept for
fabricating SOI MEMS devices, Microsyst. Technol., 10,
346–350
Ko, W.H. (2007) Trends and frontiers of MEMS, Sens. Actua-
tors, A136, 62–67.
Kovacs, G.T.A. et al. (1998) Bulk micromachining of silicon,
Proc. IEEE 86, 1543.
Koyanagi, M., T. Fukushima and T. Tanaka (2009) High-
density through silicon vias for 3-D LSIs, Proc. IEEE, 97,
49–59.
Kwon, Y. et al. (2008) Evaluation of BCB bonded and
thinned wafer stacks for three-dimensional integration, J.
Electrochem. Soc., 155, H280–H286.
Lu, J.-Q. et al. (2000) 3D integration using wafer bonding,
Advanced
Metallization
Conference
2000,
San
Diego,
paper V3.
Machida, K. et al. (2001) A novel semiconductor capacitive
sensor for a single-chip ﬁngerprint sensor/identiﬁer LSI,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 48, 2273.
Obeid, P.J. et al. (2003) Microfabricated device for DNA and
RNA ampliﬁcation by continuous-ﬂow polymerase chain
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 477]
Microfabrication at Large
497
reaction and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
with cycle number selection, Anal. Chem., 75, 288–295.
Petersen, D.H. et al. (2010) Review of electrical characteriza-
tion of ultra-shallow junctions with micro four-point probes,
J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B28, C1C27–C1C33.
Poupon, G. et al. (2009) System on wafer: a new silicon con-
cept in SiP, Proc. IEEE, 97, 60–69.
Reuss, R.H. et al. (2005) Macroelectronics: perspectives on
technology and applications, Proc. IEEE, 93, 1239–1256.
Sato, N. et al. (2005) Novel surface structure and its fabrication
process for MEMS ﬁngerprint sensor, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, 52, 1026–1032.
Sedky, S. (2007) SiGe: an attractive material for post-CMOS
processing of MEMS, Microelectron. Eng., 84, 2491–2500.
Song, J. et al. (2009) Solid-state microscale lithium batteries
prepared with microfabrication processes, J. Micromech. Mi-
croeng., 19, 045004.
Sterner,
M.,
G.
Stemme
and
J.
Oberhammer
(2010)
Nanometer-scale
ﬂatness
and
reliability
investiga-
tion
of
stress-compensated
symmetrically-metallized
monocrystalline-silicon
multi-layer
membranes,
IEEE
International Conference on Nano/Micro Engineered and
Molecular Systems, 2010.
Takeuchi, H. et al. (2005) Thermal budget limits of quarter-
micrometer foundry CMOS for post-processing MEMS de-
vices, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 52, 2081–2086.
Tanaka, Y. et al. (2007) Biological cells on microchips: new
technologies and applications, Biosens. Bioelectron., 23,
449–458.
Topol, A.W. et al. (2006) Three-dimensional integrated cir-
cuits, IBM J. Res. Dev., 50, 491–506.
Wapelhorst, E., J.-P. Hauschild and J. M¨uller (2007) Complex
MEMS: a fully integrated TOF micro mass spectrometer,
Sens. Actuators, A138, 22–27.
Webster, J.R. et al. (2001) Monolithic capillary electrophoresis
device with integrated ﬂuorescence detector, Anal. Chem.,
73, 1622–1626.
Wise, K.W. (2007) Integrated sensors, MEMS, and microsys-
tems: reﬂections on a fantastic voyage, Sens. Actuators,
A136, 39–50.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 478]
Appendix A
Properties of Silicon
0.0001
Dopant concentration (cm−3)
Resistivity (ohm-cm)
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10 000
100 000
1.E + 12
1.E + 13
1.E + 14
1.E + 15
1.E + 16
1.E + 17
1.E + 18
1.E + 19
1.E + 20
1.E + 21
p-type
n-type
Structural and mechanical
Atomic weight
28.09
Atoms, total (cm−3)
4.995 × 1022
Crystal structure
Diamond (fcc)
Lattice constant ( ˚A)
5.43
Density (g/cm3)
2.33
Density of surface atoms (cm−2)
(100) 6.78 × 1014
(110) 9.59 × 1014
(111) 7.83 × 1014
Young’s modulus (GPa)
190 (111) crystal
orientation
Yield strength (GPa)
7
Fracture strain
4%
Poisson ratio, ν
0.27
Knoop hardness (kg/mm2)
850
Electrical
Energy gap (eV)
1.12
Intrinsic carrier concentration (cm−3)
1.38 × 1010
Intrinsic resistivity (-cm)
2.3 × 105
Dielectric constant
11.8
Intrinsic Debye length (nm)
24
Mobility (drift) (cm2/V-s)
1500 (electrons)
475 (holes)
Temperature coeff. of resistivity (K−1)
0.0017
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 479]
500
Appendix A
(110)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(111)
(010)
(110)
(110)
(101)
(100)
(001)
(101)
(100)
(001)
(110)
(010)
(011)
(011)
(101)
(011)
(101)
(011)
Wafer flats and notches for identifying wafer orientation and doping type
(111) p-type
(111) n-type
(100) n-type
(100) n-type
(100) p-type
Thermal
Coefﬁcient of thermal expansion (◦C−1)
2.6 × 10−6
Melting point (◦C)
1414
Speciﬁc heat (J/kg-K)
700
Thermal conductivity (W/m-K)
150
Thermal diffusivity
0.8 cm2/s
Optical
Index of refraction
3.42
λ = 632 nm
3.48
λ = 1550 nm
Energy gap
wavelength
1.1 μm
(transparent at larger
wavelengths)
Absorption
> 106 cm−1
λ = 200–360 nm
105 cm−1
λ = 420 nm
104 cm−1
λ = 550 nm
103 cm−1
λ = 800 nm
< 0.01 cm−1
λ = 1550 nm
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 480]
Appendix B
Constants and Conversion Factors
Atomic mass unit amu
1.66 × 10−27 kg
Electron charge e
1.602 × 10−19 C
Avogadro’s constant NA
6.022 × 1023/mol
Boltzmann constant k
1.38066 × 10−23 J/K =
8.6544 × 10−5 eV/K
Faraday constant F
96 500 As/mol
(F = e × NA)
Gas constant R
8.3144 J/Kmol
(R = k × NA)
Gas molar standard volume
22.4 l/mol
(Vm = RT0/p0)
Permittivity of vacuum ε0
8.854 × 10−12 F/m
Speed of light c
2.9979 × 108 m/s
Stefan–Boltzmann constant σ
5.67 × 10−8 W/m2K4
Conversion factors
T/K = 273.15 + t/◦C
1 eV = 1.6 × 10−19 J
1 eV × NA = 96.5 J/mol = 23.06 kcal/mol
1 cal = 4.184 J
1 N = 105 dyne
1 Pa = 1 N/m2 = 10 dyne/cm2
1 μm = 10−6 m = 1000 nm = 0.001 mm
1 ˚A = 0.1 nm = 1 × 10−10 m
1 mil = (1/1000) inch = 25.4 μm
Pressure conversion
To
Pa
Torr
atm
mbar
From
multiply by
Pascal (Pa) 1
7.5 × 10−3 9.87 × 10−6
10−2
Torr  
    (mmHg)
133
1
1.316 × 10−3 1.33
atm
1.013 × 105
760
1
1013
mbar
100
0.75
9.87 × 10−4
1
Flow conversion
Pa m3/s
Torr l/s
sccm
Pa m3/s
1
7.5
592
Torr l/s
0.133
1
78.9
sccm
1.69 × 10−3
1.27 × 10−2
1
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 481]
Appendix C
Oxide and Nitride Thickness by Color
Color chart for thermal SiO2 ﬁlms under daylight
ﬂuorescent lighting
Thickness
Color
Order
(μm)
0.05
Tan
0.07
Brown
0.10
Dark violet to red-violet
0.12
Royal blue
0.15
Light blue to metallic blue
0.17
Metallic to yellow-green
i
0.20
Light gold or yellow
0.22
Gold
0.25
Orange to melon
0.27
Red-violet
0.30
Blue to violet-blue
0.31
Blue
0.32
Blue to blue-green
0.34
Light green
0.35
Green to yellow-green
0.36
Yellow-green
ii
0.37
Green-yellow
0.39
Yellow
0.41
Light orange
0.42
Carnation pink
0.44
Violet-red
0.46
Red-violet
0.47
Violet
0.48
Violet-blue
0.49
Blue
0.50
Blue-green
0.52
Green (broad)
0.54
Yellow-green
0.56
Green-yellow
iii
0.57
Yellowish
0.58
Light orange
0.60
Carnation pink
Color chart for thermal SiO2 ﬁlms under daylight
ﬂuorescent lighting
Thickness
Color
Order
(μm)
0.63
Violet-red
0.68
Bluish
0.72
Blue-green to green
iv
0.77
Yellowish
0.80
Orange
0.82
Salmon
0.85
Dull light red-violet
0.86
Violet
0.87
Blue-voilet
0.89
Blue
0.92
Blue-green
v
0.95
Dull yellow-green
0.97
Yellow to yellowish
0.99
Orange
1.00
Carnation pink
Source: Pliskin, W. and E. Conrad (1964) Non-destructive determination
of thickness and refractive index of transparent ﬁlms, IBM J. Res. Dev.,
1, 43.
Color chart for Si3N4 tungsten ﬁlament microscope
illumination
0–20 nm
Silicon
20–40 nm
Brown
40–55 nm
Golden brown
55–73 nm
Red
73–77 nm
Deep blue
77–93 nm
Blue
93–100 nm
Pale blue
100–110 nm
Very pale blue
110–120 nm
Silicon
120–130 nm
Light yellow
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 482]
504
Appendix C
Color chart for Si3N4 tungsten ﬁlament microscope
illumination
130–150 nm
Yellow
150–180 nm
Orange red
180–190 nm
Red
190–210 nm
Dark red
210–230 nm
Blue
230–250 nm
Blue-green
250–280 nm
Light green
280–300 nm
Orange yellow
300–330 nm
Red
Source: Reizman, F. and W. van Gelder (1967) Optical thickness mea-
surement of SiO2-Si3N4 ﬁlms on silicon, Solid-State Electron., 10, 625.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 483]
Index
Bold font indicates main entry
T indicates table
100 silicon, 40, 251
110 silicon, 40, 249
111 silicon, 40, 250
113 silicon, 317
130 nm, CMOS, 340T
1:3:8 etch, 136, 393
1D, one-dimensional simulation, 30
2D, two-dimensional simulation, 31
2D, two-dimensional growth, 78
3D, three-dimensional growth, 78
3D, three-dimensional simulation, 32
4PP, four-point probe, 19, 174, 494
5N (99.999 % purity), 143, 445
65 nm, CMOS, 340T
7N, (99.99999% purity), 143, 445
Aalto, Alvar, 301
ablation, 302
absorption, 37T
abrasive, 182
accelerometer, 192, 248, 369
activation energy, 5, 131, 167, 168, 433
adatoms, 78
adhesion, 80, 84, 216, 230, 322, 412
adhesion promotion, 103
adhesive bonding, 196, 219
AES, Auger electron spectroscopy, 23, 80, 85
AFM, atomic force microscope, 17, 187, 238, 305, 395
ALD, atomic layer deposition, 4, 53, 217, 361, 375,
434, 472, 475
alignment, 104, 319, 389
bonding 198
critical, 319
design rules, 319
double side, 390
marks, 11, 104, 108
alpha-tool, 416
aluminum,
etching, 137, 427
gate, 329
MEMS, 196, 370, 371T
metallization, 393, 394, 396, 452
polishing, 184
properties, 61T, 83
aluminum nitride, 4, 25, 49, 53, 91, 197, 412, 475
aluminum oxide, 4, 49, 53, 375, 475
ammonia-peroxide clean, 145T
amorphization, 177, 322
amorphous state, 4, 69, 338, 476
silicon, 62, 168, 325, 340
polymers, 205
anisotropic plasma etching, 130
anisotropic wet etching, 130, 237
annealing, 325
contact improvement, 83, 327
CVD ﬁlms, 199, 325
equipment, 421
forming gas, 332
implant damage, 177
laser, 303, 421
millisecond, 421
post-deposition, 77
post-oxidation, 157, 420
RTA, 88, 421
silicide, 88
stress tailoring, 325
thermal budget, 326
anodic bonding, 194, 225, 231, 393
APCVD, atmospheric pressure CVD, 433
antireﬂection coating, 120, 316, 374
APM, ammonia-peroxide mixture, 145T
ARC, antireﬂection coating, 120, 315
ARDE, aspect ratio dependent etching, 266
Arrhenius equation, 5, 50, 130, 435
Introduction to Microfabrication, Second E dition                 Sami Franssila
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, L td.  ISBN: 978-0-470-74983-8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 484]
506
Index
arsine, AsH3, 179, 446T
ashing, same as resist stripping, 111
aspect ratio, 7, 208, 255, 358, 365
aspect ratio dependent etching, ARDE, 266
atomic clock, 234
atomic force microscope, AFM, 17, 187, 238, 305, 395
atomic layer deposition, ALD, 4, 53, 217, 361, 375,
434, 472, 475
Auger electron spectroscopy, AES, 23
autodoping, 73, 80, 85
back-end of the line, BEOL, 6, 315, 330
bake, 104, 119, 143, 208
bamboo structure, 453
BARC, bottom antireﬂection coating, 120
barrel reactor, 438
barrier, 84, 361
base (of a bipolar transistor), 347
batch processing, 409
BCB, benzocyclobtadiene, 64T, 205
BCP, block co-polymer, 284
BEOL, back-end of the line, 315, 330
BESOI, Bond-etchback SOI, 275
beta-tool, 416
BHF, buffered HF, 131T
BiCMOS, 352
BioMEMS, 488
bipolar transistors, 30, 172, 347, 349T, 490
binary mask, 121
bird’s beak, 158
blanket wafer, 26
block co-polymer, 284
BMD, bulk microdefects, 272
BOE, buffered oxide etchant, 131T
bolometer, 140, 244, 384
bond alignment, 198
bonding, 191, 200T, 399, 402
adhesive, 196, 219
anodic, 194, 231, 393
eutectic, 196
fusion, 193, 276, 399
glass frit, 200
glass, 230
localized, 218
metallic, 195
polymer, 217
solder, 246, 401
solvent, 218
thermal, 217
thermocompression, 195, 394
bond strength, 133, 199
bonding pad, 61, 326
boron etch stop, 240
boron nitride, 82T
borosilicate glass, 226T
Bosch process, 258, 266
bottom gate TFT, 340
bottom coverage, 57, 90
boundary layer, 51, 128, 435
bow, 274
BOX, buried oxide in SOI, 276
BPSG boron-phosphorous doped silica glass, 52
Braille, 220
breakdown ﬁeld, 154, 453
brush scrubbing, 145
buffered HF, 131
bulk microdefects, BMD, 272
bulk micromachining, 45, 237, 400
buried layer, 347
buried oxide, BOX, 347
CA, contact angle, 149
cantilever, 238, 373, 378, 396
capacitance, 63, 255, 334, 337, 364, 372, 474
capacitor, 192, 323, 328, 354, 384
capillary electrophoresis, CE, 232
capillary forces, 376
capping, 402, 404
CAR, chemically ampliﬁed resist, 118
carbon nanotube, 53, 343
cavity, 279, 400
CD, compact disc, 211, 303
CD, critical dimension, 17, 125, 138, 479
CDI, collector diffusion isolation, 354
CE, capillary electrophoresis, 232
channeling, 176
chemically ampliﬁed resist, CAR, 118
chemical mechanical polishing, 183, 360, 364, 383
chemical vapor deposition, CVD, 50, 64T, 87, 434
chemisorption, 77
chip, 11, 450, 459
chip yield, 450, 459
chrome, 98
chromium, 61T, 84, 159, 227
cleaning, 143, 185, 324, 419, 439, 473
cleanroom, 10, 441
cluster tool, 412
CMOS, 10, 330
as substrate, 383, 492
fabrication, 329, 470
MEMS integration, 398, 490
scaling, 471
wafer selection, 336
CMP, chemical mechanical polishing, 183, 360
cMUT, capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducer,
399
CNT, carbon nanotube, 53, 343
cobalt silicide, 83, 88, 472
COC, cyclic oleﬁn copolymer, 205
coefﬁcient of thermal expansion, CTE,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 485]
Index
507
anodic bonding, 195
polymers, 206T
silicon, 37T
stresses, 59
thin ﬁlms, 61T, 64T, 65
cold wall reactor, 419
collar, 319
collector, 347
collimated sputtering, 80
comb-drive, 256, 376, 382
combustor, 235
contact angle, 149
contact, 60, 326, 332, 452
contact hole, 57, 66, 320, 332, 359
contact resistance, 339, 452
contact lithography, 103, 109
contamination, 143, 324, 441
contrast, 118
CoO, cost of ownership, 416
COP, crystal originated particle, 272
COP, cyclooleﬁc polymer, same as COC, 205
copper,
deposition, 49, 54, 56
etching, 135
interfaces, 83
MEMS, 371, 373, 380, 493
metallization, 360, 471, 489
oxidation, 325
polishing, 184
resistivity, 61T, 365
corner effects, 159, 243, 320
corrosion, 427
CoSi2, 83, 88, 471
cost of ownership, CoO, 416
critical alignment, 389
critical dimension, CD, 17, 125, 138, 479
critical length, 376
critical lithography, 318
critical point drying, 378
crucible, 49, 271
cryocooler, 233
cryogenic etching, 258, 428
crystal originated particle, COP, 272
crystal pulling, 36, 272
crystal structure, 39, 237
c-SOI, cavity SOI, 400
CTE, coefﬁcient of thermal expansion, 37T, 59, 61T,
64T, 65, 195, 206T
curl switch, 9
CVD, chemical vapor deposition, 50
equipment, 433
mechanism, 53
MEMS, 370
nitride, 62, 64T
oxide, 62, 64T
polysilicon, 62, 373
plasma enhanced, 52
rate, 434
reactors, 435
tungsten, 52, 87, 469
cycle time, 461
CYTOP, amorphous ﬂuoropolymer, 205
Czochralski silicon, CZ, 36, 317
damage, 177
damascene, 361
dangling bonds, 157
dark ﬁeld, 98, 110
dark ﬁeld microscopy, 15
DCS, dichlorosilane SiH2Cl2, 72, 436
Deal-Grove oxidation model, 154
deembossing, 215
deep trench isolation, DTI, 351
deep UV, λ < 300 nm, 117
defect
crystalline, 44
density, 450
etching, 131
oxide, 454
deﬂection, equation, 198, 392
demolding, 215
denuded zone, DZ, 273
depth of focus, DOF, 117
design rules, 318
desorption, 425
development (of resist), 106
DF, dark ﬁeld (mask), 98, 110
DHF, dilute HF, 131T
diamond, 52, 280, 295, 409
diamond-like carbon, DLC, 53, 80, 280
diaphragm (membrane), 245, 248, 391
diazonapthoquinine, DNQ, 106, 208
diborane, 62, 86, 438, 446T
die, 11, 455
dichlorosilane SiH2Cl2, 72, 436
dicing, 11, 303, 307
dielectrics, 48, 63T, 64T, 364
die yield, 455
diffusion barrier, 84
diffusion, 165, 314
diffusivity, thermal, 302, 424
Dill parameters, 118
dip pen, 306
direct bonding, 191
direct writing, 93, 299, 301
dishing, 185
dislocation, 44
display, 375, 463, 488
disposable mold, 294
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 486]
508
Index
DIW, de-ionized water, 10, 445
DLC, diamond-like carbon, 53, 80
DNA chip, 233, 234, 322, 485, 487
DNQ, diazonapthoquinine, 107
DOF, depth of focus, 117
dogbone, 319
dopant, 38, 165
doping proﬁle, 22, 168, 171
double poly (bipolar), 351
double side processing, 314, 389
double side polished wafers, DSP, 45, 313, 389
down force, 182
down-time, 415
drain, 10, 176, 332, 337
DRAM, dynamic random access memory, 451,
474, 479
DRIE, deep reactive ion etching, 230, 255,
268T, 365, 388T, 493
drilling, 308
drive-in, 166
dry cleaning, 146
dry etching, 128, 317
dry oxidation, 153
drying, 146, 378
DSP, double side polished wafers, 45, 313, 389
DTI, deep trench isolation, 351
dual damascene, 363
DUV, deep ultra violet, λ < 300 nm, 117
DVD, 211, 476
DZ, denuded zone, 273
EBL, electron beam lithography, 95, 478
EBR, edge bead removal, 107
ECD, electrochemical deposition, 54
ECM, electrochemical machining, 309
edge bead removal, EBR, 107
edge exclusion, 11
edge rounding, 43, 276
EDM, electro discharge machining, 308
EDP, ethylene diamine pyrocathecol, 238, 240T
EDX, energy dispersive X-ray analysis, 23
EG, extrinsic gettering, 273
EGS, electronic grade polysilicon, 35
EPW, ethylene diamine pyrocathecol water, 238, 240T
ELA, excimer laser annealing, 303
electrochemical deposition, ECD, 54
electrochemical etching, 241, 291
electrochemical etch stop, 240, 493
electroless deposition, 55
electromigration, 452
electron beam lithography, EBL, 95
electron projection lithography, EPL, 478
electroplating, 54, 380
electropolishing, 292
electronic stopping, 174
electrospray, 219, 399
ellipsometry, 17, 64
ELO, epitaxial lateral overgrowth, 76, 473
EM, electromigration, 452
embossing, 212, 228
emissivity, 422
emitter, bipolar transistor, 347
emitter push, 170
EMPA, electron microprobe analysis, 24
end point, 135
energy dispersive X-ray analysis, EDX, 23
energy loss, 174T
EOR, end of range damage, 177
EOT, equivalent oxide thickness, 337
epitaxial lateral overgrowth, ELO, 76, 473
epitaxial wafers, 275
epitaxy, 69, 275, 347, 393, 437, 473
epoxy, 205
EPW, ethylene diamine pyrocathecol water, 238, 240T
equipment, 409
equipment industry, 460
equivalent oxide thickness, EOT, 337
erosion, 185
ERR, etch rate ratio, same, 127
ESCA, electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis,
24
ESH, Environment, safety & health, 179, 445
ESI, electrospray ionization, 219, 399
etchback, 135
etch
gases, 133T
mask, 134, 239, 259, 261
mechanism, 133
proﬁle, 128
rate, 138, 255
rate ratio, 127
reactors, 428
residues, 134, 267
selectivity, 127
stop, 240, 275, 392
etching
anisotropic plasma, 130
anisotropic wet, 130
DRIE, 255
dry, 128
isotropic, 130
plasma, 127
RIE, 128
wet, 127, 227
eutectic bonding, 196
EUVL, extreme ultra violet lithography, 477
evaporation, 49, 289, 291
exposure, 96, 105, 108
exposure ﬁeld, 116, 477
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 487]
Index
509
F, feature size, 476, 479
FA, furnace annealing, 421
fab (IC fabrication facility), 460
fabless company, 460, 471
Fabry-Perot interferometer, 375
failure analysis, 26
fatal defects, 451
FBAR, ﬁlm bulk acoustic resonator, 87
F/E, focus/exposure matrix, 117
FEB, focused electron beam, 301
Fed. standard, 442
FEOL, front-end of the line, 6, 315, 329
FET, ﬁeld effect transistor, 10, 31, 32, 334, 329, 473,
478, 490
FGA, forming gas anneal, 332
FIB, focussed ion beam, 299
Fick’s law, 168
ﬁeld oxide, FOX, 331
ﬁngerprint sensor, 493
ﬂame ionization, 7
ﬂash anneal, 421
ﬂash memory, 156, 466, 475
ﬂat (wafer ﬂat), 11, 41, 191, Appendix B
ﬂat panel display, FPD, 463
ﬂatness, 191, 274
ﬂexible electronics, 341, 491
ﬂoat zone silicon, FZ, 39, 317
ﬂow/reﬂow, 326
ﬂuidic, 486
channels, 197, 210, 211, 219, 220, 316, 379
connector, 399
diode, 221
sieve, 204, 316
valve, 209
ﬂuoropolymers, 56, 150, 205, 215
focal plane deviation, FPD, 274
focus depth, 116
focussed ion beam, FIB, 299
footprint, 415
forming gas (N2/H2), 332
Foturan, 234
foundry, 460, 471
four-point probe, 4PP, 19, 174, 494
FOX, ﬁeld oxide, 331
FPD, focal plane deviation, 274
FPD, ﬂat panel display, 463
front-end, 6, 315, 329
front-side micromachining, 492
FTIR, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy,
74, 82
fuel cell, 487
furnace, 154, 410, 419
fused silica, 97, 226
fusion bonding, 193, 276
FZ, ﬂoat zone silicon, 39, 317
galvanic deposition, 54
gap ﬁll, 186
GaAs, gallium arsenide, 69, 134
gas phase transport coefﬁcient, 434
gas sensor, 494
gate, 329, 337, 473
gate oxide, 325, 331, 337, 420, 480
Gaussian beam proﬁle, 302
generation (CMOS node), 12, 479
germanium, 70
getter, 403
gettering, 272
giant magnetoresistance GMR, 90, 466
GLAD, glancing angle deposition, 291
glass, 51, 98, 225, 340
glass frit bonding, 200, 404
glass transition temperature, Tg, 106, 206, 210, 218, 226
glass wafers, 227T
g-line, λ = 436 nm, 117
global planarization, 186
GMR, giant magnetoresistance, 90, 466
gold, 61T, 195, 197, 246, 370, 374, 394, 494
grain boundary, 4, 167, 453
grain size, 79
grinding, 181, 308
GST, germanium antimony telluride, 303, 476
guard ring, 347
gyroscope, 258
h-line, λ = 405 nm, 108
handle wafer, 276
hard mask, 134
haze, 44
HBT, heterojunction bipolar transistor, 72, 352
HCI, high current implantation, 177
HDD, hard disk drive, 466
HDP, high density plasma, 428
HEI, high energy implantation, 177
HEPA, High Effciency Particulate Air ﬁlter, 444
hermeticity, 201, 327, 403
heteroepitaxy, 69
HfO2, 53, 91, 337, 472, 475
Hg-lamp, 105
high-current implanter, HCI, 177
high density plasma, HDP, 428
high index planes, 40, 238
high-k dielectric materials, 337
high vacuum, 49, 426
hillock, 455
hinged structures, 381
HIPOX, high pressure oxidation, 155
HKMG, high k, metal gate CMOS, 473
HMDS, hexamethyl disilazane, 103
Hoerni, Jean, 469
homoepitaxy, 72
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 488]
510
Index
horizontal furnace, 154, 420
hot embossing, 212
hot lot, 461
hot plate, 104, 208
hot wall reactor, 419
HPM, hydrochloric acid-peroxide mixture, 145T
HRTEM, high resolution transmission electron
microscope, 15
HTO, high temperature oxide, 51
HV, high vacuum, 49, 426
hydrochloric acid, 131, 145T
hydroﬂuoric acid, 131T, 145T, 371
hydrogen implantation, 278, 281
hydrophilic, 143, 149, 193, 400
hydrophobic, 143, 149, 277, 400
IBE, ion beam etching, 138, 289
IC, integrated circuits, 329, 343, 458, 470
ICECREM simulator, 30, 75, 161, 179
ICP, inductively coupled plasma, 428
IDHL, immediately dangerous to health and life, 446
IG, internal gettering, 273
I/I, ion implantation, 173, 277
i-line, λ = 365 nm, 117
imprinting, 201, 213
impingement rate, 425
in situ monitoring, 413
inﬁnite source diffusion, 168
infrared, 82, 208, 399
ingot, 38
injection molding, 211
ink jet, 268, 396
ink jetting, 306
indium tin oxide, ITO, 302, 341, 463
InP, indium phosphide, 280
integrated circuits, 329, 343, 458, 470
integrated passives, 323
integrated processing, 412
interconnect, 326, 332, 364
interfaces, 3, 83
interfacial oxide, 83
interference, 118, 284
interferometer, 19, 375
intermetal dielectrics, 85, 357
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors,
ITRS, 340, 482
interstitial diffusion, 167
interstitialcy diffusion, 167
ion beam etching, IBE, 138, 289
ion cut, 277
ion implantation, 173, 277
ion milling, 138, 289
ion projection lithography, IPL, 478
IPA, isopropyl alcohol, -propanol, 146, 238, 243
IR, infra red, 82, 208, 399
island growth, 78
ISO standard, 443
isopropyl alcohol, IPA, 146, 238, 243
isotropy, 130
ITO, indium tin oxide, 302, 341, 463
ITOX, internal oxidation, 278
ITRS, International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors, 340, 482
junction, 169, 338, 472
Kapton, polyimide, 204
keV, kiloelectron volt, 173
Kilby, Jack, 469
killer defect (fatal defect), 451
Knudsen number, 425
KOH, potassium hydroxide, 237, 240T, 268T, 293, 388
laminar ﬂow, 441
lapping, 41
laser pattern generation, 97
laser processing, 218, 301, 464
latex sphere equivalent, LSE, 147
lattice constant, 37, 69
layer transfer, 196
layout rules, 319
LDD, lightly doped drain, 337
LER, line edge roughness, 125, 480
lift-off, 232, 288
LIGA, 55, 216
light ﬁeld, 98, 110
lightly doped drain, LDD, 337
limited source diffusion, 169
line edge roughness, LER, 125, 480
linewidth, 12T, 18, 21, 106, 109, 116, 117T, 138, 479
liner oxide, 336
Linhard solution, 173
lithography, 103, 115, 318, 476
block copolymer, 284
colloidal, 286
contact, 109
direct write, 93
double sided, 389
electron beam, 95
electron projection, 478
EUV, 477
holographic, 284
interferometric, 284
ion beam, 299, 478
microcontact printing, 287
nanoimprint, 213, 478
optical, 103
projection, 115
proximity, 109
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 489]
Index
511
stereo, 284
UV, 103
X-ray, 478
load lock, 427
loading effect, 265
LOCOS, local oxidation of silicon, 157, 330
LOR, lift-off resist, 289
lot, 461
low-k dielectric materials, 363, 364T
low-temperature bonding, 194
LPCVD, low-pressure CVD, 52, 62, 371, 433, 436
LSE, latex sphere equivalent particle size, 147
LTO, low temperature oxide, 51
magnetic recording, 80, 466
magnetron sputtering, 428
mask, photomask, 97, 123, 318
alignment, 104, 390
applications, 104, 321
cost, 97, 458
count, 354, 485
defects, 99
repair, 98, 301
virtual, 101, 495
mask, etch mask, 134, 239, 262, 314
mass spectrometry, 495
mass transport limited, 131, 433
master, 203, 215
MBE, molecular beam epitaxy, 71, 411
MC, Monte Carlo simulation, 90, 179
MCI, medium current implanter, 177
MCZ, magnetic Czochralski silicon, 39
mean free path, 49, 425
medium-current implanters MCI, 177
megasonic cleaning, 145
membrane, same as diaphragm, 245, 391
memory, 466, 474, 479
MEMS, microelectromechanical systems, 1, 387, 462,
486
metal contamination, 149, 337, 454
metal gate, 473
metal micromechanics, 371
metallic bonding, 195
metallic thin ﬁlms, 60
metallization, 326, 332, 364
metal-semiconductor contacts, 326, 339
MFP, mean free path, 425
MGS, metallurgical grade silicon, 36, 465
microbridges, 387
microchannels, 210, 211, 219, 220, 379
microcontact printing, μCP, 287
microcrystalline, 5
microelectromechanical systems, MEMS, 1, 387, 462,
486
microﬂuidics, 486
microhotplate, 247, 494
microlens, 210, 228
microloading effect, 266
micromirror, 196, 256, 257, 285, 382, 383, 384, 394,
486
micron, same as micrometer
microneedle, 8, 261, 264, 397
microphone, 246, 384, 394, 401
micropump, 401, 489
microreactor, 191, 233, 250
microrocket, 131
microsystems, 1, 387, 462, 486
microturbine, 10
microvalve, 209
microvoid, same as COP, 272
Miller index, 40
MIM, metal-insulator-metal capacitor, 354
MIMIC, micromolding in capillaries, 211
mini-environment, 447
minifab, 461
misalignment, 320, 391
miscut, 41, 72, 317
mix-and-match lithography, 318
ML, monolayer, 53, 426
MLM, multilevel metallization, 359
mobility, 19, 37T, 168, 340
MOCVD, Metal Organic CVD, 436
modulated photoreﬂectance, 175
MOEMS, microoptoelectromechanical systems, 1, 256,
257, 261, 370, 374, 375
molding, 203, 209
glass, 228
injection molding, 211
lost mold, 294
micromolding, 211
replica molding, 209
MOSFET, Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect
Transistor
devices, 10, 31, 32, 334
fabrication, 329, 473
MEMS integration, 490
scaling, 333, 478
MOVPE, Metal Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy, 436
molecular ﬂow, 425
molybdenum, 48T, 51T, 61T, 91
monocrystalline, 4, 35
monolayer, ML, 53, 425
Monte Carlo simulation, 179
Moore, Gordon, 478
Moore’s law, 12, 469
MRAM, magnetic RAM memory, 476
MTBA, mean time between assists, 415
MTBC, mean time between cleans, 415
MTTF, mean time to failure, 415, 453
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 490]
512
Index
multicrystalline, 5, 465
Murphy’s yield model, 450
MW, molecular weight, 203
NA, numerical aperture, 115, 117
nanocrystalline, 5
nanoimprint (lithography) NIL, 213, 478
nanolaminate, 91
nanowire, 159
native oxide, 4, 138, 143, 438
NEMS, nanoelectromechanical systems, 485
negative resist, 93, 106, 109
nested mask, 239, 262
neutron transmutation doping, NTD, 165
nickel, 55, 61T, 371, 380
nickel silicide, 88, 472
NiCr, 320, 470
NiFe, 54
NIL, nanoimprint lithography, 213, 478
NiSi, 88, 472
NIST, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
26
nitride thin ﬁlms, 62, 64T, 239, 371, 387
NO, nitrided oxide, 157, 337
node, CMOS technology generation, 12, 479
non-conformal step coverage, 57
non-critical lithography, 318
non-uniformity, 25
non-volatile memory, NVM, 475
novolak resist, 106, 208
Noyce, Robert, 469
nozzle, 261, 263
NSOM, near-ﬁeld scanning optical microscope, 15
nuclear stopping, 173
nucleation, 78
numerical aperture, NA, 115, 117
NVM, non-volatile memory, 156, 475
OAI, off-axis illumination, 122
O2P, oxygen plasma, 112T, 161, 371, 378
O2P, oxygen precipitate, 272
oblique angle evaporation, 291
OED, oxidation enhanced diffusion, 170
OES, optical emission spectroscopy, 414
ohmic contact, 326
ONO, oxidized nitrided oxide, 157
OPC, optical proximity correction, 123, 477
optical emission spectroscopy, OES, 414
optical MEMS, 256, 257, 261, 370, 374, 375
optical microscopy, 15
optical proximity correction, OPC, 123, 477
optoﬂuidics, 488
organic contamination, 148
Ormocer, 196, 204
oven, 104, 208
overetch, 138
overlay, 108
overplating, 55
overpolishing, 183
OTS, octadecane trichlorosilane, 56, 307
ovonic memory, 476
oxidation, 153, 160
oxidation enhanced diffusion, OED, 170
oxidation sharpening, 160
oxide, 160
breakdown, 154, 453
defects, 157, 454
stress, 158
thin ﬁlms, 51, 62, 64T
oxidized nitrided oxide, ONO, 157, 337
oxygen precipitate, 272
oxynitride, 52, 86, 325, 332
ozone, 112, 146, 148
PAB, post apply bake, prebake, 104
PAC, photoactive compound, 106
packaging, 200, 327, 401, 452
PACVD, plasma assisted CVD, same as PECVD, 52
pad, bonding pad, 61, 326
pad, polishing pad, 182
PAG, photoacid generator, 118
palladium, 250, 493
PANI, polyaniline, 206, 342
parabolic growth, 155
particle contamination, 146, 147T, 196, 279, 442
parylene, 65, 205, 206T, 371T, 379, 398
passivation, 63, 66, 327, 332
pattern density effects, 183, 265
pattern generation, 93, 284
PC, polycarbonate, 204
PCB, printed circuit board, 283
PCM, phase change memory, 476
PCR, polymerase chain reaction, 233, 322, 487
PDA, post deposition anneal, 77
PDMS, poly(dimethyl)siloxane
bonding, 192, 218
devices, 210, 211, 217, 220, 322, 398
material, 150, 204, 206T
molding, 209, 215, 295
PEB, post exposure bake, 105
PECVD, Plasma Enhanced CVD, 52, 63
amorphous silicon, 62, 81
boron nitride, 82T
oxide, 64T
nitride, 64T
step coverage, 57
peeling mask, 239, 262
pellicle, 117
pentacene, 341
Permalloy, 54
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 491]
Index
513
permeability, 201, 220
PET, polyethylene terephthalate, 205, 220, 342
phase diagram, 83
phase shift mask, PSM, 121, 477
phosphine, 86, 178, 438, 446T
phosphoric acid, 131T, 137
phosphorus doped silica glass, PSG, 51, 165, 327, 371T
photoacid generator, PAG, 118
photodiode, 166
photolithography, see also lithography, 103, 115, 318,
476
photomask, 97, 123, 318
photonic crystal, 187
photoresist, 106, 117, 318, 389
dry ﬁlm, 108
e-beam, 96
negative, 93, 106
novolak, 106, 208
positive, 93, 106
proﬁle, 109
removal, 111
requirements, 112T
spin coating, 107
spray coating, 108
stripping, 111, 112T
submicron, 117
SU-8, 192, 196, 205, 208, 219, 371, 488
thick, 207
trimming, 123
photostructurable glass, 234
physical cleaning, 145, 185
physical vapor deposition, PVD, 48, 90
piezoelectric, 400
piezoresistance, 369, 392
PIII, plasma immersion ion implantation, 178
pinhole, 65, 99
PIP, polysilicon-insulator-polysilicon capacitor, 475
PIS, polysilicon-insulator-silicon capacitor, 475
Piranha, sulphuric acid peroxide mixture, 145T
pitch, 109
pitting, 83
planarization, 186, 359
plasma,
cleaning, 150
CVD (PECVD), 52, 81
equipment, 427, 430
etching, 132, 255
oxidation, 161
stripping, 112
plating, 54
platinum, 25, 61T, 85, 321, 374, 487
plug, 60, 66, 359
PMMA, polymethyl methacrylate, 96T, 205
POA, post oxidation anneal, 157, 420
POCl3, 52, 169
point defect, 44, 170
Poisson ratio, 37T, 373
Poisson yield model, 450
polarity (of photomask), 318
polishing, 48, 181
polycrystalline, 4, 69, 73, 78, 338
polysilicon, 17, 53, 62
crystal structure, 79
emitter, 350
epipoly, 371
gate, 329
LPCVD, 62
oxidation, 156
MEMS, 370, 371, 373, 396, 400
resistivity, 62, 168, 320, 322
trench ﬁlling, 351
polycarbonate, PC, 205
polycide, 136
polydimethyl siloxane, PDMS, 192, 205, 206T 209,
210, 211, 215, 217, 218, 220, 398
polyimide, 205, 342, 360, 363, 396, 493
polymer, 64, 203 (see also separate entries for parylene,
polyimide, PDMS, SU-8)
bonding, 217
chemical structure, 205
devices, 217
properties, 206T
sacriﬁcial layer, 371, 375
structural layer, 371, 378, 398
transistors, 307, 341
viscosity, 207
porous silicon, 291
post-oxidation anneal, POA, 157, 420
positive resist, 106
post exposure bake, PEB, 105
powder blasting, 288
PowerMEMS, 486
power devices, 9, 169, 344
ppb, parts per billion, 21
ppm, parts per million, 21
ppma, parts per million atoms, 21, 38, 271
ppt, parts per trillion, 21
precipitate, 44, 170, 272
precursor, 53
predeposition, 166
pressure sensor, 198, 246, 392
Preston model, 183
prime wafers, 449
priming, 103
process equipment, 409
process integration, 313
process latitude, 109, 117
process simulation, 30
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 492]
514
Index
proﬁle,
depth, 22
diffusion, 168
etch, 128, 138
resist, 109
proﬁlometer, 17
projected range, 173
projection lithography, 115
proximity correction, 121
proximity effect, 96
proximity lithography, 109
PSG, phosphorous doped silica glass, 51, 165, 327,
371T
PSi, porous silicon, 291
PSL, polystyrene latex sphere, 147
PSM, phase shift mask, 121, 477
PTFE, polytetraﬂuoroethylene, 205, 215
pull-in voltage, 375
pumping speed, 426
PV, photovoltaics, 464
PVD, physical vapor deposition, 48, 78, 90
Pyrex glass, 195, 225, 231, 393, 395, 403
QCM, quartz crystal microbalance, 414
quartz, (fused silica), 97, 226
radius of curvature, 17, 60, 395
range, 174
raster scan, 94
rapid thermal annealing, RTA, 88, 339, 421
rapid thermal processing, RTP, 421
rate limiting step, 54, 131, 433
RBS, Rutherford backscattering spectrometry, 22, 80
RCA clean, 145T, 331, 473
RC-delay, 365
RCL-chip, 323
reactive ion etching, RIE, 128, 132, 255
reclaim wafers, 461
reﬂective notching, 121
reﬂectometry, 18
reﬂow, 326, 332
refractive index, 18, 37T, 47, 64T, 82, 87, 206T
refractory metals, 137
relay, 377
release etch, 369, 376
release (from mold), 215
reliability, 449
remote plasma, 428
replacement gate, 473
replication, 203
residence time, 431
residual gas analyzer, RGA, 494
resist, see also photoresist, 93, 95, 106, 117, 207, 318,
389
resist removal, 112T
resistivity, 19
diffused layers, 168
DI-water, 445
metals, 61T, 320
polysilicon, 62, 168, 320
silicon, 36, 168
silane, 438
resistors, 320, 322, 323, 333, 354, 369, 397, 493
resolution, 97, 109, 117
resonance frequency, 372
resonator, 19, 87, 200, 370, 400
RET, resolution enhancement techniques, 121, 477
reticle, 116
retrograde proﬁle, 109, 215, 257
reverse engineering, 26
rework, 127
RF-MEMS, 402, 486
RF-switch, 9, 372, 373, 404
RGA, residual gas analyzer, 494
RIE, reactive ion, 128, 132, 230, 255, 427
RIE lag, 266
rinsing, 146
RMS, root mean square (roughness), 43, 187, 191
rotating structures, 10, 379
roughness, 43, 80, 187, 191, 227, 265, 389
RT, room temperature
RTA, rapid thermal annealing, 88, 421
RTO, rapid thermal oxidation, 423
RTP, rapid thermal processing, 421
SACE, spark-assisted chemical engraving, 309
sacriﬁcial etching, 293, 369, 371, 376
sacriﬁcial layer, 369, 371
salicide, self-aligned silicide, 228, 339
SAM, self-assembled monolayer, 56, 151, 307, 401
SAM, scanning acoustic microscopy, 199
SAMPLE simulator, 124
SBC, standard buried collector (bipolar transistor), 347
SC, standard clean, 145T
scaling, 479
CMOS, 334, 340
metallization, 364
Scanning Electron Microscope, SEM, 15
scatterometry, 18, 43, 147
sccm, standard cubic centimeters per minute
scCO2, supercritical carbon dioxide, 378
Schottky contact, 326
screen printing, 290
scribeline, 11
scrubber, 436
SCS, single crystal silicon, 3, 35, 271, 329
S/D, source/drain, 10, 176, 332, 337
sealing, 397, 402
secondary ion mass spectroscopy, SIMS, 22, 275, 354
seed layer, 55, 360, 380
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 493]
Index
515
Seeds yield model, 450
SEG, selective epitaxial growth, 75, 474, 490
segregation, in crystal growth, 39T
segregation, in oxidation, 160
selective deposition, 86
selective epitaxial growth, SEG, 75, 474
selectivity, 138
self-alignment, 228
bipolar, 350
MOS gate, 176, 337
phase shift mask, 121
rotor, 381
silicide (salicide), 339
TFT, 228
self-assembled monolayer, SAM, 56, 151, 307, 401
self-interstitial, 167
self-limiting depth, 237, 249
self-limiting growth, 53, 56
SEM, scanning electron microscope, 15
shadow mask, 290, 391
shallow trench isolation, STI, 336
sheet resistance, 19, 168
shelf-life, 111, 364
shrink version, 479
SiC, 52, 135, 360
SiCr, 323
sidewall spacer, 139, 338, 351
SiGe, single crystalline, 69, 438, 472
SiGe, polycrystalline, 86, 493
Si:Ge:B, 275, 393
silane, 36, 51, 72, 438, 446T
silicide, 83, 87, 136, 227, 339, 472
silicon, 35
bulk wafers, 3
crystal growth, 36
economics, 457
epitaxy, 71, 275
plasma etching, 133, 136, 255
properties, 37T
wafers, 41, 43T, 273, 274T, 281, 313, 317, 317T,
336T
wet etching, 130, 136, 237
silicon carbide, SiC, 52, 135, 360
silicon dioxide, SiO2, 51, 153
buried, 276, 369, 396
CVD, 51, 62, 337
etching, 131T, 136, 371
properties, 64T, 154
reliability, 156, 453
thermal, 153, 331, 337
silicon nitride, Si3N4, SiNx, 51
device applications, 246, 247, 249, 323, 371, 374,
394, 396, 399, 493
etch mask, 239
LPCVD, 52, 436
PECVD, 52
properties, 64T
silicon on insulator, SOI
CMOS applications, 339, 490, 492, 494
fabrication, 193, 275
MEMS applications, 245, 261, 369, 395, 400, 492,
494
silicon on sapphire, SOS, 71
siloxane, 204, 358
siloxane bond, 194
silsesquioxane, 363
SIMOX, 278
SIMS, secondary ion mass spectrometer, 22, 179, 275,
354
simulation, 29
deposition, 33, 89
diffusion, 170
epitaxy, 74
equipment, 415
front end, 334
ion implantation, 179
lithography, 124
Monte Carlo, 90, 179
oxidation, 160
single-wafer processing, 409
SiOC:H, 362
slip, 271, 317
SLM, spatial light modulator, 101, 496
slpm, standard liters per minute
slurry, 182
SM, stress migration, 455
Smart-cut, 277
SMIF, Standard Mechanical InterFace, 447
SOD, silicon-on-diamond, 280
SOD, spin-on dielectric, 56
soda lime glass, 97, 225
soft bake, 104
soft lithography, 287
SOG, spin-on-glass, 56, 358
SOI, silicon on insulator, 193, 245, 261, 275, 339, 369,
395, 400, 490, 492, 494
solar cells, 9, 304, 305, 315, 464
solubility, 166
solvent bonding, 218
SOS, silicon on sapphire, 71
source/drain, 10, 176, 332, 337
spacer, 139, 338, 351
spark assisted machining, 309
SPC, statistical process control, 318
spectrometer, 399
spin coating, 56, 103, 107
spin-on glass, SOG, 56, 358
spin processor, 146
SPM, scanning probe microscope, 16
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 494]
516
Index
SPM, sulphuric acid peroxide mixture, 145T
spray coating, 108
spray tool, 132
spreading resistance proﬁling, SRP, 20
spring constant, 372
sputtering, 50, 428
bias sputtering, 429
collimated sputtering, 80
equipment, 413, 428
etching, 429
reactive, 50
step coverage, 57
yield, 50, 86
SRAF, subresolution assist feature, 123
SRAM, static random access memory, 450, 476
SRP, spreading resistance proﬁling, 20, 74
SSP, single side polished wafer, 45, 281, 313, 389
stacking fault, 44
stamp, 204, 215
standard buried collector bipolar transistor, SBC, 347
standing waves, 119
steam oxidation, 153
steel, 36, 283, 295, 340, 344, 379
Stefan equation, 213
Stefan-Boltzman law, 422
stencil mask, 290, 391
step-and-scan, 116
step-and-repeat, 116
step-and-stamp, 215
step coverage, 33, 57
stepper, 116
stereolithography, 284
STI, shallow trench isolation, 336
sticking probability, 425
stiction, 376
stoichiometry, 5, 52
Stoney formula, 60
STO, strontium titanate, 49, 475
STP, standard temperature and pressure, 427
straggle, 137
Stranski-Krastanov growth mode, 78
stress, 58, 158, 230, 325, 392, 431, 474
stress migration, 455
Stribeck diagram, 183
stripping, 111
structural layer, 369
SU-8 epoxy resist, 192, 196, 205, 208, 219, 371, 488
submicron, <1 μm
substitutional diffusion, 167
substrates, 2, 283, 317, 340
sulphuric acid peroxide clean, 145T
superlattice, 70
SUPREM simulator, 30
surface analysis, 22
surface energy, 193
surface micromachining, 369
surface preparation, 5, 150, 325
surface processes, 51, 78, 128
surface reaction limited, 51, 131, 433
surface roughness, 43, 187, 191, 193, 227, 265, 389
Sylgard 184, 205
tantalum, 23, 48, 50, 61T, 362
tantalum nitride, 48, 360
Ta2O5, 86, 135, 160, 325, 342, 475
TAR, top antireﬂection (coating), 120
target, 50, 430
TCAD, technology CAD, 29
TCE, temperature coefﬁcient of expansion, 37T, 61T,
64T, 195, 206T
TCO, transparent conducting oxide, 302, 305, 463
TCR, temperature coefﬁcient of resistivity, 79, 321
TDS, thermal desorption spectroscopy, 25
TED, transient enhanced diffusion, 339
Teﬂon, 47, 65, 132, 205, 215
TEM, transmission electron microscope, 7, 15, 42, 71,
338, 480
temperature coefﬁcient of resistivity, TCR, 79, 321
temperature programmed desorption, 25
TEOS, tetraethoxysilane Si(OC2H5)4, 51, 371
test structures, 21, 26, 106, 318
texture, 79
TFH, thin ﬁlm head, 90, 466
TFT, thin ﬁlm transistor, 228, 307, 340, 463
Tg, glass transition temperature, 106, 207, 226
Tf, ﬂow transition temperature, 212
thermal actuator, 377, 488
thermal bonding, 191, 218
thermal budget, 326
thermal conductivity, 37T, 61T, 226T, 280
thermal desorption spectroscopy, TDS, 25
thermal isolation, 493
thermal oxidation, 153
thermal waves, 175
thermocompression bonding, TCB, 195
thermopile, 246, 399
thermoplast, 204
thermoset, 204
thick resist, 100, 207
thin ﬁlms, 3, 47, 77
characterization, 80T, 82T
deposition, 48, 78
dielectrics, 63T
metallic, 61T
polymeric, 64
stresses, 58
structure, 77
thin ﬁlm head, TFH, 467
thin ﬁlm optics in resist, 118
thin ﬁlm solar cell, 305
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 495]
Index
517
thin ﬁlm transistor, TFT, 340
thinning, 193, 399
thiol, 197, 287
threshold limit value, TLV, 446T
threshold voltage, 331, 334, 481
throughput, 415, 416T
through silicon via, TSV, 257, 490
TiN, titanium nitride, 60, 65, 80T, 91, 360
tip, 160, 238, 395
TIR, total indicator reading, 274
titanium, 61T, 65, 359, 403
titanium silicide, TiSi2, 88
TiW, 85, 87, 357
TLV, threshold limit value, 446T
TMAH, tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide, 237, 240T,
389
top antireﬂection (coating) TAR, 120
top gate (TFT), 340
top surface imaging, TSI, 120
total indicator reading, TIR, 274
total thickness variation, TTV, 44, 227, 389
transfer bonding, 196, 489
transient enhanced diffusion, TED, 339
transition width, 74
transmission electron microscope, TEM, 7, 15, 42, 71,
338, 480
transparent conducting oxides, TCO, 302, 463
transport limited reaction, 131, 433
trench isolation, 336, 351
trichlorosilane, 72, 438
TSI, top surface imaging, 120
TSV, through silicon via, 257, 490
TTV, total thickness variation, 44, 227, 389
tub, same as CMOS well, 330, 335
tungsten, 47, 50, 52, 61T, 87, 301, 359, 378
tungsten lamp, 421
turning, 308
twin-well, 335
TXRF, total reﬂection X-ray ﬂuorescence, 25,
149
UHV, ultrahigh vacuum, 49, 426
ULK, ultra-low k dielectric, 363
ULPA, Ultra Low Penetration Air ﬁlter, 444
ultrahigh vacuum, UHV, 49, 426
ultrahydrophobic, 149
ultrasonic cleaning, 145
ultrasonic transducer, 400
UMG, upgraded metallurgical grade silicon,
465
undercutting, 129, 244, 369
uniformity, 25
unidirectional ﬂow, 441
unintentional processes, 314
unlimited source diffusion, 168
up-time, 415, 416T
UPW, ultrapure water, 10, 445
USG, undoped silica glass, 51
utilization, 415, 431, 438
UV-NIL, ultraviolet nanoimprint lithography, 214,
478
UV-lithography, 103, 115
UV-photodiode, 167
vacancy, 44, 167
vacancy cluster, 272
vacuum, 411, 425
vacuum pumps, 427
vector scan, 94
vertical furnace, 410
vertical transistor, 473, 475
via hole, 358
viscosity, 107, 207, 226, 435
void, 78
volatility, 133
volume change, 88, 153, 170
wafer, 3, 11, 12, 43
bonded, 193, 275
bulk, 3
DSP, 45, 281, 313
cost, 45, 457
edge rounding, 43
epitaxial, 275T
glass, 227T
selection, 313, 317
size, 12, 35, 336, 457
SOI, 193, 275
SSP, 45
speciﬁcations, 43T, 336T
wafer fab, 12, 460
wafering, 41, 226
wafer starts per month, WPM, 460
Wallace, Bob, 470
warp, 274
waveguide, 4, 87, 257
Weir, 316
well, 330, 335
wet cleaning, 144, 473
wet etching, 130, 131T, 229
wet oxidation, 153
WIWNU, within-wafer non-uniformity, 25
WPH, wafers per hour, 409, 416T
WPM, wafer starts per month, 460
WSi2, 136, 160
WTWNU, wafer-to-wafer non-uniformity, 25
xj, junction depth, 169, 338, 472
XeF2, 128, 133, 134
XPS, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, 24
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[Page 496]
518
Index
XRD, x-ray diffraction, 24, 48,
474
XRF, x-ray ﬂuorescence, 25
XRL, x-ray lithography, 109, 478
XRR, X-ray reﬂectivity, 18
X-Si, crystalline silicon, 35
yield, 11, 449, 470, 480
yield loss, 455
yield models, 450
yield cost, 416, 459
yield ramping, 450
yield (sputtering), 50, 86
yield strength, 36
yield stress, 199
Young’s modulus, 35, 58, 62, 61T, 64T, 184, 199,
206T, 226, 279, 372
yttrium oxide, 71, 341
zero anneal, 421
zero level alignment mark, 318
zero level package, 403
zeta potential, 147
zone melting, 39
zone model, 79
ZrO2, 337, 475
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [04/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
